Plenary Lectures  ESHG PLENARY LECTURES tumour cells and give rise to invasive neoplastic tumours that colonise the entire disc PL1.1 Understanding the Influence of Conditional Host-Karyome- PL1.3 microbiome interactions in Health and Disease Human evolution: palaeontology and ancient DNA J. K. Nicholson; J. L. Arzuaga; Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Imperial College, London, United King- Centro de evolucion y comportamientos humanos, Instituto de salud de la Uni- dom. versidad Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Post-genomic technologies are being widely applied to improve the understanding of adverse drug reactions and the molecular basis of PL2.1 human disease . Metabonomics is an approach that enables multivari- mutations in the pericentrin (PcNt) gene cause primordial ate profiling of the integrated metabolic responses of complex systems dwarfism to patho-physiological stress, and so involves understanding the way A. Rauch1, C. T. Thiel1, U. Wick1, Y. J. Crow2, D. Schindler3, A. Ekici1, C. the whole metabolic regulatory system varies with interventions thus Zweier1, A. J. van Essen4, T. O. Goecke5, L. Al-Gazali6, K. H. Chrzanowska7, providing complementary information to genomics and proteomics . H. G. Brunner8, K. Becker9, C. J. Curry10, B. Dallapiccola11, K. Devriendt12, E. Mammalian biochemistry is strongly influenced by the host karyome Kinning13, A. Megarbane14, P. Meinecke15, R. K. Semple16, A. Toutain17, R. Hen- (genome) and gut microbiome symbionts that can alter drug metabo- nekam18, R. Trembath19, H. G. Dörr20, A. Reis1; lism and toxicity; the study of these transgenomic interactions is termed 1Insitute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Leeds Institute of Molecular “global systems biology” . Because these interactions are mediated by Medicine, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Insitute of Human Genetics, Würzburg, a large number of co-metabolic processes the system state integrity Germany, 4Department of Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands, 5Insitute of can be evaluated via metabolic profiling of biofluids. With the growing Human Genetics, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Faculty of Medicine, Al-Ain, United desire to apply systems biology tools to understanding human disease Arab Emirates, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Erlangen, Poland, 8Depart- processes at the population level where massive cohorts need to be ment of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 9North Wales Clinical investigated, it is necessary to use analytical and statistical methods Genetics Service, Rhyl, United Kingdom, 10Genetic Medicine Central California, that report on whole system state non-invasively, hence the attraction San Francisco, CA, United States, 11IRCCS-CSS, Rome, Italy, 12Centre for Hu- of biofuid analyses described here . man-Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, Leicester, NMR spectroscopy and chromatographic linked MS methods have United Kingdom, 14Unité de Génétique Médicale, Beirut, Lebanon, 15Abteilung been applied to characterize and quantify a wide range of metabo- für Medizinische Genetik, Hamburg, Germany, 16Department of Clinical Bio- lites in biological fluids and tissues to explore the biochemical con- chemistry, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 17Department of Genetics, Tours, sequences of drug-induced toxicity and human disease . In disease France, 18Department of Clinical Genetics, London, United Kingdom, 19Depart- or toxicity states metabolic profiles and NMR and mass spectra are ment of Medical and Molecular Genetics, London, United Kingdom, 20Depart- changed characteristically in different toxicity or disease conditions ment of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Erlangen, Germany. according to the exact site and mechanism of the lesion . The use of The growth of an individual grossly depends on regulation of cell size chemometrics allows interrogation of spectroscopic data and can give and cell division and dysfunction of the pathways involved not only direct diagnostic information and aid the detection of novel biomarkers results in somatic undergrowth but contributes to a wide variety of of disease and the integration of metabolic data with other omics sets . pathological conditions . Such diagnostics can be extremely sensitive for the detection of low Using positional cloning, we found in a total of 25 patients that biallelic level damage in a variety of organ systems and is potentially a power- loss-of-function mutations in the pericentrin (PCNT) gene cause micro- ful new adjunct to conventional procedures for disease assessment cephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type Majewski II (MOPD and can help explain environment-gene interactions that give rise to II, MIM 210720) . Adults with this rare inherited condition belong to the idiosyncratic toxicity of drugs in man . Examples of the application of shortest of the short having a height of about 100 centimeters and a metabonomics to personalised healthcare (1) and population screen- brain size comparable to that of a three-month old baby, but are of ing to detect new “Metabolome-Wide Associations” with disease risk near-normal intelligence . Truncal obesity, type 2 diabetes and a high factors (2) . risk of stroke have been noted in older individuals with MOPD II . 1 . Clayton, T .A . Nicholson, J .K . et al (2006) Pharmaco-metabonomic PCNT is known to mediate nucleation of microtubules by anchoring phenotyping and personalised drug treatment . Nature 440 (20) 1073- the γ-tubulin ring complex, thus initiating the assembly of the mitotic 1077 . spindle apparatus . We show that PCNT mutations cause absence of 2 . Holmes, E . Nicholson, J .K . et al (2008) Human Metabolic Pheno- the protein resulting in disorganized mitotic spindles, premature sister type Diversity and its Association with Diet and Blood Pressure . Nature chromatid separation and missegregation of chromosomes in patient (in press) . cells. Our findings thus characterize MOPD II as a distinct clinical en- tity linking a key protein of the centrosome to dwarfism and a high risk PL1.2 of diabetes and stroke . cell competition, apoptosis and tumour progression in Similarities between MOPD II individuals and the Late Pleistocene Drosophila hominid fossils from the island of Flores, Indonesia, also known as G. Morata; “hobbits”, suggest that these do not represent a diminutive, small- Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM - Campus de Cantob- brained new species, Homo floresiensis, but are pathological modern lanco, Madrid, Spain. humans . Larvae homozygous for mutations at the tumour suppressor genes of Rauch et al . 2008, Science Feb 8, 319:816-9 . Drosophila lethal giant larvae (lgl), scribble (scribb) or disc large (dlg) develop extensive neoplastic tumours that affect principally the central PL2.2 nervous system and the imaginal discs . Thus the lack of any of these meta-analysis of genome-wide association data and large-scale products is sufficient to transform normal imaginal cells into tumorous replication identifies several additional susceptibility loci for cells . However, imaginal cells mutant for any of these genes are un- type 2 diabetes able to develop a tumour if they are surrounded by non-tumour cells . E. Zeggini1, R. Saxena2, L. J. Scott3, B. F. Voight2, for the DIAGRAM Consor- We have been studying the behaviour of clones of lgl mutant cells tium; in the wing disc to study the interactions between tumour and non- 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Harvard and Massachusetts tumour cells. We find that as a rule lgl clones are eliminated from the Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3University of Michigan, wing disc by a process akin to cell competition: they enter apoptosis Ann Arbor, MI, United States. mediated by the JNK pathway and the interactions leading to the dis- Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified multiple new appearance of the mutant cells take place at the border of the clones . loci at which common variants modestly but reproducibly contribute to We have also found that when these cells contain an additional factor risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D) . However, established variants, common conferring a high proliferation rate, the lgl mutant cells are transformed and rare, explain only a small proportion of the heritability of T2D . To into “supercompetitors”, which are able to eliminate surrounding non- increase the power to discover alleles of modest effect, we performedPlenary Lectures  meta-analysis of three T2D GWA scans (DGI, FUSION, WTCCC) en- Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom. compassing 10,128 European-descent individuals (4549 cases and EFMR (Epilepsy and Mental Retardation limited to Females) is a disor- 5579 controls) and ~2 .2 million SNPs (directly genotyped and imput- der with an X-linked mode of inheritance and unusual expression pat- ed) . Even after excluding known type 2 diabetes loci, we saw a strong tern . Disorders arising from mutations on the X chromosome are typi- enrichment of highly associated variants (426 with p<10-4 vs . 217 ex- cally characterized by affected males and unaffected carrier females . pected by chance) . Sixty nine SNPs were taken forward to an initial In contrast, EFMR spares transmitting males and affects only carrier round of replication in up to 22,426 individuals, and 11 SNPs with repli- females . Unraveling the biology of this conundrum depends upon the cation p<0 .005 were tested in additional individuals from the deCODE, identification of the molecular defect underlying EFMR. Aided by sys- KORA, Danish and HUNT T2D studies with an effective sample size tematic re-sequencing of 737 X chromosome genes we identified dif- of up to 18,066 . Multiple new loci with strong evidence for associa- ferent protocadherin 19 (PCDH19) gene mutations in seven families . tion were observed, including the JAZF1 (OR[95%CI]: 1 .11[1 .08-1 .14], Five mutations result in the introduction of a premature termination p=8 .8x10-12), CDC123/CAMK1D (OR1 .10[1 .07-1 .14], p=5 .6x10-9), AD- codon . Study of two of these demonstrated nonsense mediated de- AMTS9 (OR1 .10[1 .07-1 .14], p=9 .5x10-9), and THADA (OR 1 .17[1 .11- cay of PCDH19 mRNA . The two missense mutations are predicted 1 .23], p=4 .5x10-8) gene regions . These loci provide additional biologi- to affect adhesiveness of PCDH19 through impaired calcium binding . cal clues about the inherited basis of T2D, and the relatively small PCDH19 is expressed in human and mouse developing brain and is effects point to the need for large discovery and follow-up samples . the first member of the cadherin superfamily to be directly implicated in epilepsy or mental retardation . To explain the reversed, sex-limited PL2.3 expression pattern for EFMR, we propose rescue in males by a human G protein-coupled receptor P2Y5 and its ligand LPA are involved specific Y chromosome gene protocadherin 11Y (PCDH11Y) . in maintenance of human hair growth References: S. M. Pasternack1, I. von Kügelgen2, K. Al Aboud3, Y. Lee4,5, F. Rüschendorf5, Ryan SG et al . Epilepsy and mental retardation limited to females: K. Voss6, A. M. Hillmer7, G. J. Molderings2, T. Franz8, A. Ramirez9,10, P. Nürn- an X-linked dominant disorder with male sparing . Nat Genet . 1997 berg10,11, M. M. Nöthen1,7, R. C. Betz1; Sep;17(1):92-5 . 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Pharmacology, Scheffer IE et al . Epilepsy and mental retardation limited to females: an Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, Makkah, Saudi Arabia, 4Depart- under-recognized disorder . Brain . 2008 Jan 29; [Epub ahead of print] . ment of Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Berlin, Germany, 5Max Del- brück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Human PL2.5 Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 7Department of Genomics, Bonn, Germany, Genomic structural variation profiles of world human 8Department of Anatomy, Bonn, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Co- populations logne, Germany, 10Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, L. Bassaganyas1,2,3, M. Garcia1,3, M. Montfort1,4,3, L. Armengol1,3, X. Estivill1,4,3; 11Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany. 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 2Pompeu Hypotrichosis simplex (MIM 146520 and MIM 605389) is a group of he- Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 3Public Health and Epide- reditary non-syndromic human alopecias that affects men and women miology Network Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Catalo- equally . The hair loss is diffuse and progressive, and usually begins in nia, Spain, 4National Genotyping Center (CeGen), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. early childhood . We mapped an autosomal recessive form of this dis- Genomic variants can contribute to genetic disease, and are potential order to chromosome 13q14.11-13q21.33, and identified homozygous substrates for natural selection resulting in phenotypic differences be- truncating mutations in P2RY5, a gene which encodes an orphan G tween individuals . The use of genome-wide molecular methods have protein-coupled receptor . We analysed expression-patterns of P2RY5 revealed the existence of Copy Number Variants (CNVs), genomic in various human and mouse tissues and performed western blot and segments ranging in size from one kb to several megabases, that are immunofluorescence analyses to characterize the protein. Further- present at variable copy number in comparison with a reference ge- more, we identified oleoyl-L-α-lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a bioac- nome . The aim of our study was to determine the existence of popula- tive lipid, as being a ligand for P2Y5 in reporter gene and radioligand tion-specific genomic structural variation and to identify genes located binding experiments . Homology and studies of signalling transduction in these regions that might contribute to phenotypic differences as well pathways suggest that P2Y5 is a member of a subgroup of LPA recep- as to differential susceptibility to common disease and environmental tors, which also includes LPA4 and LPA5 . As P2RY5 is expressed in exposures of human populations . We have selected 343 individuals human hair follicle cells, but LPA4 and LPA5 are not, a loss of P2Y5 from 11 populations from the HGDP-CEPH panel (Biaka- Mbuti Pyg- function will not be compensated for, and will ultimately lead to patho- my, Bantu, Mozabite, Bedouin, Brahui, Hazara, Yakut, Papuan-Mela- logical changes and hair loss . nesian, French, Pima and Maya) and 134 individuals from the three Our study is the first to implicate a G protein-coupled receptor as being populations of the HapMap collection (YRI, CHB and CEU) . To detect essential for and specific to the maintenance of human hair growth. structural variation we have used array-CGH (Agilent 244K) and array- With the functional characterization of the P2Y5 receptor, we identify based comparative genome intensity (Illumina) . We have observed dif- the missing link which is required for the transmission of the LPA signal ferences between populations in 179 loci . 122 of these were already through the cell membrane in hair follicle cells. This finding may pro- described in the Database of Genomic Variants and 58 coincide with vide opportunities for new therapeutic approaches to the treatment of segmental duplications . Interestingly, a number of genes involved in hair loss in humans . different common disorders or to have phenotypic differences between population groups were found to be variable in copy number among PL2.4 human populations (i .e . RHD, CFHR1, CFHR3 and PRSS1) . These X-linked protocadherin 19 mutations cause female-limited loci and others could explain differences in disease predisposition epilepsy and cognitive impairment among individuals from different populations and could provide impor- J. Gecz1,2, L. Dibbens1, P. Tarpey3, K. Hynes1, M. A. Bayly1, I. E. Scheffer4, J. tant clues on the adaptation of humans to different environments . Bomar5, L. Vandeleur1, C. Shoubridge1, Z. Afawi6, M. Y. Neufeld6, S. Kivity7, D. Lev8, T. Lerman-Sagie9, G. R. Sutherland1, K. L. Friend1, M. Corbett1, D. H. PL2.6 Geschwind5, P. Thomas2, S. Ryan10, S. McKee11, S. Berkovic4, A. Futreal3, M. R. Acetylcholine receptor pathway mutations explain various fetal Stratton3, J. C. Mulley1; akinesia deformation sequence disorders 1Womens and Childrens Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia, 2University of A. Michalk1, S. Stricker2, J. Becker3, R. Rupps4, T. Pantzar5, J. Miertus6, G. Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, Botta7, V. G. Naretto8, C. Janetzki1, N. Yaqoob9, C. Ott1, D. Seelow1, D. Wiec- United Kingdom, 4University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5University of zorek10, B. Fiebig11, B. Wirth3, M. Hoopmann12, M. Walther13, F. Koerber14, M. California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 6Tel Aviv Sourasky Blankenburg15, S. Mundlos1,2, R. Heller3, K. Hoffmann1,2; Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 7Schneider Children’s Medical Centre, , Petaq 1Charite University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2MPI Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Tikvah, Israel, 8Wolfson Medical Centre, , Holon, Israel, 9Wolfson Medical Cen- Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Cologne, Germany, tre, Holon, Israel, 10AstraZeneca, Wilmington, DE, United States, 11Belfast City 4Departments of Medical Genetics and Pathology, BCCH Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5Charite University MedicineDepartments of Medical Genetics and Pathology, BCCH Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada,Plenary Lectures  6Medical Genetics Dept., St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, and in an in vivo zebrafish SMA-model. Our data strongly support the 7Azienda Ospedaliera San Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, 8Dept. of Pathology, view that the involvement of SMN in axonal outgrowth and pathfind- „OIRM-S.Anna“ Hospital, Torino, Italy, 9Consultant Histopathologist, King Ab- ing is the major pathogenic defect in SMA . The discovery of PLS3 dul Aziz Specialist Hospital, Taif, Saudi Arabia, 10Institute of Human Genetics, as a protector against SMA provides the opportunity to identify novel University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 11Centre for Human Genetics, regulatory mechanisms that may act specifically in motor neurons, and University hospital, Regensburg, Germany, 12Prenatal Medicine, Department of which may be useful for understanding the molecular pathogenesis Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital, Cologne, Germany, 13Medical of other motor neuron diseases as well . The results may also help to Centre of Rheumatology, Berlin-Buch, Germany, 14Department of Paediatric identify novel targets for SMA therapy. Our discovery signifies a major Radiology, University Hospital, Cologne, Germany, 15Department of Neurope- breakthrough in medical genetics and represents the first report ever diatrics, Vestische Kinder- und Jugendklinik, University of Witten/Herdecke, of a fully protective modifier for a Mendelian disorder in humans. Datteln, Germany. Impaired fetal movement causes growth retardation, fetal hydrops, PL3.1 polyhydramnios, pulmonary hypoplasia, multiple joint contractures systematic resequencing of the coding exons of the X with or without webbing (pterygia), and other features, summarized chromosome in X-linked mental Retardation under the term fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) . M. Stratton; We sequenced 75 patients with severe FADS and found mutations in Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, the γ, α1and δ subunit of the AChR as well as in the receptor associ- United Kingdom. ated protein of the synapse, rapsyn . Mental retardation (MR) affects 1-3% live births and has both genetic Our major conclusions are that and non-genetic causes . A proportion of cases with genetic abnormali- - FADS is a frequent genetic condition . ties are attributable to mutations of genes on the X chromosome . Al- - Doctors in pre- and neonatal care are often confronted with FADS but though several X-linked MR (XLMR) genes have been reported, iden- are not as aware of possible involvement of AChR pathway mutations tification of more by conventional approaches is problematic because as a neurologist would be . mutations of many genes cause MR and their associated phenotypes - More awareness of the potential involvement of the AChR pathway are similar . Here, we have implemented a new strategy in which will save the lives of some newborns . the coding exons of X chromosome genes (~1Mb DNA per sample) Our findings are important to the understanding of cellular biology, ge- have been systematically resequenced for disease-causing variants netics and clinical relevance of AChR mutations especially in pre- and in individuals from more than 200 XLMR families . The strategy has neonatal care . Early neonatal diagnosis in one of our families helped to yielded several new XLMR genes . However, many families remain to start effective treatment for the second affected child, whereas the first be explained . The study also indicates that loss of function of ~1% affected - undiagnosed - died in infancy . One major conclusion is that of X-genes is compatible with apparently normal existence . To our the inclusion of clinical and molecular data from prenatally deceased knowledge, this is the largest resequencing study to identify human siblings is crucial to elucidate severe phenotypes of AChR pathway disease genes thus far conducted . The results highlight issues that mutations . will be faced in the future by whole genome screens for rare disease- We suggest that the AChR pathway contributes to a broad spectrum causing variants . of intrauterine phenotypes and should be examined functionally and genetically in patients with recurrent spontaneous abortions, fetal aki- PL3.2 nesia, hydrops, pterygia, or inborn contractures . cap-Analysis Gene Expression (cAGE) analysis of transcriptional complexity and regulation PL2.7 P. Carninci, Y. Hayashizaki; Plastin 3 protects against spinal muscular atrophy (smA) - the Functional Genomics Technology Team, Omics Science Center, Omics Science first report of a fully protective modifier of a Mendelian disease Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. Brunhilde Wirth1,2,3, Sandra Kröber1,2, Michelle L. McWhorter4, Wilfried Ros- The genome sequence is an invaluable resource, yet it is still hard to soll5, Stefan Müller3, Michael Krawczak6, Gary J. Bassell5, Christine E. Beattie4, identify all its encoded RNAs and regulatory regions . Despite there are and Gabriela E. Oprea1,2,3; about 20,000 protein coding genes, 63% to 93% of the mammalian ge- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Cologne, Germany, 2Insti- nomes is expressed, mainly producing non-coding RNAs, starting from tute of Genetics and 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of more than 230,000 core promoters. These are identified with CAGE Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4 Centre for Molecular Neurobiology, The Ohio (can-analysis gene expression), resulting in a finely redefinition of the State University, Columbus, OH, USA, 5 Emory University School of Medicine, promoter structure . Department of Cell Biology, Atlanta, GA, USA, 6 Institute of Medical Informatics The development of novel generation of sequencing instruments al- and Statistics, Christian-Albrechts University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. lows addressing the RNA complexity at a much higher definition. We Homozygous deletion of SMN1 leads to spinal muscular atrophy are using multiple platforms (454 Life Science, Illumina/Solexa and (SMA), the most frequent genetic cause of early childhood lethality . ABI-SOLiD sequencers) to produce hundreds of millions of functional In rare instances, however, individuals carrying the same SMN1 mu- sequencing tags, with particular focus on CAGE and short RNA librar- tations as their affected siblings are found to be fully asymptomatic, ies . Sequencing of deep-CAGE libraries, which contain 1 to more than thereby suggesting the action of modifier genes. By comparing the 10 millions tags, produces much detailed and sensitive data than mi- transcriptoms of lymphoblastoid cell lines from unaffected and affected croarrays at a progressively decreasing cost . We are broadening the SMN1-deleted siblings, we identified plastin 3 (PLS3, localized on CAGE applications to the ENCODE project and have also miniaturized Xq23) to be abundant in unaffected, but not affected counterparts . We the protocol, to work with RNA extracted from less than 1000 cells showed that PLS3 expression in blood is rare, occurring in only 5% (neurons) . of controls . Interestingly all eight unaffected SMN1-deleted individuals CAGE analysis allows correlating promoter elements to transcriptional were female . Despite extensive research, the molecular cause for this control, as demonstrated by reconstructing the transcriptional network gender-specific protective effect still remains unknown. We found that of differentiation of THP-1, a human myeloid leukemia cell in the Fan- PLS3 is highly expressed in spinal cord, associates with SMN, and tom 4 project in an integrated approach. We provide the first descrip- that both proteins are part of a large multi-protein complex in spinal tion of the dynamics and architecture of a human transcriptional net- cord . Both PLS3 and SMN are present at similar subcellular locations work undergoing transition from a proliferating to a differentiated state in primary motor neurons and increase in expression during neuronal differentiation. As an actin bundling protein, PLS3 influences the F- PL3.2 actin level known to be important for axonal outgrowth and guidance . High-throughput sNP genotyping and ultra-high-throughput PLS3 knock-down in neuronal differentiated PC12 cells severely af- sequencing for genome-wide association studies fects axonal growth whereas PLS3 over-expression induces axonal I. G. Gut; growth . Most importantly, over-expression of PLS3 rescues the axonal CEA - Institut de Genomique, Centre National de Genotypage, Evry, France. growth defect caused by reduced SMN levels in neuronal differenti- In the course of the last 2 years the Centre National de Génotypage ated PC12 cells, in primary motor neurons of SMA mouse embryos (CNG) has run numerous genome-wide association (GWA) studies us-Plenary Lectures  ing its high throughput genotyping platforms . We have widely applied biology is an informational science and that most biological informa- different formats of Illumina Infinium and Affymetrix arrays. The CNG tion is mediated by dynamical biological networks . The systems ap- genotyping platforms are embedded in a system of highly standard- proach to biology and medicine is a general category of approaches ized DNA handling and QC, LIMS, data QC, statistical analysis and that appear to be very effective in dealing both with biological circuits OPERON, a bioinformatic knowledge database . Our studies have de- and hence with biological complexity . Systems approaches require a livered many striking results, such as ORMDL3, a strong candidate truly cross-disciplinary environment and the effective integration of gene associated with childhood asthma, PTGER4 a candidate gene biology, technology and computation/mathematics . I will discuss my associated with Crohn’s disease, BCL11A a strong candidate gene as- views of systems biology . Then I will discuss a systems approach to sociated with sickle cell disease and β-thalassemia, and others. The one disease, prion disease in mice, and demonstrate how it profound- identification of associated genes was accelerated by a database of ly alters our views of disease_with regard to understanding disease genome-wide association of global gene expression . Recently we pathophysiology as well as new approaches to diagnosis, therapy and managed to identify an intriguing group of genes that constitute sub- eventually prevention . Then I will talk about the emerging measure- units of a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor on 15q25 associated with ment technologies that are the foundation of P4 medicine, as well as lung cancer susceptibility . some of the pioneering computational and mathematical tools that will To gain better understanding of the regions of the genome that show be necessary to usher in this revolution in medicine . The view of bi- association with a phenotype we are currently using a 2nd generation ology as an information science, the systems approach to disease, DNA sequencing platform based on Illumina Genome Analyzers . We the new measurement and visualization technologies and the evolving have adapted efficient methods for the enrichment of regions of inter- mathematical/computation tools will catalyze this paradigm change in est . The 2nd generation DNA sequencing methodology is well suited medicine. I will make five predictions: 1) our current largely reactive for the analysis of DNA samples enriched for particular genomic re- medicine will be transformed to a predictive, preventive, personalized gions of interest . Due to the technical limitations of these technologies, and participatory (P4) medicine over the next 10 to 20 years, 2) this will their application for capturing structural variation such as short range lead to the digitalization of medicine (extracting information from single length polymorphisms (microsatellites and minisatellites), duplications cells, single molecules and single individuals) with even more profound and inversion requires work arounds . We believe that a further para- implications for society than the digitalization of communications and digm shift to a 3rd generation of DNA sequencing technology will be information technologies, 3) systems medicine and its digitalization required for cost-effective whole genome sequencing . This technol- will dramatically turn around the slope of ever increasing healthcare ogy will have to be able to analyze clonal DNA molecules over long costs to the point that the developed world will be able to export its distances (5 - 30 kb) . The European Community is funding an effort to P4 medicine to the developing world, 4) P4 medicine will necessitate develop such a technology through its FP7 programme READNA . fundamental changes in the business plans of virtually every sector of the healthcare industry and 5) this new world of medicine will be PL4.1 propelled forward by carefully chosen strategic partnerships_across Distinguished speaker Lecture: systems Biology and systems all sectors of science_academia, industry, government laboratories, in- medicine dependent research institutes, etc_and that these partnerships will be L. Hood; international . ISB hopes to play an important role in catalyzing a series President, Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, United States. of these strategic partnerships . The grand challenge for biology and medicine in the 21st century is complexity . A currently emerging paradigm change is the idea thatConcurrent Symposia  ESHG CONCURRENT SYMPOSIA s02.1 Mutation specific therapy: The CF experience s01.1 E. Kerem; Dissection of structural variation in common human disease Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel. X. Estivill; CFTR mutations cause defects of CFTR protein production and func- Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barce- tion by different molecular mechanisms . The mutations can be classi- lona National Genotyping Center (CeGen), Public Health and Epidemiology fied according to the mechanisms by which mutations disrupt CFTR Network Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Pompeu Fabra University function . This understanding of the different molecular mechanism (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. of CFTR dysfunction provides the scientific basis for development of CNVs represent a new common source of genetic variability in indi- targeted drugs for mutation specific therapy of CF. Class I mutations viduals (recognized by Science as the breakthrough of 2007), which are nonsense mutations that result in the presence of premature stop might constitute susceptibility factors for the onset, progress and se- codon that leads to the production of unstable mRNA or the produc- verity of complex diseases . CNVs could directly affect the dose of tion of a short truncated protein that is not functional . Drugs such as certain genes or modify loci that regulate the expression of relevant the aminoglycoside antibiotics and PTC124 can suppress premature genes, therefore providing important clues for disease and phenotype termination codons by disrupting translational fidelity and allowing the variability . We are using and implementing multiple technologies to incorporation of an amino acid, thus permitting translation to continue further analyze CNVs potentially involved in several complex disor- to the normal termination of the transcript . Class II mutations cause ders, mainly psychiatric diseases, neurodegenerative diseases and impairment of CFTR processing and folding in the Golgi . As a result inflammatory disorders. Functional validation of CNVs with respect to the mutant CFTR is retained in the ER and eventually targeted for deg- disease needs: a/ verification that the genomic variants are associ- radation by the quality control mechanisms . Chemical and molecular ated to changes in the expression of a gene product at the mRNA chaperons can stabilize protein structure, and allow it to escape from and protein levels; and b/ characterization of the physiological con- degradation in the ER and be transported to the cell membrane . Class sequences associated to changes in the dose of a gene, which might III mutations disrupt the function of the regulatory domain . CFTR is contribute to specific traits of the disease. We have identified several resistant to phosphorylation or ATP binding . CFTR activators can over- genomic regions that contain CNVs that are common in the population come the affected ATP binding through direct binding to a nucleotide and that could have an enormous impact in disease predisposition . binding fold . In patients carrying class IV mutations, phosphorylation We have preliminary results on the identification of CNVs for several of CFTR results in reduced chloride transport . Increases in the overall neurological, neuropsychiatric and inflammatory disorders, and we are cell surface content of these mutants might overcome the relative re- characterizing such genomic regions and performing genome scans to duction in conductance . Activators of CFTR at the plasma membrane uncover the variability landscape of these disorders . may function by promoting CFTR phosphorylation, by blocking CFTR dephosphorylation, by interacting directly with CFTR, and/or by modu- s01.2 lation of CFTR protein-protein interactions . Class V mutations affect Gene copy number variation and common human disease the spicing machinery and generate both aberrantly and correctly T. J. Aitman; spliced transcripts, the level of which vary among different patients Physiological Genomics and Medicine Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre and among different organs of the same patient . Splicing factors that and Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. promote exon inclusion or factors that promote exon skipping can pro- Gene copy number variation is now well recognised as a source of mote increase of correctly spliced transcripts, depending on the molec- sequence variation in the genome of humans and other mammals . ular defect . Inconsistent results were reported regarding the required During positional cloning studies to identify genes for insulin resistance level of corrected or mutated CFTR that has to be reached in order to and autoimmune glomerulonephritis in the rat, we showed that gene achieve normal function . copy number variants, at the Cd36 and Fcgr3 gene loci respectively, contributed to disease susceptibility in the rat model . In humans, we s02.2 went on to show that low copy number of FCGR3B, an orthologue synthetic lethal approaches to the development of new of rat Fcgr3, was associated with glomerulonephritis in the autoim- therapies for cancer mune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) . More recently we A. Ashworth; found that low FCGR3B copy number predisposes to development of Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Re- SLE itself and to development of the systemic autoimmune diseases search, London, United Kingdom. microscopic polyangiitis and Wegener’s granulomatosis . These stud- About one in nine women in the Western world develop cancer of the ies provide direct evidence for the importance of heritable variation in breast and at least 5% of these cases are thought to result from a he- gene copy number in the evolution of genetically complex phenotypes, reditary predisposition to the disease . Two breast cancer susceptibility including susceptibility to a range of common human diseases . (BRCA) genes have been identified and mutations in these genes ac- count for most families with four or more cases of breast cancer diag- s01.3 nosed before the age of 60 . Women who inherit loss-of-function muta- Beta-defensin copy number variation: measurement, tions in either of these genes have an up to 85% risk of breast cancer diversification and association with psoriasis by age 70 . As well as breast cancer, carriers of mutations in BRCA1 J. A. L. Armour; and BRCA2 are at elevated risk of cancer of the ovary, prostate and Institute of Genetics, Nottingham, United Kingdom. pancreas . The genes are thought to be tumour suppressor genes as In the current excitement surrounding the recent discoveries from case- the wild-type allele of the gene is observed to be lost in tumours of control association studies, it is essential to avoid overenthusiastic inter- heterozygous carriers. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 have significant roles pretation of error-prone data . Although this is still an important consid- in the maintenance of genome integrity via roles in the repair of DNA eration for SNP typing, it is of particular concern in assessing the role of damage via homologous recombination. The specific DNA repair de- copy number variation, for which the development of typing technology fect in BRCA-mutant cells provides opportunities for novel therapeu- satisfactory for case-control association studies is still in its early stages . tic approaches based on selective inhibition of functionally interacting I will address the importance of accuracy (as well as throughput) in mea- repair pathways, in particular by inhibition of the enzyme PARP . Here suring copy number, with reference to our own PRT methods applied to I will describe recent work defining determinants of sensitivity and re- beta-defensin variation on 8p23 .1 . This copy number variation involves a sistance to PARP inhibitors, as well as the application of the synthetic cluster of seven defensin genes, presumed to act as antimicrobials, but lethal approach to other cancer types . which may have a wider spectrum of functions; copy number variation is commonly over the range between 2 and 7 copies per diploid genome . The accuracy of the typing methodology has been essential in discover- ing an association between beta-defensin copy number and psoriasis, as well as in revealing an unexpected and highly unusual mechanism for generating variation in the copy number of these genes .Concurrent Symposia  s02.3 s03.3 small-molecule therapy for cystic Fibrosis Personalized medicine and Genetic services: the Us model A. S. Verkman; M. Aspinall; Departments of Medicine and Physiology, University of California, San Fran- Genzyme Corporation, Westborough, MA, United States. cisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. A revolution is underway in the life sciences and health care indus- The Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) try . Fueled by the mapping of the human genome and a deepening is a cAMP-activated chloride channel expressed in epithelia in the understanding of human genetic variation and ongoing advances in lung, intestine, pancreas, testis and other tissues, where it facilitates diagnostics are expanding our understanding of the molecular basis transepithelial fluid transport. In the intestine CFTR provides the major of disease . Health care delivery is beginning to shift from trial-and- route for chloride secretion in certain diarrheas . Mutations in CFTR error medicine to patient-centric medicine . Patient care is becoming cause the hereditary disease cystic fibrosis, where chronic lung in- focused on highly targeted and individualized diagnostic and treatment fection and deterioration in lung function cause early death . CFTR is regiments . The use of genetic services is expanding in all areas . This a well-validated targeted for development of inhibitors for therapy of revolution is known as personalized medicine . secretory diarrheas and polycystic kidney disease, and activators for Personalized medicine is a movement away from defining diseases by therapy in cystic fibrosis. Our lab has identified and optimized small their symptoms and locations within the body, and toward understand- molecule inhibitors of CFTR, as well as activators of deltaF508-CFTR, ing them through their underlying genetic causes . With a successful the most common mutant CFTR causing cystic fibrosis. High-through- transition to this model, more specific disease diagnoses will occur, put screening of small molecule collections utilizing a cell-based fluo- resulting in a personalized treatment plan for individual patients . Costs rescence assay of halide transport yielded thiazolidinone and glycine will be reduced through more accurate diagnosis, improved drug ef- hydrazide CFTR inhibitors that block enterotoxin-mediated secretory ficacy with fewer adverse drug reactions as well as improved patient diarrhea in rodent models, including a class of non-absorbable inhibi- drug compliance . This trend to personalized medicine and increased tors that target the CFTR pore at its external entrance . Nanomolar- use of genetic services is occurring today in the field of oncology and potency benzothiophene, phenylglycine and sulfonamide potentiators will expand to all areas of medicine . were identified that correct the defective gating of deltaF508-CFTR The field of genetics services - both testing and counseling - is es- chloride channels, restoring their function to that of wildtype CFTR . sential to the implementation of personalized medicine . Without these Several classes of correctors of defective deltaF508-CFTR cellular services, physicians and other healthcare providers will not be able to misprocessing were discovered, including bisaminomethylbithiazoles, access the information necessary to make the most informed choices that improve mutant CFTR folding and facilitate its stability and target- for patients . ing to the cell plasma membrane, restoring cAMP-stimulated chloride Personalized medicine, however, must overcome multiple challenges permeability . Small-molecule modulators of CFTR function are in de- if it is to fully adopted. There are significant challenges involving physi- velopment for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, secretory diarrhea and cian and patient education and acceptance . An expanded understand- polycystic kidney disease . ing of genetics and diagnostics and its impact on patient care will be Pedemonte, N ., N .D . Sonawane, A . Taddei, J . Hu, O . Zegarra-Moran, necessary for all healthcare providers . A health information infrastruc- Y .F . Suen, L .I . Robins, C .W . Dicus, D . Willenbring, M .H . Nantz, M .J . ture must be able to accommodate the accumulation and analysis of Kurth, L .J . Galietta and A .S . Verkman (2005) . Phenylglycine and sul- expanding patient and pharmacogenomic data . fonamide correctors of defective deltaF508- and G551D-CFTR chlo- In this talk, I will review the current status of personalized medicine in ride channel gating . Mol . Pharmacol . 67:1797-1807 . the United States including examples of its current impact on patient Pedemonte, N ., G .L . Lukacs, K . Du, E . Caci, O . Zegarra-Moran, L .J . care . I will also describe the current United States diagnostic market Galietta and A .S . Verkman (2005) . Small molecule correctors of defec- including the current distribution systems and infrastructure design . tive deltaF508-CFTR cellular processing identified by high-throughput screening . J . Clin . Invest . 115:2564-2571 . s03.4 the clinical Use of Genetic and molecular Biomarkers: A Public s03.1 Health Perspective is the era of genetic counseling over? R. Zimmern; S. Kessler; PHG Foundation Cambridge, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley, United Kingdom. Berkeley, CA. Advances in genomic science have led to a much greater knowledge of disease mechanisms and the development of novel technologies s03.2 such as genetic tests and molecular biomarkers . Unlike the well trod- medical genetic services in developing nations den pathway that exists for pharmaceutical products, we do not have A. Christianson; within Europe (or anywhere across the developed world) an effective Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Services & University framework for their clinical evaluation . The absence of mechanisms of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. for generating the necessary data, or of institutions that focus on their An expert advisory group of the WHO recognized in the early 1980’s analysis, and the lack of policy about the respective responsibilities or that health (epidemiological) transition would require developing coun- the public and commercial sectors for their establishment and funding tries, within the foreseeable future to develop medical genetic services . are major concerns for the practice of medicine and for public health . To that end the expert advisory group developed an approach cogent The lecture will argue that an approach to the introduction of tests into for developing nations that focused on community based medical ge- clinical practice based on clinical judgement is longer sustainable . The netic services integrated into primary health care and closely linked to complexities of modern diagnostics will require a more formal and in- secondary and tertiary health care services . novative approach . Tests will require explicit evaluation to identify the In the latter half of the last century these approaches were refined, to clinically valid and useful . Biomarkers that are predictive of complex an extent based on services that were being established in a few de- disease before its development, in contrast to diagnostic or prognostic veloping countries . This decade several middle-income nations have markers or to genetic tests for high penetrance single gene disorders, recognized the need to develop medical genetic services, initially for pose a particular challenge . The low relative risks that these show, the care and prevention of birth defects . Following the approach pro- and the fact that each individual biomarker will be neither necessary posed by the WHO these nations are developing medical genetic ser- nor sufficient for the development of disease suggests that a different vices, some with assistance from the March of Dimes and the World approach to their assessment will be needed . Alliance of Organizations for Prevention and Treatment of Genetic and Congenital Conditions (WAO) . Numerous barriers to the establishment of these services still exist, but are being overcome .Concurrent Symposia  s04.1 allow genome wide single well high throughput screening with the goal microRNA Regulation of cardiac Development and Disease to study more complex phenotypes and, importantly, to identify targets D. Srivastava; that upon inhibition would only affect tumor cells where normal cells Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, UCSF – Dep. of Pediatrics and would remain unaffected . The concept that a particular mutation has Biochemistry & Biophysics, San Francisco, CA, United States. deleterious consequences under specific conditions is known as syn- Gradients of signaling and transcription factors result in distinct cellular thetic lethality. Two genes are defined as synthetic lethal when cells die responses during organ formation suggesting that the precise dose of if they have both genes mutated but can survive if either gene alone is major regulatory proteins must be tightly controlled . MicroRNAs (miR- mutated . The approach of exploring synthetic lethal gene-gene inter- NAs) are phylogenetically conserved small RNAs that regulate transla- actions is attractive because it turns a hallmark of cancer cells, specific tion or stability of target messenger RNAs providing a mechanism for mutations, into a weakness that can be explored therapeutically . We protein dose regulation . Studies in our lab of multiple cardiac-enriched explore the existence of synthetic lethal interactions with tumor spe- miRNAs reveal that they coordinate decisions of cellular proliferation, cific genetic alterations and large scale siRNA screens. differentiation and response to stress via intricate transcriptional and These approaches illustrate the power of RNAi to gain insight in the translational networks . In addition to our previous work demonstrating mode of action of novel cancer drugs with the goal to accelerate their the role of miR-1 in differentiation of mouse and fly cardiac progenitors, development and as a powerful way to identify a whole new class of we found that targeted deletion of miR-1-2 in mouse causes defects more specific and more efficient anticancer drugs. in cardiac morphogenesis as well as cardiac conduction and cell cycle abnormalities. Consistent with this finding, manipulation of miR-1 and s05.1 the co-transcribed miR-133 in mouse and human embryonic stem cells Guidelines for the clinical management of Lynch syndrome and revealed that these miRNAs can be used to guide pluripotent stem adenomatous polyposis cells into mesodermal cells and ultimately into the cardiac lineage, H. F. A. Vasen; while repressing neuroectodermal and endodermal differentiation . Fi- Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Leiden University Medical Cen- nally, novel approaches of miRNA target identification to explain the tre, Leiden, Netherlands. mechanisms underlying the described effects of cardiac miRNAs will The Lynch syndrome (LS)(HNPCC) is characterized by the devel- be discussed . opment of colorectal cancer (CRC), endometrial cancer and vari- ous other cancers and is caused by a mutation in one of the mis- s04.2 match repair (MMR) genes: MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 or PMS2 . Fa- A rapidly evolved RNA gene may have played a role in the milial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a well-described inherited evolution of the cerebral cortex syndrome, characterized by the development of hundreds to thou- D. Haussler; sands of adenomas in the colorectum . The syndrome is caused by Center for Biomolecular Science & Engineering, University of California, Santa mutations in the APC-gene or the MUTYH-gene . Both syndromes Cruz, CA, United States. (LS, FAP) are responsible for at least 5-7 % of all cases of CRC . We have scanned the human genome for segments that have been Since 2006, annual workshops were organized by a group of Euro- under negative selection during most of mammalian evolution, but pean experts in hereditary gastrointestinal cancer (the Mallorca group) experienced a burst of changes during the last few million years of aiming to establish guidelines for the clinical management of heredi- human evolution . The most dramatic such segment occurs in a previ- tary CRC syndromes . Thirty-one experts from nine European coun- ously unstudied RNA gene expressed specifically in the Cajal-Retzius tries participated in these workshop . Prior to the meeting, various par- neurons in the developing cerebral cortex, during the time these neu- ticipants prepared the key management issues of debate according to rons guide the development of the 6-layer cortical structure . Examples the latest publications . A systematic literature search using Pubmed like this demonstrate the power of computational reconstruction of the and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, reference lists of evolution of the human genome, and argue that changes in non-coding retrieved articles, and manual searches of relevant articles was per- functional regions may have played a significant role in the molecular formed . During the workshop all recommendations were discussed in events that forged our species . detail . Part of the guidelines will be discussed . Moreover, the results of recent studies on cancer risk and experience of longterm surveillance s04.3 for CRC in the Lynch syndrome will be presented . the RNAi strategy in cancer: towards the Achilles Heal of References: cancer 1 . H .F .A .Vasen & G .Möslein & the Mallorca group . Guidelines for the clinical R. L. Beijersbergen; management of Lynch syndrome (HNPCC) J Med Genet 2007; 44: 353-61 The Netherlands Cancer Institute , Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and 2 . H .F .A .Vasen & G .Möslein & the Mallorca group . Guidelines for the NKI Robotics and Screening Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. clinical management of Familial adenomatous polyposis . Gut 2008; The development of the RNA interference (RNAi) technology has 57:704-13 changed the way how we approach target discovery and validation in cancer research . The potential to study the consequence of the inac- s05.2 tivation of each individual gene is a very effective tool to identify novel Evaluation of breast and ovarian cancer screening programmes targets . In addition, high content imaging allows us to identify novel in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: the UK, Norwegian and components of cellular pathways involved in complex cellular pheno- Dutch experience types in a high throughput manner . The combination of RNA interfer- D. G. Evans1, K. N. Gaarenstroom2, D. Stirling3, A. Shenton1, L. Maehle4, A. ence and high content imaging will lead to the discovery of a new class Dørum4, M. Steel5, F. Lalloo1, J. Apold6, M. E. Porteous3, H. F. A. Vasen7, C. J. of targets that can be used for development of novel cancer therapies van Asperen8, P. Moller4; or to improve existing therapies . 1Medical Genetics Research Group and Regional Genetics Service, University We have constructed a large set of retroviral vectors encoding more of Manchester and Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s University than 50 .000 shRNAs, which target 15 .000 different human or mouse Hospitals NHS Trust, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department genes for suppression . This RNA interference library has been used of Gynaecology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3South to identify genes involved in major cellular pathways such as the p53 East of Scotland Genetics Service, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, tumor suppressor pathway . In particular we have focused on genes United Kingdom, 4Section for Inherited Cancer, Department of Medical Genet- that modulate the cytotoxic response to small molecules that target the ics, Rikshospitalet Radiumhospitalet Clinical Center, Oslo, Norway, 5University MDM2-p53 interaction . In addition we have developed novel screening of St Andrews, Bute Medical Buildings, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 6Centre methods with the use of shRNA libraries and DNA micro-arrays to be of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, able to rapidly screen large numbers of shRNA vectors . This technol- and Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 7The ogy is applied to identify the mechanism of action of novel anti-can- Netherlands Foundation for the Detection of Hereditary Tumours and the De- cer drugs and to identify genes involved in resistance to anti-cancer partment of Gastroenterology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Nor- drugs . way, 8Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, Recently, we have extended our efforts into synthetic siRNA screens toConcurrent Symposia  Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Norway. implications of this research for service delivery in cancer genetics will The management of the high risk of breast and ovarian cancer in be considered . female BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers remains a vexing issue . In order to provide alternatives to risk reducing surgery, surveillance pro- s06.1 grammes have to detect the disease sufficiently early to provide a very common, low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility alleles: high likelihood of cure . In particular there have been substantial doubts the clinical relevance about the ability of routine annual mammography and ovarian ultra- P. Pharoah; sound plus serum CA125 to meet this goal . Collaborative research be- University of Cambridge Dept of Oncology, Strangeways Research Laboratory, tween the UK, the Netherlands and Norway has enabled us to provide Cambridge, United Kingdom. a more accurate assessment of the likelihood of cure within these pro- Empirical, genome-wide association studies have discovered seven grammes. Additionally the benefits of MRI screening for breast cancer breast cancer susceptibility alleles that are common in the population . have been demonstrated by National studies in each country . These findings have brought the promise of a “polygenic” approach to To assess the effectiveness of annual ovarian cancer screening (trans- the prevention of breast cancer a step nearer . The risks conferred by vaginal ultrasound and serum CA125 estimation) in reducing mortal- individual loci are small, but risk alleles seem to act multiplicatively . As ity from ovarian cancer in women at increased genetic risk . A cohort a result there is an approximately six-fold difference in risk of breast of 3532 women at increased risk of ovarian cancer was screened at cancer between women carrying 14 risk alleles and those carrying no five centres between January 1991 and March 2007. Survival from risk alleles at these loci . Overall, the distribution of relative risk in the diagnosis of ovarian cancer was calculated using Kaplan-Meier analy- population based on combinations of genotypes at these loci is ap- sis and compared for proven BRCA1/2 carriers with non-carriers and proximately log-normal. The efficiency of population-based preventive whether the cancer was detected at prevalence or post prevalent scan . programs, such as screening mammography, could be improved by Screening was performed by annual transvaginal ultrasound and se- targeting women at greatest risk based on genotype . rum CA125 measurement 64 epithelial ovarian malignancies (59 invasive and 5 borderline), de- s06.2 veloped in the cohort . 26 tumours were detected at prevalent round, What GWAs have taught us about the genetic architecture and there were 27 incident detected cancers and 11 interval. Sixty-five per- pathogenesis of the inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). cent of cancers were stage 3 or 4, however, stage and survival were lit- J. Rioux; tle different for prevalent versus post prevalent cancers . Five year and Université de Montréal and the Montreal Heart Institute Research Center, Mon- 10-year survival in 49 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers was 58 .6% (95% treal, QC, Canada. CI 50.9-66.3%) and 36% (95% CI 27-45%), which was significantly Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are debilitating, inflammatory worse than for 15 non BRCA-carriers (91 .8% (95% CI 84-99 .6%) both diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, collectively known as the inflam- 5 and 10-year survival p=0 .015) . Annual surveillance, by trans-vagi- matory bowel diseases (IBDs) . Genetic studies have been particularly nal ultrasound scanning and serum CA125 measurement in women successful in the identification of genes for Crohn’s disease. In fact, at increased familial risk of ovarian cancer is ineffective in detecting in 2001 one of the first successful discoveries of a causal gene for tumours at a sufficiently early stage to substantially influence survival a complex trait was the identification of three genetic variants in the in BRCA1/2 carriers . NOD2 gene that are associated with Crohn’s disease as well as the A collaborative study between Norway and the UK has shown that identification of an associated haplotype on chromosome 5q31, known survival in prospectively detected breast cancers in BRCA1 carriers in as IBD5, containing five genes: IRF1, SLC22A5, SLC22A4, PDLIM4, an annual mammography screening programme is significantly worse and P4HA2 . than for BRCA2 and other familial groups . It appears this may be due Recent GWAS of CD has identified and confirmed an additional set of to relatively poor survival for small node negative cancers . Some of nine genetic risk factors . These studies have since led to an interna- this poor survival may be attributable to the failure to treat these small tional collaboration to combine the data from over 3,000 patients with tumours with chemotherapy . This is particularly relevant when assess- CD, examined in the individual screens, in order to identify the most ing the benefits of MRI which in combination with mammography has significant associations for replication in an independent set of nearly >90% sensitivity at detecting breast cancers in an annual programme . 4,000 patients with CD. This collaborative work has identified a mini- The benefits of the combined approach for BRCA2 appear robust with mum of 20 additional risk factors for susceptibility to CD . It is estimated survival likely to exceed 90% for breast cancers identified in surveil- that the 31 loci identified to date explain about 10% of the overall vari- lance programmes . ance in disease risk; providing some indications of the extent of the complexity in genetic architecture for this chronic immune-mediated s05.3 disease. Some of the pathogenic pathways newly identified by these managing genetic risk: some issues for BRCA and BRCA GWAS include autophagy, novel innate immunity mechanisms, and mutation carriers T 17 mediated immune responses . Interestingly, a subset of the genes H N. Hallowell; identified to date are also seen to influence other immune mediated Public Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. diseases and thus provide a window into the disease-specific and Men and women who have a number of relatives with breast, ovarian shared pathogenic pathways . In this presentation we will discuss the and prostate cancer in close relatives may be at risk of developing results from these recent discoveries and some of conclusions that can these diseases because they carry a dominantly inherited (BRCA1/2) currently be drawn from this data in terms of the genetic architecture mutation . These individuals need to reach a decision about managing and pathogenesis of IBD as a model for other complex human traits . their cancer risks . There are a number of risk management strategies available - which can be divided into familial and individual strate- s06.3 gies . The former entails DNA screening - determining whether indi- title to be announced viduals and, subsequently, their relatives carry a mutation . The latter G. Abecasis; include: bodily surveillance (breast, ovarian and prostate screening), University of Michigan, School of Public Health, M4132 SPH II, Ann Arbor, MI. chemoprevention (e .g . tamoxifen, oral contraception), risk-reducing pre-symptomatic surgery (e .g . mastectomy, oophorectomy), which are s07.1 available to at-risk confirmed and unconfirmed mutation carriers. Genomic encoding of positional identity This presentation will present an overview of some of the main issues H. Y. Chang; emerging from research which investigates the psychosocial implica- Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, tions of cancer risk management . I will argue that both risk manage- CA, United States. ment decisions and the process of managing risk have both an in- The problem of how genetic information gives rise to the spatial or- dividual and familial dimension. Some of the factors influencing risk ganization has long intrigued biologists . While cellular differentiation management decisions such as: gender, cancer status and stage in addresses the control of expression of specific genes within a cell, the lifecycle will be discussed as will the repercussions for identity of pattern formation addresses the spatial arrangement of distinct cell adopting particular risk management practices . Finally, some of the types . A major mechanism of pattern formation in the embryo is theConcurrent Symposia 0 use of positional information . By linking differentiation programs to mutations or larger chromosome rearrangements affecting gene copy cell positions on a coordinate system, an assembly of cells can be number or regulation . However, in spite of expert clinical assessment programmed to develop into well-defined spatial patterns that are not and conventional chromosome analysis, most children with develop- easily perturbed by the removal or addition of cells . In contrast to em- mental disorders remain undiagnosed and indeed are undiagnosable bryonic development, the higher-order patterns of cellular specializa- using this methodology . tion in adult animals and mechanisms of their maintenance are less Recently it has become possible to screen patients for submicroscopic well understood . Here I discuss progress in using genomic expression chromosome imbalance (microdeletions and microduplications) and to programs to understand the organization and mechanisms of pattern identify mutations in genes on a genome-wide scale . The application formation and maintenance in mammalian epithelia . of comparative genomic hybridisation to DNA microarrays (array-CGH) The major themes are the encoding positional identity in one class of has revolutionised our ability to identify small chromosome imbalances cells and the transfer of this information by epithelial-mesenchymal down to a few Kb not only in patients but also as normal copy num- interaction; the role of chromatin modifications in the fidelity of tran- ber variation in unaffected individuals . A number of clinical laboratory scriptional memory, and the discovery of a class of long non-coding centres worldwide are now applying genomic microarray technology RNAs that regulate chromosomal domains of chromatin modification to investigate a small proportion of patients with developmental delay, to enable position-specific gene expression. learning disability and congenital malformation . However the sporadic nature and rarity of the majority of these cases limits the ability of the s07.2 individual clinician, working in isolation, to interpret the molecular find- Rapid high-resolution identification of balanced genomic ings from genome-wide array analysis . There is a great need for in- rearrangements by 4c technology ternational collaboration to report and catalogue genotype-phenotype M. Simonis1, P. Klous1, R. Galjaard2, E. Rijkers3, F. Grosveld1, J. Meijerink4, W. correlations such that clusters of individuals sharing similar genomic deLaat1; rearrangements and phenotypes can be identified. To facilitate such 1Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Depart- international collaboration, we have developed the DECIPHER data- ment of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department base with the general aim of providing a clinical and research tool to: of Biochemistry, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediat- a . Aid in the interpretation of data from genomic microarray analysis ric Oncology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. e .g . the differentiation between pathogenic and polymorphic copy The architecture of DNA in the cell nucleus is an emerging key con- number changes tributor to genome function . To better understand how DNA is folded b . Utilise the human genome map via the Ensembl genome browser inside the cell nucleus, we recently developed 4C technology . 4C to define genes involved in a specific microdeletion, microduplication, technology is a high-throughput technique that combines 3C (chromo- translocation or inversion some conformation capture) technology with tailored micro-arrays to c . Facilitate collaboration between clinical geneticists and molecular uniquely allow for an unbiased genome-wide search for DNA loci that cytogeneticists using the world-wide-web to accelerate progress in the interact in the nuclear space (Simonis et al ., Nature Genetics 2006) . delineation of new syndromes and of gene function It is based on formaldehyde cross-linking and capturing of in vivo in- teracting DNA elements, which are subsequently ligated to each other s08.2 and PCR amplified. Processes of allelic and ectopic recombination in the human Here, we will show that 4C technology is also a powerful technique genome for the accurate identification of balanced and unbalanced genomic A. J. Jeffreys, I. L. Berg, M. C. Ergoren, K. G. Lam, V. E. Lawson, C. A. May, rearrangements . Balanced chromosomal rearrangements (inver- R. Neumann, L. Odenthal-Hesse, S. Sarbajna, A. Webb; sions, translocations) frequently occur in the human population and Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. can cause disease, but techniques for their rapid and accurate iden- Single molecule typing of sperm DNA allows very high resolution anal- tification are missing. 4C technology accurately reconstructs at least ysis of meiotic recombination events in human DNA and has revealed 5-10 megabases of the one-dimensional chromosome sequence map narrow crossover hotspots dominating the allelic recombination land- around the selected genomic viewpoint . Changes in this physical map scape, at locations that in general correlate well with regions of break- as a result of genomic rearrangements are therefore identified by 4C down of linkage disequilibrium . All 36 hotspots characterised to date technology . We demonstrate that 4C detects balanced inversions and by sperm typing show a very similar morphology but vary hugely in translocations, but also unbalanced rearrangements like deletions, at recombination activity . Polymorphism between men in activity at spe- a resolution (~7kb) that allows immediate sequencing of the break- cific hotspots is common, consistent with rapid evolutionary turnover points. Breakpoints are identified even when they are 4 megabases of hotspots, but curiously appears to be restricted to less active hot- away from the genomic viewpoint . We have applied 4C to samples spots, at least half of which show either quantitative variation or com- from patients with congenital malformations and with T cell acute lym- plete on/off polymorphism . These polymorphisms help identify local phoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Using 4C, we have identified novel rear- DNA sequence determinants and other factors that appear to influence rangements underlying T-ALL . We will show that balanced rearrange- hotspot activity . Single DNA molecule methods have also been devel- ments are identified also if they occur in a small subpopulation of cells. oped to explore ectopic recombination between locally repeated DNA 4C technology therefore offers a novel high-resolution genomic ap- sequences. Analysis of the α-globin gene cluster has revealed recom- proach that can efficiently identify balanced genomic rearrangements. binational exchanges between the duplicated α-γλοβιν γενεs leading to apparently reciprocal duplications and deletions, though with some s07.3 evidence for an additional minor pathway of intramolecular deletion . Integrative genomic approaches for the identification of These exchanges are surprisingly common, contrasting sharply with regulatory variation underlying disease risk the rarity of rearranged chromosomes in most human populations and J. Blangero; implying significant selection pressure against these rearrangements, Dept. of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Anto- despite the lack of obvious phenotypic effect in individuals carrying nio, TX. these copy number variants . Unlike recombination at allelic crossover hotspots, exchanges between α-globin genes are not restricted to mei- s08.1 osis but also arise mitotically to give various classes of rearrangement Deciphering Developmental Disorders whose frequencies can be erratically inflated by mutational mosaicism, N. Carter; even in the germline . Similar analysis of Lepore-type deletions in the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Cambridge, United King- β-globin gene cluster has provided further support for distinct allelic dom. and ectopic recombination pathways, with evidence that a very active Genetically determined disorders of development result in malforma- allelic recombination hotspot within the cluster is not responsible for tions (e .g . congenital heart defects), a dysmorphic appearance (i .e . driving ectopic exchanges . unusual craniofacial appearance) and/or neurodevelopmental disabil- ity . They have a profound effect on the life and health of the individual and of their family . Many developmental disorders are caused by geneConcurrent Symposia  s08.3 s09.3 chromosome rearrangements and fusion genes in breast and ‚Neurotic Yeast‘ and the molecular Basis of Parkinson‘s Disease other epithelial cancers T. F. Outeiro; P. Edwards; Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Cell and Molecular Neuroscience Unit, Lisboa, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Hutchison-MRC Research Portugal. Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Aging is the major known risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Chromosome translocations that form fusion transcripts or activate Parkinson’s disease (PD), but genetic deffects have been associated genes by promoter insertion are central to leukaemias, lymphomas, with familial cases . Huntington’s disease (HD) is a purely genetic neu- and sarcomas, but for various reasons have been neglected in the rodegenerative disorder, where mutations in the IT15 gene, encoding common epithelial cancers . It is now clear that at least some of the for the protein huntingtin, determine the development of the disease . abundant chromosome rearrangements in the common cancers cre- A common hallmark to many neurodegenerative diseases is the pres- ate fusion genes (reviewed by Mitelman et al, Nature Reviews Can- ence of proteinacious inclusions inside neuronal populations, which cer 2007;7:233) . Tomlins et al . (Science 2005;310:644) have shown are selectivelly affected in each disorder. Lewy bodies, made of α- that most prostate cancers have fusions of ETS transcription factors synuclein in PD, and huntingtin inclusions, in HD, are but a few ex- and Soda et al (Nature 2007;448:561) reported an EML4-ALK fusion amples of protein aggregates deposited inside neurons . Whether in- present in around 7% of NSCLC lung cancers . We have undertaken clusions are themselves toxic or actually cytoprotective is still under a comprehensive analysis of chromosome rearrangements in breast current debate, but it is widely accepted that protein misfolding and cancer cell lines, mapping all rearrangements to 1Mb resolution or bet- oligomerization are central molecular events in these diseases . ter (Howarth et al, Oncogene 2008, PMID18084325) . We used ‘array Molecular genetic approaches using different model organisms, from painting’, in which chromosomes are isolated using a cell sorter (flow yeast to mammalian cell culture and mouse models, coupled with ad- cytometer) and then hybridised to DNA microarrays to determine what vanced microscopy techniques resulted in a detailed characterization parts of the genome are present in each chromosome . We found that of the pathways and events involved in cytotoxicity . many more translocations were balanced than expected: a total of nine Using the budding yeast Saccharomyces cereviseae as a ‘living test reciprocal translocations in three cell lines completely analysed, with tube’ we were able to unveil fundamental aspects of α-synuclein bi- several other translocations balanced for at least one of the participat- ology . Powerful yeast genetic screens enabled us to identify several ing chromosomes . Many of the mapped breakpoints were in the kind molecular pathways as playing central roles in the toxicity induced by of genes one would expect oncogenic translocations to target, and to α-synuclein. Genes involved in intracellular trafficking, lipid metabo- date three in-frame fusion transcripts have been verified. It may be lism, and oxidative stress, were among the most highly represented that gene fusions caused by chromosome rearrangement will prove to categories . With this knowledge at hand, we are applying a variety of be as significant in common epithelial cancers as in leukaemias and tools to unravel the molecular basis of neurological disorders associ- sarcomas . ated with protein misfolding, with the goal of developing novel avenues for therapeutic intervention . s09.1 Intracelluar Traficking and Neurodegeneration - The SCA1/ s10.1 ataxin-1 story in utero stem cell transplantation: where are we now? H. T. Orr; T. H. Bui; Institute of Human Genetics, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, The Karolinska Institute, Department of Molecular Medicine, Clinical Genetics United States. Unit, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is one of nine inherited disorders In the last 35 years, extensive progress has been made in the prenatal caused by a polyglutamine expansion in the affected protein . In SCA1 diagnosis of genetic disorders . In contrast, success in fetal therapeutic this expansion is in the ataxin-1 (ATXN1) protein . Nuclear localization interventions has been more limited . of ATXN1 is implicated in the pathology of SCA1 . Previous worked One of the basic tenets of immunology is learned self tolerance: the showed that toxicity of mutant ATXN1 is due to soluble protein and its ability, at the cellular and molecular levels, to recognise “self” and to interacting proteins . Thus, polyglutamine-expanded mutant ATXN1 is eliminate that which is “foreign” must be “learned” during fetal life . able to interact with several other nuclear proteins and incorporate into This paradigm has served to support the concept of in utero trans- native complexes similar to wild type protein. We identified partners plantation (IUT), a promising approach with the potential to effectively of ATXN1 that interact with it in a manner dependent on two criteria treat fetuses with a variety of genetic defects . The rationale is to take necessary for toxicity: polyglutamine expansion and phosphorylation advantage of normal events during haematopoietic and immunologi- at serine 776 . Polyglutamine expansion as well as phosphorylation of cal ontogeny to facilitate allogeneic stem cell engraftment at an early serine 776 in ATXN1 favors the formation of a particular protein com- stage of pregnancy, before permanent damage has occurred to the plex containing a putative regulator of RNA splicing RBM17 . We fur- fetus . Clinical success has been realised, so far, in only fetuses with ther found that changing the serine at position 776 to an aspartic acid severe combined immunodeficiency syndromes. More recently, re- (a substitution that can mimic phosphorylation) renders a wild type al- search has focused on mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) . Like adult lele of ataxin-1 with 30 glutamines pathogenic in vivo . Mice expressing bone marrow-derived MSCs, fetal liver-derived MSCs appear to be ataxin-1 30Q-D776 have a phenotype very similar to that seen in mice non-immunogenic both in vitro and in vivo . Both adult and fetal MSCs expressing ataxin-1 82Q-S776. These findings demonstrate the glu- retain multilineage potential to form e .g . cartilage, bone, adipose and tamine expansion in ATXN1 enhance protein/protein interactions that muscular tissues on induction. The first cases of IUTs using fetal MSCs are normally regulated by its phosphorylation at serine at position 776 for fetuses with severe osteogenesis imperfecta have been performed and that polyglutamine-induced misregulation of S776 phosphoryla- in our Centre . tion and subsequent alterations in nuclear trafficking underlie SCA1 Lessons learned from animal studies and clinical cases have contribut- pathogenesis . ed in defining new strategies to possibly overcome barriers to engraft- ment or tolerance in the fetus . The experience gained in IUTs is likely s09.2 to benefit also the new experimental field of intrauterine gene therapy. Polyneuropathies and axonal trafficking Clearly, ethical issues relating to these new frontiers of medicine need K. A. Nave; also to be addressed . Department of Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Goettingen, GERMANY.Concurrent Symposia  s10.2 s11.1 Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome: a Peroxisomal disorders: biochemistry, molecular biology and challenging puzzle in circulating fetal nucleic acid research genetics R. Chiu; H. R. Waterham; Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences and Department of Chemical Pathol- Academic Medical Center, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amster- ogy, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, dam, Netherlands. New Territories, Hong Kong. Peroxisomes are ubiquitous organelles that play an essential role in In 1997, our group discovered the existence of cell-free fetal DNA and cellular metabolism as underscored by the recognition of a large num- subsequently fetal RNA in the plasma of pregnant women . Such cir- ber of often severe genetic disorders in which one or more peroxisomal culating fetal nucleic acids represent a convenient source of genetic functions are defective. These peroxisomal disorders can be classified material from the unborn child that could be sampled non-invasively into two main groups, including the Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders and simply through the collection of a maternal blood sample . This (PBDs) and the single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. approach is thus a safe alternative to conventional methods which rely The group of single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies currently com- on fetal cell sampling through invasive procedures such as amniocen- prises 10 different defects, 5 of which involve enzymes involved in per- tesis . We showed that the detection of circulating fetal nucleic acids oxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation, including the most common peroxi- could potentially be applied to the non-invasive assessment of fetal somal disorder X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) . The distinc- blood group status, sex-linked genetic diseases and beta-thalassae- tion between the different disorders can be readily made on the basis mia as well as the monitoring of pregnancy-related complications, such of specific metabolite patterns in combination with selective enzyme as preeclampsia . Among these applications, the non-invasive assess- diagnostics and followed by diagnostic DNA testing . ment of fetal rhesus D status has been adopted as a routine clinical The PBDs comprise a group of severe, often lethal multi-systemic test in a number of centres in Europe . However, Down syndrome is the autosomal recessive disorders displaying considerable clinical, bio- main reason for couples opting for prenatal diagnosis . Due to the cell- chemical and genetic heterogeneity . Based on clinical and biochemi- free nature of fetal DNA/RNA in maternal plasma, development of non- cal parameters, originally 3 different presentations had been defined, invasive definitive diagnostic methods for Down syndrome had been including Zellweger syndrome (ZS), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy a challenge . After tackling this puzzle for a decade, we have recently (NALD) and infantile Refsum disease (IRD), with decreasing clinical developed strategies to directly assess the dosage of chromosome and biochemical severity . Recently, however, they have been assigned 21 from maternal plasma allowing for direct non-invasive detection of to the Zellweger Spectrum continuum based on the recognition that fetal Down syndrome . One method, termed the RNA-SNP approach, the different presentations can be caused by mutations in different is based on determining the ratio between polymorphic alleles of a genes, different mutations within the same gene and the fact that they placental expressed mRNA derived from chromosome 21 in maternal show considerable clinical and biochemical overlap . A fourth entity as- plasma . Another method, termed the relative chromosome dosage ap- signed to the group of PBDs is Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata proach, is based on the detection of an excess of chromosome 21 (RCDP) type 1, the clinical presentation of which clearly differs from DNA sequences with respect to a reference chromosome in mater- those observed in the Zellweger Spectrum disorders . nal plasma . These approaches have brought us closer to realising the PBDs can be caused by mutations in any of at least 13 different PEX goal of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal Down syndrome . genes, which encode proteins (peroxins) involved in different stages of peroxisomal protein import and organelle biogenesis . To establish s10.3 the overall mutational spectrum of PBDs with respect to the affected the regulation of prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis PEX gene as well as mutations therein and to allow rapid identifica- in the UK tion of the defective PEX gene for diagnostic purposes, we developed E. Jackson; genetic complementation assays based on peroxisome restoration Law Department, London School of Economics, London, United Kingdom. assessment following PEG-mediated fusion of patient cell lines with This paper will explain how the Human Fertilisation and Embryology tester cell lines or transfection of patient cell lines with either of the Authority (HFEA) regulates preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) known PEX cDNAs. Using these assays we have assigned skin fi- in the UK . Prenatal genetic diagnosis is not separately regulated in the broblasts from over 500 patients diagnosed with a PBD, to different UK, although abortion law provides a special ground for abortion on genetic complementation groups representing defects in the various the grounds of abnormality, and this initially was used as a model for PEX genes . For all the genes we implemented diagnostic DNA testing the regulation of PGD . involving gene sequencing . PGD is not specifically mentioned in the UK’s legislation - the Human 1 . Wanders RJ & Waterham HR . 2006 . Biochemistry of mammalian Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 . Instead the HFEA has laid peroxisomes revisited . Annu Rev Biochem 75:295-332 . down the circumstances in which PGD may be used through its Code 2 . Wanders RJ, Waterham HR . 2006 . Peroxisomal disorders: the single of Practice, currently in its 7th edition. In short, there has to be a signifi- peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. Biochim Biophys Acta 1763:1707- cant risk of a serious condition being present in the embryo, and the 1720 . Code fleshes out what this means. 3 . Waterham HR, Koster J, van Roermund CW, Mooyer PA, Wanders Every centre that wants to carry out PGD needs a variation to its li- RJ, Leonard JV . 2007 . A lethal defect of mitochondrial and peroxisomal cence for each genetic condition it wishes to test for . There is a list of fission. N Engl J Med 356:1736-1741 . previously-approved conditions which can be authorized fairly speedily if an experienced centre wishes to add them to its licence . For new s11.2 centres, and for late-onset or lower-penetrance conditions, each ap- Diagnostic tools in mitochondrial respiratory chain defects plication must be separately approved by a licence committee . O. Elpeleg; The HFEA has also permitted preimplantation HLA-typing, provided Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. certain criteria are met . Congenital disorders of the mitochondrial respiratory chain are com- This paper will explore how the HFEA has made policy decisions about mon inborn errors of metabolism with an incidence of 1:5,000-8,000 legitimate uses of PGD, and how, in practice, it regulates PGD . It will live births . The respiratory chain consists of 85 subunits which are as- also consider whether the law which is currently before parliament will sembled into five enzymatic complexes. Thirteen of the 85 subunits make any substantive changes to the regulatory framework in the UK . are encoded by the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and a large number of proteins are required for the replication of the mtDNA molecule, its ex- pression and for the assembly of each of the complexes . Most patients present with neurological symptoms accompanied by lactate elevation and the enzymatic diagnosis is established in muscle tissue . However, translation of the results of the enzymatic analysis into genetic coun- seling is hampered by the fact that the same defect is not present in fibroblasts and that many of the genes encoding the non-structural factors are presently unknown .Concurrent Symposia  Because all our patients originate from small consanguineous families University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. and since most of the proteins responsible for congenital disorders of Genetically different individuals can exhibit large quantitative varia- the mitochondrial respiratory chain are encoded by the nuclear genome tion for disease susceptibility, physiology, and many other traits of and the defects are transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner, we interest . Such variation stems, at least partly, from variations in the have used homozygosity mapping . This method, in combination with DNA . Modern sequencing technologies can reveal the variations in the mtDNA and mtRNA quantification, resulted not only in a fast and eco- (epi)genome, and genome-wide linkage (GWL) analysis and genome- nomic diagnosis, but has also led to the identification of novel genes wide association (GWA) analysis can then link or associate them to involved in the biogenesis of the mitochondrial respiratory chain . variations in the trait of interest . These strategies are increasingly ap- 1 . Saada A, et al . C6ORF66 is an assembly factor of mitochondrial plied to a growing number of organisms, including human, mouse, complex I . Am J Hum Genet 2008;82:32-8 . rat, cattle, pigs, A. thaliana, tomato, corn, yeast, C. elegans, and D. 2. Berger I, et al. Mitochondrial complex I deficiency caused by a del- melanogaster, and have pinpointed many quantitative trait loci (QTL) eterious NDUFA11 mutation . Ann Neurol 2008;63:405-8 . on the genome . To lift the veil that covers the genome-to-phenotype 3. Barghuti F, et al.The unique neuroradiology of complex I deficiency relation we may need to monitor the whole trajectory of intermediate due to NDUFA12L defect . Mol Genet Metab 2008, in press biomolecular phenotypes . Today’s molecular technologies, particular 4 . Saada A, et al . Antenatal mitochondrial disease caused by mi- microarray and deep sequencing for transcriptome and high resolution tochondrial ribosomal protein (MRPS22) mutation . J Med Genet mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance for proteomics 2007;44:784-6 and metabolomics, have reached a cost-efficiency level allowing for 5 . Edvardson S, et al . Deleterious mutation in the mitochondrial argi- comprehensive molecular profiling of many samples at multiple bio- nyl-transfer RNA synthetase gene is associated with pontocerebellar molecular levels . We here discuss the results, promises and pitfalls for hypoplasia . Am J Hum Genet 2007;81:857-62 network reconstruction using system-wide data on gene expression 6 . Smeitink JA, et al . Distinct clinical phenotypes associated with a (eQTLs), proteins (pQTLs) and metabolites (mQTLs) from studies on mutation in the mitochondrial translation elongation factor EFTs . Am J human, mouse and A. thaliana . Hum Genet 2006;79:869-77 7. Elpeleg O, et al. Deficiency of the ADP-forming succinyl-CoA syn- s12.2 thase activity is associated with encephalomyopathy and mitochon- metabolic networks in biology and diseases drial DNA depletion . Am J Hum Genet 2005;76:1081-6 Z. Oltvai; 8 . Miller C, et al . Defective mitochondrial translation caused by a ribo- Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United somal protein (MRPS16) mutation . Ann Neurol 2004;56:734-8 . States. Most diseases are the consequence of the breakdown of cellular s11.3 processes, but the relationships among specific genetic/ epigenetic Glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: biochemical and defects and variations (SNPs, CNVs, etc) and these disruptions, the molecular aspects molecular interaction networks underlying them, and the disease phe- A. Ribes; notypes remains poorly understood . To begin to gain insights into such Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics. Division of Inborn Errors relationships we have constructed a bipartite human disease associa- of Metabolism (IBC). Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. tion network in which nodes are diseases and two diseases are linked Glutaric aciduria type I (GA I; OMIM 231670) is an autosomal reces- if mutated enzymes associated with them catalyze adjacent metabolic sive disorder due to deficient or non-functional glutaryl-CoA dehydro- reactions . We will describe the characteristics of this network and genase (GCDH) . The metabolic block leads to the accumulation of glu- show that the structure and modeled function of the human metabolic taric, and 3-hydroxyglutaric acids as well as glutarylcarnitine in body network can provide insights into disease comorbidity, with potentially fluids. The clinical picture is characterized by the sudden onset of a important consequences for disease diagnosis and prevention . severe dystonic-dyskinetic disorder, hypotonia, irritability, macroceph- aly and degeneration of the caudate and putamen, which generally ap- s12.3 pear between the 5th and 14th months of age, but mild symptoms such Reverse engineering the transcriptional networks as motor delay and hypotonia can be observed at earlier ages . D. diBernardo; The gene GCDH consists of 11 exons and codes for a precursor pro- Group Leader, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM) & Re- tein of 438 amino acids . The active enzyme is a homotetramer . Single search Associate - University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy. prevalent mutations have been found in small isolated ethnic groups . One of the main challenges in the era of post-genomic research is to However, mutations of the GCDH gene in general population are het- develop methods to extract information from the vast amount of data erogeneous . To date, more than 150 disease-causing mutations have generated by high-throughput techniques . Tools such as microarrays been identified. probing expression of all known genes are now a standard technique More than half of the reported patients had completely absence of worldwide, whereas new approaches based on sequencing are fast GCDH activity, while others had a residual activity between 5- 15% and emerging . very few patients had a residual activity up to 30% . Complete absence This genome-wide data yields information not only at the single gene of activity was connected to certain mutations . The most frequent was level, but also at the ‘systems’ level, i .e . how genes, proteins and me- p .R402W . Less but also frequent was the mutation p .A293T . This tabolites interact with each other to perform a specific function. In order group of patients all excreted considerable amounts of both glutarate to ‘read’ such information new methods coming from quantitative sci- and ß-hydroxyglutarate with significant higher amounts of the former. ences such as physics and engineering, have to be used . The most frequent mutations associated with residual activity, were We will introduce experimental protocols and computational algorithms p .V400M, p .R227P and p .A421V and most of these patients had low to infer gene regulatory networks . excretion of glutarate and ß-hydroxyglutarate with highest excretion of We have applied our reverse-engineering approach to elucidate the the latter compound . Therefore, it seems clear that two distinct geneti- transcriptional network regulated by the transcription factor p63, whose cally and biochemically groups of patients exist, but the severity of the mutations are causative of human malformaton syndromes, in primary clinical phenotype seems to be closely linked to the development of keratinocytes . encephalopathic crisis rather than to residual enzyme activity or to the We have identified over 100 novel targets of p63 and shown that it genotype . transiently regulates members of the AP-1 protein complex . s12.1 Genetical genomics: a combination of genetic variation with genomic profiling to reconstruct molecular networks R. Jansen1,2; 1University of Groningen, Groningen Bioinformatics Centre (GBIC), Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, Haren, Netherlands, 2Dept of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen,Concurrent Symposia  s13.1 dissection of these modules has yielded important information of the Dysregulated RAs signaling in Noonan syndrome and related molecular pathogenesis of the associated disorders, the “ciliopathies” disorders disease family . They point towards a role of the cilia in regulating a M. Tartaglia; wide variety of basic cellular processes, such as vesicle transport, Wnt Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, signalling and Hedgehog signalling . Furthermore, similar to the identi- Rome, Italy. fication of RPGRIP1L, they have provided us with a valuable collection In the last few years, mutations in genes coding for transducers with of novel “ciliopathy candidate genes”, that will even expand the ciliary role in the RAS-MAPK signaling pathway have been identified as the factor in various disease processes . molecular cause underlying a group of clinically related developmen- tal disorders with features including reduced postnatal growth, facial s13.3 dysmorphia, cardiac defects, ectodermal anomalies, cognitive deficits Alterations of FGF signalling in LADD syndrome and variable predisposition to certain malignancies . Noonan syndrome B. Wollnik; (NS), which is the most common condition among these Mendelian Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany. traits, is caused by heterozygous mutations in PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS Mutations in different components of the FGF signalling pathway and RAF1 in approximately 65% of affected individuals . Missense cause the lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD) syndrome, an auto- PTPN11 and RAF1 mutations also account for the vast majority of somal dominant disorder mainly characterized by anomalies of the LEOPARD syndrome (LS), while defects in KRAS, BRAF, MEK1 and lacrimal system, ears and hearing, teeth, and distal limb development . MEK2, and a bunch of missense changes in HRAS occur in 60-80% Notably, all LADD mutations identified so far in FGFR2/3 are located of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFCS) and in Costello syndrome within the tyrosine kinase (TK) domains of the receptors within loops (CS), respectively . that play an important regulatory function in the control of receptor The RAS-MAPK signaling pathway controls cell proliferation, survival activity . Our functional studies of FGFR2 LADD mutants indicated a re- and differentiation, and represents the most common target for so- duced tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor itself as well as reduced matic activating mutations in cancer . NS-, LS-, CFCS- and CS-causing FGFR2-mediated substrate phosphorylation and reduced downstream alleles encode for proteins with aberrant biochemical and functional signalling . Moreover, the timely and precisely ordered dynamics and properties, mostly resulting from impaired catalytic autoinhibition, that patterns of autophosphorylation are changed in FGFR2 mutants as promote increased signal flow through the MAPK cascade. shown by biochemical investigations and crystal structure analysis . The available structural, molecular and biochemical data support the While FGFR2 LADD mutants exert a putative dominant-negative ef- view that, besides its crucial role in oncogenesis, dysregulation of fect on normal FGFR2 protein, FGF10 LADD mutations cause hap- RAS-MAPK signaling has profound consequences on development . loinsufficiency. Beside novel mutational mechanisms of known LADD These findings also provide evidence that germline transmitted mu- genes, we found an autosomal recessive inheritance in a severely af- tations causing developmental disorders define a novel allele series fected LADD patient caused by the homozygous p .R579W in the TK that have distinctive perturbing role on signaling, and offer a model in domain of FGFR2 . Interestingly, we also observed molecular overlaps which distinct gain-of-function thresholds of the activity of individual of LADD-like phenotypes with p63-related disorders . Our data shed transducers are required to induce cell-, tissue- or developmental-spe- light on pathophysiological mechanisms underlying LADD syndrome cific phenotypes, each depending on the transduction network context und expand the spectrum of disorders associated with altered FGF involved in the phenotype . signalling . s13.2 s14.1 the molecular dissection of Joubert syndrome and allied molecular mechanisms of cellular senescence ciliopathies F. Fagagna; H. H. Arts1, D. Doherty2, S. E. C. van Beersum1, S. J. F. Letteboer1, T. A. Pe- IFOM-IEO Campus, Milan, Italy. ters3, I. A. Glass2, N. V. A. M. Knoers1, R. Roepman1; Early tumorigenesis is associated with the engagement of the DNA- 1Dept. of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Ni- damage checkpoint response (DDR) . Cell proliferation and trans- jmegen, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of formation induced by oncogene activation are restrained by cellular Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud senescence . It is unclear whether DDR activation and oncogene-in- University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. duced senescence (OIS) are causally linked . Here we show that the Joubert syndrome is a disorder that is primarily characterised by a typi- expression of an activated oncogene (H-RasV12) in normal human cal hind brain malformation known as the “molar tooth sign”, as seen cells, results in a permanent cell cycle arrest caused by the activation on CT and MRI images . Retinal degeneration, cystic kidneys, mental of a robust DDR . Experimental inactivation of DDR abrogates OIS and retardation and abnormal breathing patterns (episodic hypernea and promotes cell transformation . DDR and OIS are established after a apnea) are also common features . To date, four genes are known to hyper-replicative phase occurring immediately after oncogene expres- be involved in Joubert syndrome, and three of the protein products sion . Senescent cells arrest with partly replicated DNA and with DNA localize to primary cilia . replication origins having fired multiple times. In vivo DNA labelling We examined the function of the RPGRIP1-like protein (RPGRIP1L), and molecular DNA combing reveal that oncogene activation leads encoded by RPGRIP1L on chromosome 16q12 .2 . This is the ho- to augmented numbers of active replicons and to alterations in DNA mologue of RPGRIP1 (RPGR interacting protein 1), a ciliary protein replication fork progression .Therefore OIS results from the enforce- involved in congenital blindness (Leber congenital amaurosis) . RP- ment of a DDR triggered by oncogene-induced DNA hyper-replica- GRIP1L is ubiquitously expressed and its protein product localizes to tion . Senescence is also associated with a global heterochromatiniza- basal bodies of cilia in brain, retina and kidney. We identified homozy- tion of nuclear DNA . These senescence associated heterochromatic gous frameshift and splice site mutations in two families with typical foci (SAHFs) are enriched in histone H3 di-tri methylated on lysine 9 Joubert syndrome and compound heterozygous nonsense and mis- (H3K9m) and HP1 proteins and High mobility group A (HMGA) pro- sense mutations in a third family . All mutations disrupt the interaction of teins are also known to be essential structural components of SAHFs . the C2-domain of RPGRIP1L with nephrocystin-4, encoded by NPHP4 Our most recent results on the interplay between DDR activation and which is mutated in Senior Løken syndrome patients (retinal dystro- oncogene-induced heterochromatinization will be presented . phy and cystic kidneys) . Interestingly, one of the patients had post- axial polydactyly and encephalocele resembling the Meckel-Gruber s14.2 syndrome phenotype, suggesting that RPGRIP1L could be involved cornelia de Lange syndrome and the cohesinopathies: in disorders that represent different spectra of the same underlying Developmental Repercussions of cohesin Dysfunction defect . I. D. Krantz; We and others have found that these disorders with overlapping phe- Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children’s Hospital of notypes in the retina, the brain and the kidney, can result from pertur- Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. bation of individual components of shared functional modules, regu- The cohesin proteins compose an evolutionarily conserved complex lating distinct processes that are based at (primary) cilia . Functional whose fundamental role in chromosomal cohesion and coordinatedConcurrent Symposia  segregation of sister chromatids has been well characterized across apes . Recently, the draft sequences of the chimpanzee and rhesus species . Recently regulators and structural components of cohesin macaque genomes have opened up new possibilities in this area . I have been found to surprisingly cause specific human developmental will discuss work that compares functional and structural aspects of disorders (collectively termed “cohesinopathies”) when mutated . Muta- the human and ape genes, using FOXP2, a gene involved in speech tions in NIPBL, the vertebrate homolog of the yeast Sister chromatid and language, as an example . I will also discuss how a genome-wide cohesion 2 (Scc2) protein, a regulator of cohesin loading and unload- analysis of the Neandertal genome will enhance our ability to identify ing, are responsible for approximately 50% of cases of Cornelia de genes that have been of importance during human evolution . Lange syndrome (CdLS) . Mutations in the cohesin structural compo- nents SMC1A and SMC3 were also found to result in CdLS . CdLS s15.2 is a multisystem developmental disorder classically characterized by Human genetic population structure: Patterns and underlying facial dysmorphia, upper extremity malformations, hirsutism, cardiac processes defects, growth and cognitive retardation, and gastrointestinal abnor- G. Barbujani; malities . A mild form of CdLS has been consistently reported, however, University of Ferrara, Department of Biology and Evolution, Ferrara, Italy. it had not been clear if this is a distinct etiologic entity from classic Classical studies of genetic diversity in humans consistently showed CdLS or truly a mild manifestation, however molecular testing of co- that the largest proportion of human diversity occurs among mem- hesin genes has identified mutations in individuals with very subtle bers of the same population . On average, differences among different features of CdLS bordering on apparent isolated mental retardation . populations in the same continent represent 5% of the global human Mutations in another cohesin regulator, ESCO2, result in Roberts syn- variance, and differences among continents another 10% . Genetic drome (RBS) and SC phocomelia . Roberts syndrome is a recessively variation is largely discordant across the genome, meaning that dif- inherited multisystem disorder with craniofacial, limb, cardiac, other ferent loci show different spatial patterns, and implying that a good systemic abnormalities and neurocognitive dysfunction . While there is description of population structure can only be based on the analysis some overlap between Roberts syndrome and CdLS they are clinically of multiple loci . Studies of single loci are also unlikely to reasonably readily differentiated . Other developmental disorders have also recent- identify an individual’s place of origin . A general decline of genetic of ly been found to be associated with cohesin dysfunction . The recent genetic diversity with distance from Africa, and a parallel increase in implication of the cohesin complex and its regulators in transcriptional linkage disequilibrium, can be accounted for by the effects of a series control has shed light on the mechanism by which alterations in this of founder effects accompanying the spread of anatomically-modern complex leads to the specific phenotypes seen in these disorders. A humans from Africa . Recent DNA analyses at the global level show review of cohesin function, the disorders associated with disruption of that most allelic variants are cosmopolitan and only a small percentage this pathway and future clinical and bench-top research directions will are continent-specific, whereas a clearer continental structure emerg- be discussed . es when considering composite haplotypes . This suggests that, at the global level, gene flow has had a strong impact on genetic diversity, s14.3 through both directional dispersal and successive short-range migra- Nijmegen breakage syndrome: clinical manifestation of defective tory exchanges . At the local level, several factors have contributed to response to DNA double-strand breaks genetic differentiation, and, in particular, language barriers have been M. Digweed; shown to be associated with small but non-negligible increases of the Charité - Institut für Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany. genetic differences between neighboring populations . Patients with the human genetic disorder, Nijmegen Breakage Syn- drome (NBS) display a characteristic facial appearance, microcephaly s15.3 and a range of symptoms including immunodeficiency, growth retar- From genetic diversity to the understanding of basic biological dation and chromosomal instability . NBS patients have an extremely function: towards evolutionary systems biology high risk of developing lymphoma . Patients were found to be highly J. Bertranpetit; sensitive to ionising irradiation (IR) and this radiosensitivity had fatal Unitat de Biologia Evolutiva, , Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la consequences in some undiagnosed patients . The most dangerous Salut, Barcelona, Catalonia, SPAIN. DNA-lesion caused by IR is considered to be the double-strand break (DSB) and indeed, NBS patient cells are sensitive to all mutagens which produce DSBs directly or indirectly . The underlying gene, NBN, codes for a protein, nibrin, involved on the one hand, as a “caretaker”, in the processing/repair of DNA double strand breaks and on the other hand, as a “gatekeeper”, in the regula- tion of cell cycle checkpoints . The majority of patients are homozygous for a founder mutation in NBN, a 5bp deletion in exon 6 . This muta- tion leads to a truncated amino-terminal fragment containing FHA and BRCT domains, and a carboxy-terminal protein (p70-nibrin) which is produced by alternative initiation of translation from a cryptic upstream start . NBN is an essential gene and it is clear that the carboxyterminal p70-nibrin protein is sufficient to ensure patient survival. We have been examining patient cells and conditional Nbn null mutant mouse cells in order to establish which functions of full length nibrin can be carried out by the carboxy terminal fragment and, more par- ticularly, how this partial functioning explains aspects of the human disease . In this connection a further rare nibrin fragment, p80-nibrin, which is associated with a milder course of the disease has been of particular interest since it may define the basis of a potential anti-can- cer prophylactic treatment for NBS patients . s15.1 Genomic Perspectives on Human Origins S. Pääbo; Max-Planck-Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. One approach to understanding what makes humans unique as a spe- cies is to perform structural and functional comparisons between the genomes of humans and our closest evolutionary relatives the greatConcurrent Sessions  ESHG CONCURRENT SESSIONS pression in the brain and since it escapes X-inactivation in females . For the other genes, expression array and quantitative PCR analysis c01.1 in patient cell lines compared to controls showed a significant up-regu- clinical and molecular characteristics of 1qter syndrome: lation of HSD17B10 and HUWE1 as well as several important genes Delineating a critical region for corpus callosum agenesis/ in their molecular pathways . Loss-of-function mutations of HSD17B10 hypogenesis have previously been associated with progressive neurological dis- B. W. M. van Bon1, D. A. Koolen1, R. Borgatti2, A. Magee3, S. Garcia-Minaur4, ease and XLMR . The E3 ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 has been implicated L. Rooms5, W. Reardon6, M. Zollino7, M. C. Bonaglia2, M. De Gregori8, F. in TP53-associated regulation of the neuronal cell cycle . We also de- Novara8, R. Grasso2, R. Ciccone8, H. A. van Duyvenvoorde9, R. Guerrini10, E. tected segregating sequence changes of highly conserved residues in Fazzi11, S. G. Kant9, C. L. Marcelis1, R. Pfundt1, N. de Leeuw1, B. C. Hamel1, H. HUWE1 in three XLMR families, which are possibly associated with the G. Brunner1, F. Kooy5, O. Zuffardi8, B. B. A. de Vries1; phenotype . Mutations in HSD17B10 have previously been reported to 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, be associated with XLMR and a progressive neurological disorder . Our 2IRCCS Eugenio Medea La Nostra Famiglia, Lecco, Italy, 3Northern Ireland findings demonstrate that an increased gene dosage of HSD17B10, Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, Ireland, 4South East of Scotland Clinical HUWE1, or both contribute to the etiology of XLMR, and suggest that Genetic Service, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5University of Antwerp, Antwerp, point mutations in both genes are associated with this disease too . Belgium, 6National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 7Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 8Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 9Leiden c01.3 University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 10Azienda Ospedaliero- clinical outcome and molecular investigation of Pitt-Hopkins Universitaria A. Meyer, Firenze, Italy, 11IRCCS C. Mondino Institute, Pavia, Italy. syndrome: a series of 9 patients Patients with a microscopically visible deletion of the distal part of the L. de Pontual, Y. Mathieu, M. Rio, A. Munnich, S. Lyonnet, J. Amiel; long arm of chromosome 1 have a recognisable phenotype, including INSERM U-781, Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, Paris, mental retardation, microcephaly, growth retardation, a distinct facial France. appearance and various midline defects including corpus callosum Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a syndromic encephalopathy charac- abnormalities, cardiac, gastro-oesophageal and urogenital defects as terised by severe psychomotor delay, epilepsy, daily bouts of diurnal well as various central nervous system anomalies . hyperventilation starting in infancy, and distinctive facial features . A So far, only 8 cases with a pure submicroscopic deletion of distal 1q systematic 1Mb resolution genome wide BAC array identified a 1.8 Mb have been clinically described . In general, patients with a submicro- de novo microdeletion on chromosome 18q21 .1 in 1 case . We subse- scopic deletion have a similar phenotype, suggesting that the main quently identified de novo heterozygous mutations of TCF4 gene in 8 phenotype of these patients is caused by haploinsufficiency of genes additional PHS cases. These findings provide the first evidence of a in this region . human disorder related to class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription In the present study we describe the clinical presentation of 13 new factor (also known as E-proteins) defects . Our data support that hap- patients with a submicroscopic deletion of chromosome 1q43q44, of loinsufficiency is the most likely disease-causing mechanism, while a which 9 were interstitial, and report on the molecular characterisation dominant-negative effect is an alternative hypothesis currently being of the deletion size . tested for missense mutations occurring in the basic domain . Expres- The clinical presentation of these patients has clear similarities with sion analysis of the TCF4 gene during human embryonic development previously reported cases with a terminal 1q deletion . Corpus callosum will also be presented . abnormalities were present in ten of our patients . The AKT3 gene has Bouts of hyperventilation and epilepsy, although distinctive, are not been reported as an important candidate gene causing this abnormal- fully penetrant . Several clinical features will be underscored as pos- ity . However, through detailed molecular analysis of the deletion size in sible diagnostic clues in particular the facial gestalt, dysautonomia and our patient cohort, we were able to delineate the critical region for cor- subtle immunoglobulin deficiency. EEG and brain MRI may also give pus callosum abnormalites to a 360 kb genomic segment which con- valuable clues that will be discussed . Patients diagnosed with PHS tains four possible candidate genes, but excluding the AKT3 gene . display a broad spectrum of dysautonomic features that will be de- tailed . These data may also shed new light on the normal processes c01.2 underlying autonomic nervous system development and maintenance submicroscopic duplications of the hydroxysteroid of an appropriate ventilatory neuronal circuitry . dehydrogenase HSDB0 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase HUWE are associated with mental retardation c01.4 G. Froyen1, M. Corbett2, J. Vandewalle1, I. Jarvela3, O. Lawrence4, M. Bauters1, Expanding the clinical phenotype of tetrasomy 18p H. Van Esch5, J. Chelly6, D. Sanlaville7, H. van Bokhoven8, H. Ropers9, F. Lau- C. D. Sebold1, E. Roeder1,2, B. T. Soileau1, A. Malik1, D. Neigut2, K. Hernan- monnier10, C. E. Schwartz11, F. Abidi11, P. S. Tarpey12, A. Whibley13, F. L. Ray- dez3, M. Thomas3, B. Perry4, P. Fox5, M. Semrud-Clikeman6, B. Butcher6, S. mond13, M. R. Stratton12, J. Fryns5, M. Peippo14, M. Partington15, A. Hackett15, P. Smith7, L. O’Donnell1, K. Richards8, K. Reinker9, R. Tragus1, D. E. Hale1, J. D. Marynen1, G. Turner15, J. Gécz2; Cody1; 1VIB, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Women’s and Children’s Hospi- 1Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States, tal, Adelaide, Australia, 3Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Christus Santa Rosa Children’s Hospital, San Antonio, TX, United States, 3Uni- 4John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, Australia, 5University Hospital Leuven, versity Health System, San Antonio, TX, United States, 4Ear Medical Group, Leuven, Belgium, 6Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 7Necker Enfants San Antonio, TX, United States, 5UTHSCSA Research Imaging Center, San Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 8University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Antonio, TX, United States, 6University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United Netherlands, 9Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, States, 7University of Texas at Austin, San Antonio, TX, United States, 8Wilford 10Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Bretonneau, Tours, France, 11JC Self Re- Hall Medical Center, San Antonio, TX, United States, 9University of Texas search Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood, SC, United States, 12The Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 13Cambridge Insti- Background. Thus far, the phenotype of tetrasomy 18p has been pri- tute of Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 14The Family Federa- marily delineated by a series of published case series and case re- tion of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 15The GOLD service Hunter Genetics Univer- ports . Findings reported in more than 25% of these cases include neo- sity of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia. natal feeding problems, growth retardation, microcephaly, strabismus, Submicroscopic copy number imbalances contribute significantly to abnormalities in muscle tone, scoliosis/kyphosis, and variants on MRI . the genetic etiology of human disease . We report on a novel micro- Developmental delays and mental retardation are also universally duplication hot spot at Xp11.22 identified in 6 unrelated families with present . Methods. To further refine the phenotype and natural history predominantly nonsyndromic XLMR . All duplications are unique and of tetrasomy 18p, we reviewed the medical history and records of 34 segregate with the disease, including the large families MRX17 and individuals with tetrasomy 18p . In addition, 20 individuals with tetraso- MRX31 . Our FISH data are strongly suggestive for tandem duplication my 18p were clinically evaluated at our center . These individuals had events with their sizes ranging from 0 .4 to 1 .0 Mb with a minimal, com- multiple evaluations, including endocrinology, ophthalmology, neuro- monly duplicated region that contains three genes: RIBC1, HSD17B10 psychology, orthopedics, ENT, and genetics . They also underwent an and HUWE1 . RIBC1 could be excluded based on its absence of ex- MRI as well as a hearing test . Results. As a result of these analyses,Concurrent Sessions  we can expand the phenotypic description of tetrasomy 18p . Findings toms . Since both families originated from nearby cities in the Blacksea identified in more than 25% of our patient population included neona- region of Turkey, this suggested a possible role of a founder muta- tal jaundice, recurrent otitis media, hearing loss, seizures, refractive tion . As a consequence of the highly inbred nature of these families an errors, a history of constipation and gastroesophageal reflux, heart autosomal recessive mode of inheritance is likely . Alternatively, since defects, pes planus, and attention problems . Dysmorphic features that all patients are males, X-linked inheritance challenged by inbreeding were reported in more than 25% of the population included ptosis; pos- should also be considered. Some of these findings apparently over- teriorly rotated ears; unraveled helices; small ears; abnomal columella; lap with cerebrofrontofacial (OMIM 6085789) and craniofrontonasal smooth philtrum; small mouth; thin upper lip; abnormal Cupid’s bow; (OMIM 304110) syndromes . However, neither a total alopecia, nor hy- palatal abnormalities, and a prominent or pointed chin . Conclusion. pogonadism has been associated with the aforementioned conditions These findings further our knowledge of the clinical manifestations of previously . To the best of our knowledge, this is a new disorder with tetrasomy 18p and will enable physicians to better anticipate and man- severe cranio-fronto-nasal malformations in association with alopecia age complications as they arise . and genital abnormalities . Clinical and molecular investigations of this new disorder are done within the CRANIRARE consortium supported c01.5 by the European Research Area Network “E-RARE” . congenital nephrotic syndrome, microcephaly, trigonocephaly, polydactyly, brain and eye anomalies: a distinct autosomal c02.1 recessive disorder Fas-associated factor-1, a protein involved in apoptosis, causes M. Zenker1, O. Gross2, E. Mildenberger3, B. Albrecht4, V. Matejas1, D. Wiec- cleft lip and palate zorek4; M. Ghassibe1, L. Desmyter2, F. Claes3,4, O. Boute5, B. Bayet6, P. Pellerin7, L. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Dept. Backx8, K. Hermans3,4, P. Brouillard1, N. Revencu1, R. Vanwijck6, J. R. Ver- Nephrology&Rheumatology, University Hospital Goettingen, Goettingen, meesch8, H. A. Poirel1,9, P. Carmeliet3,4, M. Vikkula1; Germany, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, University Hospital Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Labora- Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen, Essen, tory of Human Genetics, de Duve Institute, université catholique de Louvain, Germany. Brussels, Belgium, 3Department for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNS) is a heterogeneous disease . VIB, Leuven, Belgium, 4Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy While genetic causes of isolated CNS are well established, the knowl- (CTG), K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Centre de Génétique, CHU de Lille, edge on the genetic basis of various syndromic forms is still fragmen- Lille, France, 6Centre Labiopalatin, Service de Chirurgie Plastique, Cliniques tary . One of them is characterized by the association of CNS with micro- universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 7Service de Chirurgie Plastique cephaly / brain anomalies, also known as Galloway-Mowat syndrome et Reconstructive, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 8Center for Human Genetics, (GMS) . It is obvious that GMS itself is not a homogeneous entity . Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 9Center for Human Genetics, We observed a strikingly similar form of syndromic CNS in four chil- Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, dren originating from unrelated consanguineous families . All affected Belgium. children had gross proteinuria from birth and rapid progress to end Cleft lip and palate is the most common craniofacial birth defect with stage renal failure . Two had evidence of additional tubular involvement . complex etiology . We show that a reciprocal translocation, which Head circumference fell below the 3rd centile within the first months of cosegregates with cleft palate in a family, disrupts the Fas-Associated life in all patients . Trigonocephalic head shape was present in three of Factor-1 (FAF1) gene . The mutation results in lowered expression, and them . All children had cerebral gyration anomalies, and Dandy-Walk- likely haploinsufficiency. Transmission disequilibrium analysis demon- er malformation was present in two. Further constant findings were strates that FAF1 associates with cleft lip and palate . In situ hybridiza- postaxial hexadactyly and eye anomalies including iris atrophy, non- tion unravels high levels of mFaf1 along the lips and the medial edge reactive miosis, coloboma, and microphthalmia . Three children had an epithelium (MEE) of the fusing palate in mice. Moreover, in zebrafish atrial septal defect . larvae, zFaf1 is mostly expressed in the pharyngeal cartilages, where One of these patients was reported previously (Mildenberger et al .: Acta its knock-down results in orofacial defects . As FAF1 is a member of the Paediatr 1998), but no other similar reports exist to our knowledge . We Fas death-inducing complex that initiates apoptosis, it likely causes propose that this is a distinct autosomal recessive disorder within the cleft palate by preventing MEE degeneration . The data provides strong heterogeneous group of microcephaly-nephrosis syndromes . It may molecular evidence that “death”, rather than epithelial mesenchymal be considered a subtype of GMS or a separate entity (Mildenberger transformation or anterior/posterior migration, is the major fate for syndrome) . There is an obvious overlap with Pierson syndrome (OMIM MEE . These data also predict that other factors in the FAS-induced 609049), which is caused by LAMB2 mutations, but no mutations in apoptosis pathway likely play a role in cleft pathogenesis . this gene were found in the disorder presented here . c02.2 c01.6 sporadic venous malformation is caused by somatic mutations An undescribed phenotype associated with cranio-fronto-facio- in tiE2 nasal malformations, total alopecia and genital abnormalities M. Uebelhoer1, V. Wouters1, N. Limaye1, L. M. Boon1,2, J. B. Mulliken3, M. Vik- N. A. Akarsu1, H. Kayserili2, I. Vargel3, Y. Alanay4, S. Candan2, G. Tuncbilek5, kula1; O. Uyguner2, S. Balci6; 1de Duve Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center 1Hacettepe University, Pediatrics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey, for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique 2Istanbul University Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Kirikkale University, de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Vascular Anomalies Center, Children’s Hospi- Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Kirikkale, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University, tal, Boston, MA, United States. Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 5Hacettepe University, Plastic Venous malformations (VM) are the most frequent vascular malforma- and Reconstructive Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 6Hacettepe University, Pediatrics, tions referred to vascular anomaly centers . An autosomal dominant Clinical Genetics (Emeritus Member), Ankara, Turkey. familial form, termed cutaneomucosal venous malformation (VMCM), We report an unusual malformation in the craniofrontonasal region of representing about 1% of venous lesions, is caused by gain-of-func- four males from two distinct inbred families . Major characteristics are; tion mutations in the TIE2 gene . The aetiology of sporadic VM, which 1-) total alopecia; 2-) brachycephaly due to coronal suture synostosis; represents more than 95% of venous lesions, has however remained 3-) frontonasal dysostosis providing hypertelorism, blepharophimosis, unknown . Here we show that sporadic VMs are caused by somatic severely depressed nasal bridge with bifid tips; 4-) posterior cranial mutations in TIE2. We identified seven missense mutations in VM skull defects; 5-) small naevi on the posterior skull; 6-) rotatory nystag- tissue-derived DNA, which were however absent in blood DNA from mus and 7-) corpus callosum agenesis . These malformations are also these patients, and in tissue DNA from 90 controls . All of the muta- associated with bilateral cryptorchism and hypogonadism. The first tions, predicted by bioinformatic analysis to have deleterious effects of family contains three affected individuals with one premature death at varying severity on protein function, were found to result in a strong in the age of two months, the others, 13 and 45 years old respectively, vitro ligand-independent increase in phosphorylation of TIE2 . In some belong to different branches of the same family . The second pedigree patients, we observed two mutations acting in cis . Such combinations contains a three months old single affected male with similar symp- on the same allele induced even higher phosphorylation levels of theConcurrent Sessions  receptor than the constituent single mutations . Additional mutations c02.5 were identified in lesion-derived cDNA, suggesting that the number of Knock-out models in mice and men suggest a proatherogenic cells carrying a mutation can be in the minority, making the reduction of role for UsF1 tissue heterogeneity an important factor in mutation detection . These P. P. Laurila1, K. Merikanto1, J. Perttilä1, J. Saharinen1, M. Gentile1, J. Nauk- data provide molecular evidence that sporadic venous malformations karinen1, P. K. Laurila2, A. Tuomainen3, C. Ehnholm1, V. M. Olkkonen1, M. Jauhi- are caused by somatic activating TIE2 mutations, which are often ainen1, L. Peltonen1,4,5; linked to additional somatic genetic events . They explain the localized, 1National Public Health Institute, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of predominantly unifocal nature of these lesions, and furthermore, pin- Pathology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute of point the TIE2 signaling pathway as a target for the development of Dentistry, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4The Wellcome Trust Sanger therapeutic interventions . (miikka .vikkula@uclouvain .be) Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United States. c02.3 Disturbances in body lipid homeostasis are tightly linked with cardio- LTBP mutation in autosomal recessive microspherophakia with vascular disease (CVD) . We recently established the association of some marfanoid features USF1 transcription factor with high blood triglycerides and cholesterol J. Desir1, Y. Sznajer2, J. Laes3, F. Roulez4, M. J. Abramowicz1; (Pajukanta et al, 2004) . 1Medical Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 2Medi- We have generated a strain of Usf1 knockout (-/-) mice which along cal Genetics Department, HUDERF-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 3DNAvision, with their +/- and +/+ littermates (n=12) were fed with ‘Western’ diet Gosselies, Belgium, 4Ophthalmologic Department, HUDERF-ULB, Brussels, rich in triglycerides (TG) and cholesterol for 8 weeks . After the diet Belgium. Usf1 -/- mice had significantly lower blood (p<0.05) and VLDL (p<0.01) Microspherophakia is a lens malformation encountered in Marfan TG than their +/+ littermates . By using Affymetrix expression arrays, (MFS) and Weill-Marchesani (WMS) syndromes . We observed a large we observed that lipoprotein lipase (Lpl) mRNA levels were elevated consanguineous family with three children affected with microsphero- (p<0 .01) in -/- mice liver and muscle as compared to controls, con- phakia . The proband had tall stature with an arm span larger than his sistent with the TG phenotype . In -/- mice adipose tissue, the cho- height, long slender fingers, and a high-arched palate. He did not meet lesterol biosynthetic pathway was significantly down-regulated when the diagnostic criteria for MFS, nor WMS . No mutation was found in compared to their +/+ littermates . the MFS-associated gene FBN1 (CMG, University of Gent, Belgium) . We also established a cellular model representing USF1 knock-down, We mapped the locus by homozygosity to a 12 .6 cM region of chromo- employing treatment of human hepatoma cells (HuH7) with USF1 siR- some 14q2 using a 10K GeneChip SNP array in the affected siblings, NAs . We labeled the cells for 30 min with [3H]acetic acid, followed followed by microsatellite analysis, with a multipoint LOD of 2 .57 . The by a chase, and quantified the [3H]cholesterol and TG synthesized. A linkage interval contained one conspicuous candidate gene, LTBP2, decreased amount of both [3H]cholesterol and TG (p<0 .05) was ob- encoding a latent transforming growth factor-beta binding protein . LT- served in siRNA treated cells as compared to controls . Again, with Af- BPs are extracellular matrix proteins with multiple domain structures fymetrix microarrays we observed that several cholesterol biosynthetic bearing strong homologies with fibrillins, and may play several roles, pathway enzymes were down-regulated in USF1 knockdown cells . including finely controlling TGF-b activity in the matrix, a structural role Since the loss-of-function of USF1 caused a decrease in plasma TG in microfibrils, and a role in cell adhesion. We found a truncating mu- in vivo as well as cholesterol and TG biosynthesis in vitro, we hypoth- tation g .76339dupC (p .Pro599ProfsX4), homozygous in the affected esize that USF1 could be proatherogenic and its knockdown in appro- siblings, heterozygous in the parents, and absent from 100 unrelated priate tissues actually has a favorable cardiovascular effect . control subjects from the same ethnic group . Using a polyclonal an- tibody, we found LTBP2 to be strongly expressed in the calf ciliary c02.6 zonule . Fibroblast cultures and lymphoblast cell lines from the affected Disruptions of highly conserved, very distant regulatory siblings are under study . We conclude that the LTBP2 truncating muta- elements on either side of sOX9 are associated with Pierre tion reported here is a rare cause of microspherophakia with marfanoid Robin sequence features . J. Fantes1, S. Benko2, J. Ramsay1, J. Amiel2, S. Heaney1, D. McBride1, P. Perry1, D. Kleinjan1, S. Thomas2, N. Jamshidi3, C. Gordon3, C. Golzio2, V. Aba- c02.4 die4, C. Ayuso5, M. Holder-Espinasse6, N. Kilpatrick3, P. Thomas3, A. Pelet2, M. Novel ARVD5 gene causes autosomal dominant sudden cardiac Vazquez7, M. Vekemans2, A. Munnich2, P. Farlie3, H. Etchevers2, S. Lyonnet2, death due to missense mutations in the TMEM gene D. R. FitzPatrick1; T. Young1, N. D. Merner1, K. Hodgkinson1, A. F. Haywood1, W. McKenna2, S. 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2INSERM U-781, Connors1, V. French1, L. Thierfelder3, P. Syrris2, P. Parfrey1; Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Oral Health Research 1Memorial University, St. John’s, NL, Canada, 2The Heart Hospital, London, Group,Musculoskeletal Disorders Theme, Murdoch Children’s Research Insti- United Kingdom, 3Max-Delbruck Centrum fur Molekulare Medizin, Berlin, Ger- tute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 4Université Paris 5 René many. Descartes, Paris, France, 5Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Genética, Madrid, Spain, Autosomal dominant arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/ 6CHRU de Lille, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 7Assistance Pub- dysplasia (ARVC/D) causes lique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-Faciale, Hôpital d’Enfants sudden cardiac death and is characterized by clinical and genetic het- Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. erogeneity . Fifteen unrelated ARVC Most evolutionarily conserved human DNA has no protein-coding func- families from Newfoundland’s founder population were identified tion but may have regulatory function . The mechanism of action and wherein patients with ARVC shared an ancestral haplotype on chro- size of the domains controlled by these highly conserved non-coding mosome 3p (ARVD5). Identification of key recombination events and elements (HCNE) remains largely unknown . We show here that dis- sequencing of the 20 annotated genes mapping within the ARVD5 ruption of very distant cis-regulatory HCNE on either side of SOX9 critical region identified one rare variant that resulted in a missense gene causes Pierre Robin sequence (PRS), a common and impor- mutation in all patients from all families in Transmembrane Protein 43 tant orofacial cleft anomaly with hypoplastic jaw . Evidence for an au- (TMEM43 1073 C>T, S358L) . This variant was not found in popula- tosomal dominant PRS locus on 17q24 comes from linkage in a large tion-matched controls . Interestingly, TMEM43 is not predicted to be a PRS family and a cluster of breakpoints in three independent familial desmosomal protein . Although little is known about the function of the translocations mapping to gene desert 1 .06-1 .23 Mb centromeric to TMEM43 protein in the cardiac myocyte, the gene contains a response SOX9. We identified potential regulatory mutations via comparative element for PPARγ (an adipogenic factor) which may explain the fi- genomic hybridization across a 3 .6Mb conserved region surrounding brofatty replacement of the myocardium, a characteristics pathological SOX9 . Heterozygous microdeletions involving one or more HCNEs finding in ARVC, and may act upstream of the desmosomal proteins were identified in three of eleven PRS patients 1.38-1.58 Mb up- or that cause other forms of ARVC . Results from full gene sequencing of downstream of the SOX9 gene . In one family a single non-polymorphic TMEM43 in a series of 150 ARVC probands from the UK will also be nucleotide change in a HCNE was found that altered transcription fac- presented . tor binding and enhancer function in vitro . Interphase FISH analysis of the orthologous region in 13 .5 dpc mouse embryos showed that thisConcurrent Sessions  normally condensed genomic region demonstrates dynamic expres- In family TR21 the linkage interval partially overlapped with the pre- sion-dependent chromatin decondensation in the developing mandi- viously described DFNB35 locus . Sequencing of candidate genes in ble . Normal development of the mandible thus requires the action of the overlapping region revealed a mutation in ESRRB . Screening of very long-distance cis-acting elements operating on both sides of the ESRRB in the original DFNB35 family and in three other Pakistani SOX9 promotor, at transcriptional and chromatin levels . The domain of DFNB35-linked families revealed four additional mutations . RNA in situ action of tissue-specific cis-regulation appears to be very large indeed hybridization and immunohistochemical analyses indicate that ESRRB and this has significant implications for mutation analysis in human is essential for inner ear development and ion homeostasis . disease and genome biology In family TR56 a novel locus (DFNB63) was found . Combination of results which we obtained with the separately described DFNB63 fami- c03.1 lies narrowed the critical interval . Sequencing of the genes from this Mitochondrial complex 3 deficiency associated with interval revealed four mutations in the DFNB63 gene . In situ hybridiza- homozygous mutation in UQCRQ, encoding ubiquinol - tion and RT-PCR analyses show expression of the DFNB63 gene in cytochrome c reductase, complex iii subunit Vii, 9.5kDa inner ear and some other tissues . O. Barel1, Z. Shorer2, H. Flusser2, R. Ofir1, G. Narkis1, G. Finer1, H. Shalev2, A. Our results indicate that in 43 (48%) of the 90 ARNSHL families caus- Nasasra1, O. S. Birk1,2; ative mutations distributed in eight different genes, of which LHFPL5, 1National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 2Soroka ESRRB and DFNB63 were novel . Medical Center, Beer-sheva, Israel. A consanguineous Israeli Bedouin kindred presented with an auto- c03.3 somal recessive phenotype of severe psychomotor retardation and thromboxane synthase mutations in an increased bone density extrapyramidal signs, dystonia, athetosis and ataxia, mild axial hypo- disorder (Ghosal syndrome) tonia, marked global dementia with defects in verbal and expressive D. Geneviève1, V. Proulle2, B. Isidor1, S. Bellais1, V. Serre1, F. Djouadi3, C. communication skills . Metabolic workup was normal except for mildly Picard4, C. Vignon-Savoye5, B. Bader-Meunier6, S. Blanche4, M. de Vernejoul7, elevated blood lactate levels . Brain MRI showed increased density in L. Legeai-Mallet1, A. Fischer8, M. Le Merrer1, M. Dreyfus2, P. Gaussem8, A. the putamen, with decreased density and size of the caudate and len- Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; tiform nuclei. Reduced activity specifically of mitochondrial complex 3 1Département de Génétique, Unité INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, was evident in muscle biopsies . Homozygosity of affected individuals AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2AP-HP, Laboratoire to UQCRB and to BCSIL, previously associated with isolated complex d’Hématologie, Université Paris-Sud, Hôpital Kremlin-Bicêtre, Kremlin Bicê- 3 deficiency, was ruled out. Genomewide linkage analysis identified tre, France, 3Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UPR9078, Paris, a homozygosity locus of ~9cM on chromosome 5q31 that was fur- France, 4AP-HP, Unité d’Immuno-Hématologie et de Rhumatologie Pédiatrique, ther narrowed down to 2 .14cM, harboring 30 genes (LOD score 8 .82 Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service de Pédiatrie, Centre at θ=0). All 30 genes were sequenced, revealing a single missense Hospitalier Intercommunal Le Raincy-Montfermeil, Montfermeil, France, 6AP- (Ser45Phe) mutation in UQCRQ (ubiquinol - cytochrome c reductase, HP, Service d’Hématologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, complex III subunit VII, 9 .5kDa), one of the 10 nuclear genes encoding 7AP-HP, Département de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, proteins of mitochondrial complex 3 . 8AP-HP, Laboratoire d’Hématologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. c03.2 Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia syndrome (GHDD) is a rare au- Genetic defects underlying autosomal recessive nonsyndromic tosomal recessive disorder characterized by increased bone density hearing impairment in Turkey; three novel and five known genes with diaphyseal involvement, abnormal long bone modeling and corti- E. Kalay1,2, R. W. J. Collin3, S. Masmoudi4, Z. M. Ahmed5, R. Çaylan6, M. Tariq7, cal hyperostosis associated with aregenerative corticosensitive ane- T. Peters3, B. van der Zwaag8, S. Riazuddin5, H. Venselaar9, K. Lee10, M. A. mia and chronic inflammation. Studying four consanguineous GHDD Mosrati4, M. Hmani-Aifa4, F. P. M. Cremers2, B. Wollnik11,12, H. G. Brunner2,13, families, we first localized the disease locus gene on chromosome S. Riazuddin7, A. Karaguzel1, S. M. Leal10, H. Ayadi4, T. B. Friedman5, H. Kre- 7q33-q34 and then identified four distinct homozygous mutations in mer2,13; the thromboxane synthase gene (TBXAS1) which codes for thrombox- 1Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical ane synthase (TXAS) . The mutations segregated with the disease and University, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Uni- were not identified in 210 chromosome controls. TXAS is an enzyme of versity Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Department of the arachidonic acid (AA) cascade and converts prostaglandins H into 2 Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Thromboxane A (TXA), which is a powerful inducer of platelet aggre- 2 2 The Netherlands, 4Unité Cibles pour le Diagnostic et la Thérapie, Centre de gation . We therefore investigated primary haemostasis in our subjects . Biotechnologie, de Sfax, Tunisia, 5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National No history of spontaneous bleeding disorder was reported but platelet Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorder, Rockville, MD, studies from GHDD patients revealed a specific deficit in AA aggrega- United States, 6Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Karad- tion and platelet exocytosis . In addition, ELISAs detecting TXB_the 2 eniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 7National Center of Excellence in metabolite of TXA_and PGE showed low TXB and high PGE levels 2 2 2 2 Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 8Department of in patients, which might be responsible for anemia and inflammation Pharmacology and Anatomy, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Univer- observed in GHDD . sity Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 9Center for Molecular Finally, in order to elucidate the mechanism of increase bone density and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The in GHDD, we investigated the effect of TXAS and TXA on RANKL and 2 Netherlands, 10Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College OPG expression in primary cultured osteoblasts and found that adding of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 11Center for Molecular Medicine Co- a stable analog of TXA markedly increased RANKL and decreased 2 logne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 12Medical Genetics OPG while the addition of a specific inhibitor of TXAS had an opposite Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, effect. These findings suggest that thromboxane synthase acts as a 13Center for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, local regulator of bone resorption with a key function in bone remodel- The Netherlands. ing . Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment (ARNSHI) is genetically highly heterogeneous . To date, about 70 loci for ARNSHI c03.4 have been mapped; for 26 of these loci the causative gene has been congenital arthrogryposis: autosomal recessive lethal identified. congenital contractural syndrome caused by mutations in Ninety-four Turkish families with ARNSHI were evaluated . Screening PIPKC and in ERBB of the GJB2 gene revealed mutations in 29 of the families . In a number G. Narkis1, E. Manor2, D. Landau2, M. Volokita1, K. Elbadour2, O. S. Birk1,2; of GJB2-negative families genome-wide homozygosity mapping was 1National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka performed and in twelve of these families causative mutations were Medical Center, Beer-sheva, Israel. found in TMC1, TMPRSS3, DFNB59, MYO15A and LHFPL5 (TMHS) . We demonstrate that mutations in genes associated with the phospha- The latter was novel . Four families were found to have syndromic tidylinositol pathway cause lethal congenital contractural syndrome forms of hearing loss with mutations in SLC26A4 or USH1G . (LCCS), a neurogenic form of arthrogryposis . We previously mappedConcurrent Sessions 0 an autosomal recessive form of the disease (LCCS2, MIM 607598) parents who were African-Americans or contemporary West-African in Israeli Bedouin kindred to chromosome 12q13 . We now mapped immigrants to USA, suggesting the existence of a mutant allele which a similar phenotype (LCCS3) in another Bedouin kindred to 3 .4Mb had been transported to America with the colonial slave trade . To es- on chromosome 19p13, demonstrating a homozygous mutation in timate the carrier frequency of IVS5+1G>T in African-Americans, we PIP5K1C, encoding phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase, type I, extracted genomic DNA from 1429 random African-American newborn gamma (PIPKIγ), an enzyme that phophorylates phosphatidylinositol metabolic screening cards from Pennsylvania. We identified 1/286 4-phosphate (PI4P) to generate phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate carriers (0 .35%), predicting a possible incidence of lethal type VIII (PIP2) . The mutation abolishes the kinase activity of PIP5K1C . Based OI due to IVS5+1G>T homozygosity of 1/330,000 African-American on this finding, we sequenced genes in the LCCS2 locus that encode births . Furthermore, genomic DNA from contemporary West Africans proteins in pathways interacting with the phosphatidylinositol pathway . was screened by SNP assay, followed by PCR confirmation of positive We demonstrate that LCCS2 is caused by a mutation in ERBB3 (Her3) samples . Fifteen of 1097 independent individuals (1 .37%) from Nige- which is known to modulate PI3K, an enzyme that phosphorylates ria and Ghana were heterozygous for IVS5+1G>T . This high carrier PIP2 to produce phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3) . Thus, frequency suggests that the incidence of type VIII OI in West Africa a defect in the phosphatidylinositol pathway leading to decrease in from this mutation alone is equivalent to the incidence of dominant OI . synthesis of PIP2, a molecule active in endocytosis of synaptic vesicle Haplotype data on probands, carriers and unaffected sibs supports the proteins, culminates in lethal congenital arthrogryposis . occurrence of a common founder mutation over 300 years ago, con- sistent with our hypothesis on the transportation of this West African c03.5 allele to the Americas . Drastic reduction in the life span of cystatin c L68Q gene carriers due to life-style changes in the last two centuries c04.1 A. Palsdottir1, A. Helgason2,3, S. Palsson4,5, H. T. Bjornsson6, B. T. Bragason1, copy number variations in patients with overgrowth syndromes S. Gretarsdottir2, U. Thorsteinsdottir2,7, E. Olafsson8,7, K. Stefansson2,7; detected by array-cGH 1Institute for Experimental Pathology, Keldur, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, V. Malan1,2, V. Cormier-Daire1,2, S. Chevallier1, C. Coubes3, D. Lacombe4, L. Iceland, 2DeCODE Genetics, Reykjavík, Iceland, 3Department of Anthropol- Pasquier5, J. Soulier6, N. Morichon-Delvallez1,2, M. Vekemans1,2, A. Munnich1,2, ogy, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Institute of Biology, University L. Colleaux1,2; of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland, 5DeCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 6Johns 1Departement de Génétique et INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Université Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 7Faculty Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3CHU Hôpital Saint-Eloi, Montpellier, France, of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 8Department of Neurol- 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Pellegrin, ogy, LSH University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland. Bordeaux, France, 5Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, Hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy (HCCAA) is an autosomal 6Laboratoire d’Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France. dominant disease with high penetrance, manifest by brain hemorrhag- Overgrowth syndromes are a heterogeneous group of conditions in- es in young normotensive adults . In Iceland, this condition is caused cluding endocrine hormone disorders, several genetic syndromes and by the L68Q mutation in the cystatin C gene, leading to amyloid depo- many situations with thus far unexplained mechanisms . Interestingly, sition in cerebral arterioles, ending in the death of contemporary car- chromosomal deletions and duplications have been identified in pa- riers at an average age of only 30 years . Here, we report, based both tients with overgrowth such as dup(4)(p16 .3), dup(15)(q26-qter) and on linkage disequilibrium and genealogical evidence, that all known del(9)(q22 .32-q22 .33) . Thus, we hypothesized that the sensitivity of copies of this mutation derive from a common ancestor born roughly array-CGH could improve the genetic diagnosis of overgrowth condi- 18 generations ago . Intriguingly, the genealogies reveal that obligate tions . L68Q carriers, in all families, born 1825 to 1900 experienced a drastic Sixty-five patients with unexplained overgrowth syndrome were ana- reduction in life span, from 65 years to the present day average . At lyzed using a 1 Mb resolution array-CGH. The patients were classified the same time, a parent-of-origin effect emerged, whereby maternal into two groups: group I (32 cases) includes patients with a clinically inheritance of the mutation was associated with a 9 year reduction known syndrome (i .e Sotos syndrome or Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syn- in life span relative to paternal inheritance . As these trends can be drome) whereas group II (32 cases) includes patients with unclassified observed in several different extended families, three centuries after overgrowth syndrome . the mutational event, it seems likely that some environmental factor We detected eight possibly pathogenic imbalances (12,3%) among 2 is responsible, perhaps linked to radical changes in the life-style of patients belonging to group I and 6 patients belonging to group II . Two Icelanders during this period . A mutation with such radically different are deletions and 6 are duplications . No recurrent abnormality was phenotypic effects in reaction to normal variation in human life-style identified. FISH analyses confirmed the chromosomal abnormalities in not only opens the possibility of preventive strategies for HCCAA, it 5 cases while the remaining cases are still under investigation . may also provide novel insights into the complex relationship between Firstly, these results demonstrate that array-CGH is able to provide a genotype and environment in human disease . high diagnostic yield in patients with overgrowth syndrome . Secondly, while chromosomal deletions are most often associated with growth c03.6 retardation, we found that the majority of the imbalances detected in Greater than 1% of contemporary West Africans are carriers of a our patients are duplications . Thirdly, careful re-examination of patients Founder mutation for severe Recessive type Viii Oi, Which Was may allow the delineation of novel clinically recognizable overgrowth Presumably Brought to America with the colonial slave trade syndromes .Finally, besides their importance for diagnosis and genetic and Also Occurs in African-Americans counseling, these data may pave the way to the search of genes in- W. A. Cabral1, A. M. Barnes1, C. N. Rotimi2, L. Brody3, J. E. Bailey-Wilson4, F. volved in the pathogenesis of overgrowth . D. Porter5, J. C. Marini1; 1Bone & Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United c04.2 States, 2National Human Genome Center, Howard University, Washington, DC, Design, implementation and results using diagnostic oligo array- United States, 3Molecular Pathogenesis Section, Genome Technology Branch, cgh NHGRI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Statistical Genetics Section, In- J. A. Crolla1,2, S. Huang2, S. J. Beal2, V. Maloney2, J. C. K. Barber2; herited Disease Research Branch, NHGRI, NIH, Baltimore, MD, United States, 1University of Southampton, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2National Genetics 5Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States. Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury, United Kingdom. Classical Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by a wide variety Array-cgh is an essential tool for the detection, quantification and inter- of dominant mutations, many de novo, in type I collagen and has an pretation of cryptic copy number changes throughout the genome . Us- incidence of 1/20,000 births . Two recessive OI types, caused by de- ing Agilent Technology’s eARRAY we have designed and customised a fects in cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP) or prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 60mer oligo array printed in 4x44K format (i .e . four 44,000 oligo arrays (LEPRE1), account for approximately 5% of OI cases in North Amer- per slide) . This constitutional array provides maximum even coverage ica. We identified a recurring mutation in LEPRE1, IVS5+1G>T (Nat of the genome and targets known microdeletion/duplication syndrome Genet (2007) 39:359-365) in 6 probands (9/12 alleles) with severe/le- regions, is semi-automatable and provides a high-throughput platform thal recessive type VIII OI (OMIM #610915) . All probands had carrier for array-cgh . To date we have reported 350 diagnostic oligo arraysConcurrent Sessions  (a) 85% ascertained following normal karyotypes but with idiopathic phenotype of these patients with our patients suggested that a specific mental retardation, dysmorphism and/or congenital abnormalities; (b) phenotype of these syndrome may be defined. These characteristics 15% for further characterisation of visible chromosome abnormalities should be taken into account in order to identify additional patients . including apparently balanced translocations (ABCR), complex rear- rangements (CCR) and supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMC) . Tab .1 de novo rearrangements We have detected copy number changes (ranging in size from 88 Kb - 5 Mb) in 25% of ascertainment group (a), including a number of pre- case molecular karyotype Presence Overlap with polym. Number of Disease genes References of LcR region genes viously unreported de novo abnormalities . The majority of group (b) SCN2A; GALNT3; SCN1A; SCN9A; Pescucci et al .; del(2)(q24 .3q31 .1){10 .6 cases were found to have deletions or duplications not detected by 1 Mb} NO 5% 50 ABCB11; LRP2; BBS5; GAD1; Eur J Med Genet . ITGA6; CHRNA1 2007;50(1):21-32 light microscopy (ABCR and CCR), or arrays resolved their chromo- CERKL; NEUROD1; FRZB; COL3A1; Mencarelli et al .;Am del(2)(q31 .2q32 .3){13 .9 somal origin and composition (SMC) . Interpretation of array-cgh re- 2 Mb} NO 33% 43 COL5A2; SLC40A1; PMS1; J Med Genet A . HIBCH; STAT1 2007;143(8):858-65 sults remains challenging and the increasing use and resolution of this Caselli et al .; Eur technology suggests that it may soon replace karyotyping for some 3 del(6)(q24 .3q25 .1){2 .6 Mb} SI 10% 21 SUMO4 J Med Genet . 2007;50(4):315-21 primary ascertainment groups . Caselli et al .; Am J Med 4 del(7)(q36 .1q36 .2){5 .5 Mb} SI 35% 56 CNTNAP2; KCNH2; NOS3; PRKAG2 Genet A . 2007 c04.3 5 del(14)(q12q12){3 .0 Mb} NO 48% 5 COCH del(1)(p36 .32p36 .33){3 .8 the challenge of interpreting microduplications detected by 6 NO 70% 65 SKI; PEX1; TP73 Mb} arraycGH 7 del(4)(p16 .3p16 .3){2 .0 Mb} SI 60% 30 PDE6B; IDUA; FGFR3; WHSC1 C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts, B. Leegte, T. Dijkhuizen, R. Hordijk, I. Stolte- 8 del(15)(q11 .2q13 .1){5 .7 SI 35% 14 NDN; SNRPN; UBE3A; GABRB3; Mb} OCA2 Dijkstra, M. de Jong, M. Kerstjens-Frederikse, K. Kok, B. Sikkema-Raddatz; dup(17)(p11 .2p11 .2){3 .9 TNFRSF13B; FLCN; RAI1; ATPAF2; Greco et al . .; Clin Genet . 9 SI 63% 41 Department of Genetics, University Medical Center, Groningen, The Nether- Mb} MYO15A; ALDH3A2; AKAP10 2008;73(3):294-6 del(17)(p11 .2p11 .2){3 .4 TNFRSF13B; FLCN; RAI1; ATPAF2; lands. 10 Mb} SI 63% 41 MYO15A; ALDH3A2; AKAP10 The decision whether arrayCGH copy number alterations are causative 11 del(22)(q11 .21q11 .21){3 .1 PRODH; TBX1; COMT; RTN4R; Uliana et al .; Clin 12 SI 42% 37 Dysmorphol . for the phenotype comprises a number of steps: exclusion of known 13 Mb} SERPIND1; SNAP29; GGT2 2008;17(1):13-7 polymorphisms, confirmation by MLPA/FISH, analyzing parental sam- del(22)(q13 .31q13 .33){4 .7 PPARA; TRMU;ALG12; MLC1; 14 NO 54% 39 SCO2; ECGF1; ARSA; SHANK3; ples, and a literature/database search to compare the phenotype with Mb} ACR cases with similar genotypes . The interpretation of microduplications is difficult. FISH confirmation is technically not always possible and c04.5 specific MLPA primers have to be constructed. The phenotype is usu- towards an improved genetic diagnosis of individuals with a ally variable and thus inheritance from a (near) normal parent does not congenital heart defects always exclude a causal relationship . The scarcity of published cases B. Thienpont1, L. Tranchevent2, P. Van Loo1,2, J. Breckpot1, M. Gewillig3, Y. is also a well known problem . Moureau2, K. Devriendt1; We analysed 300 karyotypically normal MR/MCA patients with an in 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Electrical En- house 6500k BACarray . We detected, besides polymorphic CNV’s, 38 gineering, ESAT-SCD, Leuven, Belgium, 3Pediatric Cardiology Unit, Leuven, microduplications (0 .3-7 .3Mb) in 35 patients . In 28 cases FISH result- Belgium. ed in 18 confirmed (1.4-7.3Mb) and ten non-confirmed (0.3-3.4Mb) du- Detection of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances by array-CGH plications. In eight of the ten non-confirmed cases the duplication was opens opportunities in diagnostics as well as in the identification of shown to be inherited by arrayCGH, demonstrating that FISH is not novel loci involved in the patients phenotype . We analysed 130 pa- always suitable for confirming duplications. Three FISH non-confirmed tients with idiopathic ‘syndromic’ congenital heart defects (CHDs) by duplications were tested and confirmed by MLPA. For 26 duplications array-CGH with a 1Mb resolution . Causal chromosomal abnormalities the parents were tested: 19 were inherited (0 .5-4 .14Mb) and seven were detected in 22/130 patients (17%) . were de novo (0 .3-7 .3Mb) . Upon re-evaluation one mother appeared In some of the regions, genes known to cause CHDs upon mutation to have a similar phenotype as her affected son . Of the 38 microdu- are found: TBX1, NKX2 .5, GATA4, NSD1, EHMT1, NOTCH1, ATRX plications six still need confirmation, seven need parental testing, 18 and CBP . In the remaining regions no genes are known to cause are inherited from a phenotypically normal parent and three could not CHDs, and they thus represent novel loci linked to CHDs . To identify be confirmed. So far four seem to be clinically relevant; the de novo the causal genes, the genes in imbalanced regions were first scored duplications 9p24 .3, 17p13 .3, and 19q13 .31q13 .32, and a maternally for their potential involvement in cardiogenesis using a tailored modu- inherited duplication 22q13 .3 . Clinical information will be presented . lar prioritisation algorithm based on ENDEAVOUR (Aerts et al, Nat Bio- tech 24 p 537). We first added expression microarray data of murine c04.4 cardiogenesis to the ENDEAVOUR framework . We next constructed Array-CGH analysis of MCA/MR patients: identification of 5 6 different training sets related to different aspects of CHDs or car- novel microdeletion syndromes diogenesis . Leave-one-out cross-validations determined which data F. T. Papa, E. Katzaki, M. A. Mencarelli, R. Caselli, V. Uliana, M. Pollazzon, K. sources contain relevant information for prioritization of genes related Sampieri, I. Longo, F. Ariani, I. Meloni, F. Mari, A. Renieri; to that process . Next we fused these different prioritizations (of one Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy. candidate gene set, using different training sets) into one overall priori- We have investigated 84 patients with mild to severe mental retarda- tization . We validated the prioritisation of ENDEAVOUR by expression tion associated to facial dysmorphisms and/or congenital anomalies . analysis in zebrafish. 45 of the highest-ranking genes were analysed. All patients had a normal karyotype and have been evaluated by clini- As a positive control we analysed expression of some of the identified cal geneticists (AR and FM) who excluded a recognizable syndrome genes known to cause CHDs . Two strong candidate genes for CHDs on a clinical ground . Using 105K oligo Array-CGH a mean of 5 CNVs/ emerge from these analyses: BMP4 and HAND2 . patient were identified. These ranged in size from 62Kb to 1Mb and they are reported in the databases as benign polymorphisms . Private c04.6 imbalances were detected in 24 out of 84 patients . In 10 cases (12%) information management for constitutional cytogenetics: tools a private rearrangement was inherited from one healthy parent . In 14 for ArraycGH in a clinical diagnostic context cases (16 .5%) the rearrangement was de novo: 5 were novel deletions S. W. L. A. Van Vooren1, B. Coessens1, J. R. Vermeesch2, Y. Moreau1; (Tab .1, cases 1-5) and 9 were known syndromes in atypical cases 1K.U.Leuven, ESAT/SCD (SISTA), Heverlee, Belgium, 2Center for Human Ge- (Tab .1, cases 6-14) . The last group included three cases of 22q11 de- netics, Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium. letions, the shortest 4p- known in the literature, and one case of Po- As Microarray-CGH is introduced into clinical practice for identification tocki-Lupski. The five novel de novo deletions ranged between 2.6 and of submicroscopic genomic aberrations, tools to handle related data 13 .9Mb and they overlapped with polymorphic regions for an extent become essential for clinical geneticists and biomedical researchers of 5-48%. Only two (6q24.3-q25.1 and 7q36.1-q36.2) are flanked by alike . We have developed Bench, a web application that combines LCRs . An accurate search of the literature allowed to identify addi- a constitutional cytogenetics database and tools for search, visuali- tional patients with overlapping deletions . Comparative analysis of the sation, genome annotation, automated genotype-phenotype linkage,Concurrent Sessions  reporting, and literature mining . human genome, a HapMap Yoruba sample (NA18507), by ultra-high Array-CGH technology is currently on its way to replace classical throughput sequencing of paired-end libraries with the AB SOLiD(TM) karyotyping as primary diagnostic tool in copy number screening . Its System . We sequenced a variety of 2x25-bp paired-end libraries vast importance in clinical diagnosis and research are underlined by (>15Gb) with insert sizes ranging from 600bp to 6kb (SD 10-23%) . large number of genes in human development and disease still un- Each library provides over 10x physical (clone) coverage, with a total known. A data storage and mining tool aimed specifically at leverag- combined physical coverage >60x for 90% of the genome . The high ing the power of Array-CGH in a clinical context will aid aetiology of physical coverage and diverse insert sizes allowed detecting small in- rare and complex genetic diseases by characterising genomic rear- dels within tags (1-10 bp), and approximately 70,000 indels of length rangements, annotating and analysing clinical features, and provid- 20 bp to >100 kb . Additionally, we sequenced 7Gb of 50-bp fragment ing advanced data mining and integration . For example, through an libraries, which combined with the paired libraries provided over 12x automated analysis of PUBMED abstracts, Bench allows to prioritize sequence coverage, allowing us to discover millions of SNPs of which candidate genes in genomic deletions and duplications by phenotype 75% are found in dbSNP . Inferred SVs were compared to a database characteristics annotated to the patient . Also, known Copy Number of end-sequence pairs of 10x physical coverage obtained by di-deoxy Variations, genes and their functions, and other genome annotations, sequencing of 40kb fosmid ends . A subset of novel SVs were validated when integrated with patient related data, aid in diagnosis and aetiol- by PCR and Sanger sequencing . Our results serves as a model for ogy of new submicroscopic chromosomal imbalance syndromes . further high-resolution exploration of genetic variation in human popu- Bench provides a collaborative Array-CGH LIMS system that allows lations and cancer with next-generation sequencing . to maintain records of phenotype and chromosome rearrangements in patients, augmented with data mining, reporting and visualisation c05.3 facilitating research, diagnostics, research and genetic counseling by Expression analysis using deep solexa sequencing shows involving relevant information from a variety of sources . Bench can major advances in robustness, resolution and inter-lab be used free of charge in a research collaboration . http://www .esat . portability over microarray platforms kuleuven .be/cghgate/ . J. T. den Dunnen1,2, Y. Ariyurek2, H. H. Thygesen1, E. Vreugdenhil3, J. M. Boer1, G. B. van Ommen1, P. A. C. ‘t Hoen1; c05.1 1Human and Clinical Gentics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Genome Functional interactions of conserved non-coding (cNc) Technology Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Medical Pharmacology, Leiden / sequences with other cNc using circular chromosome Amsterdam Center for Drug Research, Leiden, The Netherlands. conformation capture (4c) The hippocampal transcriptomes of wild-type mice and mice transgen- D. Robyr, G. Duriaux-Sail, S. E. Antonarakis; ic for δC-doublecortin-like kinase were analyzed with the Solexa deep University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. sequencing technology . We determined around 2 million sequence The comparison of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) sequences with tags per sample and compared these data with results of the same the mouse syntenic regions led to the identification of roughly 3500 samples analysed using five different microarray platforms. Seventy regions displaying an identity of >70% over a length of a least 100 percent of the sequence tags were mapped to approximately 30,000 nucleotides of ungaped alignment . About 65% (~ 2300) of these are unique, high-confidence transcripts, their abundance spanning four conserved non-coding sequences (CNCs) . Very little is known about orders of magnitude . Antisense transcription, undetectable by microar- the function of most CNCs . We speculated that a functional CNC may rays, was found in 51% of all genes, and alternative poly-adenylation interact with its genomic target (i .e . an enhancer would bind to it’s cog- in 47% . With a dedicated Bayesian model and false discovery rate nate gene promoter). Thus, the identification of any part of the genome of 8.5%, we measured statistically significant differential expression that interacts directly with a CNC could provide clues on the function of for 3179 transcripts; many more and with higher fold-changes than the latter . We have generated libraries of CNC-interacting DpnII frag- observed using microarrays . The deep sequencing technology dem- ments by chromosome conformation capture (4C) whose identity is onstrates superb reproducibility, not only between biological replicates determined by subsequent high-throughput sequencing . but even across laboratories . The described major advance in robust- We are currently screening for the interactions of 18 CNCs located in ness, comparability and richness of sequence -based transcriptomics the two ENCODE regions of HSA21 in different cell lines . Preliminary data is expected to boost in-depth collaborative, comparative and inte- results for two CNCs in K562 cells indicate that these may interact grative genomics studies . near regions of the genome that show conservation among verte- brates . Indeed, the median distances from the sequenced DpnII frag- c05.4 ments to the nearest conserved region are 381 .5 bp (P = 0 .0583) and studying gene dosage imbalance in embryonic stem cells 764bp (P = 0 .023) respectively for the 2 CNCs analysed . These results G. Cobellis1,2, A. Romito1, R. De Cegli1, S. Iacobacci1, A. Fedele1, D. di Ber- provide initial evidence that the function of CNCs is mediated by their nardo1, A. Ballabio1; interactions with other conserved regions . Interestingly, these CNCs 1TIGEM, Napoli, Italy, 2Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy. are capable of interactions with loci not only in cis and over several Mb, To gain insight into the alterations of the transcriptional pathways un- but also in trans with loci located on other chromosomes . derlying the pathogenesis of Down syndrome, we decided to use an integrated strategy combining the systematic overexpression of chro- c05.2 mosome 21 genes in ES cells, transcriptome analysis and systems A high-resolution structural variation map of a human genome biology approaches . by next-generation, high-throughput paired-end sequencing We generated an ES cell clone bearing an inducible/exchangeable F. M. De La Vega1, H. E. Peckham2, S. S. Ranade2, S. F. McLaughlin2, C. C. cassette in the ROSA26 locus to be used to insert, one by one, every Lee2, Y. Fu2, Z. Zhang1, F. C. L. Hyland1, C. L. Clouser2, A. A. Antipova2, J. M. murine orthologs of human chromosome 21 genes. Using this flex- Manning2, C. L. Hendrickson2, L. Zhang2, E. T. Dimalanta2, T. D. Sokolsky2, ible system, we developed a library of ES cells over-expressing, in M. W. Laptewicz2, B. E. Coleman2, J. K. Ichikawa2, J. B. Warner2, B. Li1, J. M. an inducible manner, murine orthologs of human transcription factors, Kidd3, J. A. Malek4, G. L. Costa2, E. E. Eichler3, K. J. McKernan2; kinases and miRNAs mapping on HSA21 in order to perturb the physi- 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, Bev- ological genetic network at the cellular level . The biological pathways erly, MA, United States, 3HHMI, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United affected by the over-expression of each coding and non-coding gene States, 4Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar, Doha, Qatar. and their regulators and regulated genes have been inferred using The human genome and HapMap projects have considerably in- system biology approach . We already mapped the regulatory gene creased our understanding of the role of sequence variation in evolu- networks specifically altered by each transcription factors and kinases, tion and disease . Hybridization microarrays and fosmid-end sequenc- opening new hypothesis toward the understanding of pathogenesis of ing reveal that structural variants (SVs) including insertions, deletions, Down syndrome . duplications, inversions and translocations are common and extensive . Finally, the above-described ES cell lines have been used to study the Microarray methods, however, lack resolution and are blind to unbal- gene dosage imbalance effects on ES cell differentiation to cardiomyo- anced events, while clone-based end-sequencing is time consuming cytes, myeloid and neuronal lineages, tissues affected by the DS . and expensive . Here, we present a high-resolution survey of SVs of a This project represent the first to involve a systematic overexpressionConcurrent Sessions  of all individual genes from a single human chromosome (HSA21) in c06.1 mouse ES cells to identify the effects of gene dosage imbalance on the mutations in the cyclin family member FAm58A cause a novel global transcriptome and on the ability of pluripotent ES cells to differ- X-linked dominant disorder characterized by syndactyly, entiate into lineages relevant to human aneuploidy phenotypes . telecanthus, anogenital and renal malformations (stAR syndrome) c05.5 J. Kohlhase1, D. Boehm1, F. J. Kaiser2, S. Kaulfuss3, W. Borozdin1, K. Buiting4, A large human miRNA library screen reveals a potential role of P. Burfeind3, J. Boehm5, F. Barrionuevo5, A. Craig5, K. Borowski6, K. Keppler- miRNAs in the fine tuning of fibrinogen levels Noreuil6, T. Schmitt-Mechelke7, B. Steiner8, D. Bartholdi8, G. Mortier9, R. Sand- A. Fort1, C. Borel1, R. J. Fish1, S. E. Antonarakis1, M. Neerman-Arbez1,2; ford10, B. Zabel11, A. Superti-Furga11, S. Unger5,11; 1University Medical Center, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Division of Angiology and 1Center for Human Genetics Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2University Clinic Haemostasis, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland. Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 3Human Genetics, In humans, plasma fibrinogen levels are maintained between 2-4 University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany, 4University Clinic Essen, Es- g/L with a wide variability in the population . Here, we addressed the sen, Germany, 5Human Genetics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, role of microRNAs in the regulation of fibrinogen gene expression by 6Medical Genetics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 7Neuropedi- screening the regulatory potential of 471 human microRNAs (from the atrics, Kinderspital Luzern, Luzern, Switzerland, 8Medical Genetics, University ~1’000 annotated miRNAs in the human genome) on all five fibrino- of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 9Medical Genetics, University of Ghent, gen transcript 3’UTRs (FGA, FGAα-E, FGB, FGG and FGG’). For this Ghent, Belgium, 10Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, purpose, we cloned each fibrinogen 3’UTR behind a firefly luciferase United Kingdom, 11Pediatrics, University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. reporter gene . Co-transfections in HEK-293 cells included one of the We recently identified four girls with a consistent constellation of toe firefly luciferase reporter gene constructs, a microRNA precursor and Syndactyly, Telecanthus, Anogenital and Renal malformations, and we a transfection efficiency control (expressing renilla luciferase). The propose the name STAR syndrome for this condition . A single moth- regulatory effects of microRNAs on each fibrinogen 3’UTR was cal- er-daughter pair had previously been reported by Green et al . with culated by dividing the ratio of luciferase intensities (firefly/renilla) of a similar combination of malformations . The authors noted that this each transfection with a microRNA by the ratio from a reaction without condition was autosomal dominantly inherited and overlapping with microRNA . We also screened human liver RNA for expression of 362 but distinct from Townes-Brocks syndrome (OMIM #601446) . Array microRNAs, by qPCR . 57% of the tested microRNAs are expressed CGH performed with DNA of one of our patients revealed a de novo in the liver. With these experiments, we identified 8 microRNAs, ex- heterozygous deletion of 37 .9-50 .7 kb including exons 1 and 2 of the pressed in the liver, showing -13% to -40% down-regulating potential; gene FAM58A on Xq28, and qPCR detected a de novo deletion of 4 of these acting specifically on FGA, 2 on FGB, 1 acting on FGA FAM58A exon 5 in a second case . Point mutation analysis revealed and FGG and 1 down-regulating all fibrinogen 3’UTRs. None of these one truncating and two splice mutations in FAM58A in three further microRNAs showed an effect on the control firefly luciferase vector cases including the family reported by Green thus confirming this dis- lacking a 3’UTR, demonstrating fibrinogen 3’UTR-specific down-regu- order as a distinct recognizable X-linked dominant condition . FAM58A lation potential . We also detected 16 liver-expressed microRNAs with encodes a Cyclin box fold domain, and in accordance with that siRNA up-regulating potential of + 16% to + 176% . Ongoing experiments are mediated knockdown in cultured cells revealed a proliferation defect . assessing the effects of these candidate microRNAs on endogenous FAM58A interacts with SALL1 but not SALL4 as determined by co-im- fibrinogen synthesis in HepG2 cells. munoprecipitation, corresponding to the close phenotypic overlap with Townes-Brocks syndrome . c05.6 Visualization of molecular interactions in situ, with single- c06.2 molecule resolution KCNQ2 mutations and implications for counselling and perinatal O. Söderberg; care in Benign Familial Neonatal convulsions Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. N. Verbeek1, M. Poot1, W. Arts2, K. Flipsen-ten Berg1, B. Gunning3, D. Lind- New, powerful techniques are required to observe individual protein hout1, M. van Kempen1; molecules and their interactions in situ, in order to analyze, with high 1Division of Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, precision, in which cells the interacting proteins are located, and in Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Epilepsy Centre Kempenhaeghe, Heeze, The what sub-cellular compartments . Netherlands. We therefore developed a method called in situ proximity-ligation as- Background: Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is an auto- say (in situ PLA) that requires multiple recognition events, by a pair of somal dominantly inherited form of epilepsy characterized by seizure antibodies, for detection . By conjugating DNA-strands to the antibod- onset around the third day of life, spontaneously resolving within a few ies we convert the binding of the antibodies to a protein or a protein months . In general, psychomotor development is normal, but 10-15% complex into an amplifiable DNA molecule, thus increasing both the of patients develop epilepsy later in life . BFNC is caused by muta- selectivity and sensitivity of the assay. Rolling-circle amplification gen- tions in the voltage-gated potassium channel subunit gene KCNQ2 erates a concatemeric product for localized detection by fluorescently (20q13 .3) or, less frequently, KCNQ3 (8q24) . Purpose of this study is labeled probes . Using the in situ PLA, we could detect interactions be- to determine the frequency of KCNQ2-mutations in BFNC families and tween two (c-Myc/Max) and three (c-Myc/Max/RNA pol II) endogenous sporadic cases . proteins, visualizing the active fraction of c-Myc as it exert its func- Methods: MLPA- and sequence analysis of the KCNQ2 gene was per- tion in promoting gene transcription (Söderberg et al . Nature Methods, formed in 28 probands/families with neonatal seizures . Larger dele- 2006), as well as post-translational modifications, i.e. phosphorylation tions were analysed with Infinium humanhap300 SNP-array. Pheno- of PDGFRβ, in cultured cells and fresh frozen tissues sections in situ typic details were provided by the referring physician . (Jarvius et al . Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 2007) . In situ PLA is Results: In eleven families and three sporadic cases, three missense, applicable for detection of all types of biomolecules (e .g . proteins, DNA eight frameshift or nonsense mutations, and three large deletions were and RNA) and interactions thereof, allowing detection and enumeration detected . All large deletions (ranging form 49 to 479 kbp) contained of biomolecules within cells and tissue, at a single-molecule resolu- one to fourteen annotated genes, including the frontal lobe epilepsy tion. As the read-out of the method is based upon DNA amplifications, gene, CHRNA4, in two families . Associated mental retardation (with- in situ PLA can easily be multiplexed for simultaneously detection of out active epilepsy), autism or (febrile) seizures later in life, occurred multiple analytes . In situ PLA provides a unique opportunity to monitor in multiple families . Perinatal mutation analysis was performed in two interaction patterns for diagnostic purposes . families . Conclusions: Mutations were found in 50% of probands with (benign) neonatal convulsions . Large deletions comprise a substantial portion (21%) of KCNQ2-mutations . Mutation detection in neonates with be- nign convulsions can prevent superfluous diagnostic procedures. Fur- thermore, perinatal mutation analysis in sibs with 50% risk to BFNC could significantly improve perinatal management.Concurrent Sessions  c06.3 c06.5 clinical features of maternal uniparental disomy 14 are also A novel, autosomal dominant, Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum-like present in patients with an epimutation and a deletion of the phenotype in a five-generation family imprinted DLK/GTL gene cluster P. D. Turnpenny1, O. M. Vanakker2, L. Costrop2, A. de Paepe2, L. Schurgers3, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, D. Kamber2, J. I. Martin-Subero3, W. Lieb1, P. Terhal4, R. Florijn4, F. M. Pope5, M. James6, S. Tomkins6, P. Newman7, S. Ellard8, E. B. Albrecht2, E. Rossier5, D. Rita6, S. Das7, S. Purmann1, S. Groß2, C. Lich2, R. Young8, M. L. P. Robert1; Siebert8, B. Horsthemke2, K. Buiting2; 1Peninsula Clinical Genetic Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Center for Medi- 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut cal Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3VitaK & CARIM, University für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Institut für of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4The Netherlands Ophthalmic Re- Humangenetik, Christian Albrecht Universität Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4Department search Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Northwick Park Health Institute, of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Nether- London, United Kingdom, 6South Western Regional Genetics Service, Bristol, lands, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, Tübingen, United Kingdom, 7Dept Histology, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, Germany, 6The Park Site Center, Park Ridge, Illinois, IL, United States, 7Depart- United Kingdom, 8Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, ment Of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, United Kingdom. 8Institut für Humangenetik, Christian Albrecht Universität Kiel, Kiel, Germany. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an autosomal recessive (AR) Maternal uniparental disomy 14 [upd(14)mat] is associated with a rec- progressive disorder of elastic fibres characterised by dermal, ocu- ognizable phenotype that includes pre- and postnatal growth retarda- lar and vascular lesions, due to mutations in ABCC6, an ATP-bind- tion, neonatal hypotonia, feeding problems and precocious puberty . ing cassette transporter, in ~80% of cases . Autosomal dominant (AD) Chromosome 14 contains an imprinted gene cluster, which is regulat- inheritance is very rare and usually due to pseudodominance (Plomp ed by a differentially methylated region (IG-DMR) between DLK1 and et al . 2004) . We studied 17 individuals from a 5-generation family with GTL2 . Here we report on six patients with clinical features of maternal PXE-like skin manifestations . Many subjects also suffer premature upd(14)mat who show a typical methylation pattern at the IG-DMR and claudication pain and ischaemic heart disease but they do not have the GTL2 promoter region, but biparental inheritance for chromosome typical PXE ophthalmic signs . Electron microscopy analysis of skin 14. In five of the patients loss of paternal methylation appears to be was normal except in one patient who had fragmentation and clump- a primary epimutation, whereas the other patient has a paternally de- ing of elastic fibres with no evidence of calcification. Sequencing of rived deletion of ~1 Mb that includes the imprinted DLK-GTL2 gene ABCC6 was negative and linkage to this locus excluded . Vanakker et cluster. These findings demonstrate that the upd(14)mat phenotype is al (2007) reported GGCX mutations in 3 families with an AR PXE-like caused by altered expression of genes within this cluster . phenotype and vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy . Our family has no history of abnormal bleeding, clotting assays were normal in one af- c06.4 fected individual, and sequencing of GGCX and VKORC1 was normal . capillary malformation - Arteriovenous malformation: clinical Immunohistochemistry of lesional skin tissue showed disturbance in and molecular aspects the gamma-carboxylation of vitamin K-dependent mineralization inhib- N. Revencu1,2, L. M. Boon1,3, J. B. Mulliken4, O. Enjolras5, M. Cordisco6, P. E. itors, particularly matrix gla protein (MGP) . This suggests involvement Burrows4, P. Clapuyt7, F. Hammer7, J. Dubois8, E. Baselga9, D. Chitayat10, M. of a related pathway as in the PXE-like phenotype of Vanakker et al Vikkula1; (2007) . Genome-wide linkage results, and candidate gene sequenc- 1de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques ing, are awaited . This 5-generation family with a PXE-like phenotype universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Vascular Anomalies Centre, Divi- demonstrates unequivocal AD inheritance . We believe this is a previ- sion of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium, ously unreported clinical and genetic entity, the pathogenesis of which 4Vascular Anomalies Center, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, may provide new information on the molecular pathways involved in 5Centre Multidisciplinaire des Angiomes de l’enfant, Hôpital d’enfants Armand- PXE and related disorders . Trousseau, Paris, France, 6Department of Pediatric Dermatology, Hospital de Pediatria Dr. J.P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7Department of Radiol- c06.6 ogy, Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 8Department of clinical phenotypes and outcome of 101 LmNA gene mutation Medical Imaging, Sainte-Justine Mother-Child University Hospital, Montreal, carriers QC, Canada, 9Hospital de la Santa Creu I Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 10Medi- N. Marziliano1, M. Pasotti1, M. Grasso1, A. Pilotto1, E. Serafini1, B. De Giorgio1, cal Genetics Program Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. M. Diegoli2, A. Brega3, E. Arbustini1; Background: Mutations in RASA1 were documented in 6 families (39 1Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, PAVIA, Italy, 2University of Pavia, individuals) with autosomal dominant multifocal capillary malforma- PAVIA, Italy, 3University of Milan, MILANO, Italy. tions (CMs) . Nine individuals had an associated arteriovenous malfor- Background . Lamin A/C (LMNA) gene mutations cause a variety of mation/fistula (AVM/AVF). One patient had Parkes Weber syndrome phenotypes . In the cardiologic setting, patients diagnosed with idio- (PKWS), a disorder considered to be sporadic and non-genetic . pathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) plus atrio-ventricular block (AVB) Methods: We collected clinical information and DNA samples for 61 constitute the majority of reported cases . probands (from 21 centers) and their families with a phenotype similar Methods . This was a longitudinal retrospective study conducted in 32 to that observed in the original study: 56 had multifocal CMs, and 35 consecutive families in which LMNA gene defects were identified in the also a fast-flow vascular anomaly: 19 AVM/AVF and 16 PKWS; 5 had probands, sharing DCM (n=31) and ARVD (n=1) phenotype . PKWS without multifocal CMs . RASA1 was screened by DHPLC fol- Results . Of the 171 family members, 101 were carriers of LMNA gene lowed by sequencing . mutations . 65 of 101 (64 .5%) were phenotypically affected while 36 Results: We identified 42 distinct mutations in 44/61 probands: 16/19 were only genotypically affected, including 5 with preclinical signs . The with AVM/AVF, 13/16 with PKWS, 15/21 with multifocal CMs only, and 65 patients had DCM with AVB (n=44), DCM with Ventricular Tachy- 0/5 with PKWS without multifocal CMs . RASA1 mutation was also cardia/Fibrillation (VT/VF) (n=12), DCM with AVB and Emery-Dreifuss found in 57 relatives . Overall, 17 individuals with a RASA1 mutation Muscle Dystrophy type 2 (EDMD2) (n=6), AVB plus EDMD2 (n=2) and had an AVM/AVF: 8 were intracranial, 2 of which were vein of Galen ARVD (n=1) . The disease was proven to be familial autosomal domi- aneurysmal malformations . Moreover, 7 patients had either a benign nant (AD) in 23 of the 32 families; likely familial AD in 6 and associated or a malignant tumor, 3 of which are known to occur in neurofibromato- with a de novo mutation in 3 . During a median follow-up of 57 .4 months sis type 1 or 2 . Penetrance of RASA1 mutations was 98% and de novo (interquartile range 26-115 months) we observed 54 events in 47 DCM occurrence was 32% . patients (7 had a later event excluded from the analysis) whereas no Conclusions: Multifocal CM is the hallmark of RASA1 mutation . These event was observed among the 36 non-affected carriers . The events patients often have extra- or intracranial AVM/AVF. This study confirms were related to heart failur the original association designated capillary malformation-arteriove- Conclusions . DCMs caused by LMNA gene defects are highly pene- nous malformation (CM-AVM) . In addition, PKWS, as well as vein of trant, adult-onset, malignant diseases characterized by high rate of HF Galen aneurysmal malformation are genetic diseases, part of the CM- and life-threatening arrhythmias predicted by NYHA class, competitive AVM spectrum. Specific neural tumors also may be linked to RASA1. sport activity and type of mutation . We also found a LMNA gene defect associated with an ARVD clinical phenotype .Concurrent Sessions  c07.1 c07.3 Oligosaccharyltransferase subunits mutations in non-syndromic mechanisms of mEcP2 function underlying Rett syndrome as mental retardation revealed from overexpression and knock-down systems in vitro F. Molinari1, F. Foulquier2, P. S. Tarpey3, W. Morelle2, J. Teague3, S. Edkins3, P. M. Vecsler1,2, A. J. Simon1,3, G. Rechavi1,3, N. Amariglio1,3, E. Gak1,2; A. Futreal3, M. R. Stratton3, G. Turner4, G. Matthijs5, J. Gecz6, A. Munnich1, L. 1Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Genetics In- Colleaux1; stitute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 3Cancer Research Center, 1INSERM U781 and Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2UMR CNRS/ Institute of Hematology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. USTL 8570, Lille, France, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder Kingdom, 4The Gold Service, Adelaide, Australia, 5Laboratory for Molecular mainly affecting girls and is the second common cause of mental re- Diagnostics, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 6Department of Pe- tardation in girls after the Down syndrome . The methyl CpG-binding diatrics and School of Molecular & Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, protein 2 (MeCP2), a ubiquitous transcriptional repressor interact- Adelaide, Australia. ing with the chromatin remodeling machinery, is considered a single Mental Retardation (MR) is the most frequent handicap among chil- causative factor of Rett syndrome and related phenotypes, and some dren and young adults . While a large proportion of X-linked MR genes autistic cases . Our present study is focusing on interaction between have been identified, only four genes of autosomal recessive non-syn- MeCP2 and chromatin proteins leading to changes in chromatin archi- dromic MR (AR-NSMR) have been described so far . tecture and silencing of gene expression . Using confocal microscopy, Here, we report on two new genes involved in autosomal and X-linked we demonstrate that MeCP2 protein is localized at the nuclear hetero- NSMR. First, autozygosity mapping in two sibs born to first cousin chromatin compartment together with the heterochromatin protein 1 French family led to the identification of a region on 8p23.1-p22. This alpha (HP1α). In addition, we have developed in-vitro systems overex- interval encompasses the gene N33/TUSC3 encoding one subunit of pressing the normal MeCP2 and MeCP2 containing Rett related mu- the oligosaccharyltransferase (OTase) complex which catalyses the tations, as well as a knock-down system of the endogenous MECP2 transfer of an oligosaccharide chain on nascent proteins, the key step using specific siRNA. Studying these systems with a comprehensive of N-Glycosylation . Sequencing N33/TUSC3 identified a one base- gene regulation antibody array, we demonstrate that the expression of pair insertion, c .787_788insC, resulting in a premature stop codon, a specific set of nuclear proteins, including hBRM/hSNF2a component p .N263fsX300, and leading to mRNA decay . Surprisingly, glycosylation of SWI/SNF, HMGB1 high mobility group protein, G9a histone meth- analyses of patient fibroblasts showed normal N-glycan synthesis and yltransferase, PRMT1 protein arginine methyltransferase and HDAC2 transfer . Subsequently, screening the X-linked N33/TUSC3 paralog, histone deacetylase, is synchronized with MeCP2 overexpression and the IAP gene, identified a missense mutation (c.932T>G, p.V311G) in knock-down . Moreover using co-immunoprecipitation analyses, we two brothers with X-linked NSMR . Interestingly, quantitative RT-PCR demonstrate a direct interaction between MeCP2 and hBRM/hSNF2a analyses showed increased IAP expression in N33/TUSC3 mutated component of ATPase-dependent SWI/SNF complex involved in global cells, suggesting that normal N-glycosylation observed in patient fibro- chromatin remodeling mechanism. Our findings suggest that MeCP2 blasts may be due to functional compensation . acts through parallel mechanism of chromatin remodeling involving Recent studies of fucosylation and polysialic acid modification of HDACs and SWI/SNF complex, thereby inducing local as well as large neuronal cell adhesion glycoproteins have shown the critical role of scale changes in chromatin architecture and compaction . glycosylation in synaptic plasticity. However, our data provide the first demonstration that a defect in N-Glycosylation can result in NSMR . Al- c07.4 together, our results demonstrate that fine regulation of OTase activity mutations in UBE are associated with X-linked infantile is essential for normal cognitive function development, providing there- spinal muscular atrophy (XL-smA) and cause decreased gene fore new insights to understand the pathophysiological bases of MR . expression in patients and carrier females A. Meindl1, J. Ramser1, C. Lenski1, M. von Rhein2, B. Wirth3, K. O. Yariz4, M. E. c07.2 Ahearn4, L. Baumbach-Reardon4; Influence of Friedreich ataxia GAA non-coding repeats 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Technical University Munich, expansions on pre-mRNA processing Munich, Germany, 2University Children’s Hospital Mainz, Mainz, Germany, F. Pagani; 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Miller ICGEB, Trieste, Italy. School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States. The intronic GAA repeat expansion in the frataxin gene causes the X-linked infantile spinal-muscular atrophy (XL-SMA; MIM301830) is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder Friedreich’s ataxia . While it is rare X-linked disorder that presents with the clinical features of hypo- generally believed that GAA repeats block transcription elongation, a tonia, areflexia and multiple congenital contractures (arthrogryposis) direct proof in eukaryotic system is lacking . We tested in hybrid mi- associated with anterior horn cell loss and infantile death . Large scale nigenes the effect of GAA and TTC repeats on nascent transcription mutation analysis in the linkage interval (DXS8080-DXS7132) resulted and pre mRNA processing . Unexpectedly, disease-causing GAA re- in the detection of three rare novel variants in exon 15 of the gene peats (n=100) did not affect transcriptional elongation in nuclear HeLa coding for the Ubiquitin-Activating Enzyme E1 (UBE1): two missense RUN ON assay nor pre mRNA transcript abundance but resulted in a mutations (c .1617 G>T, p .Met539Ile, c .1639 A>G, p .Ser547Gly) pres- complex defect on pre mRNA processing . GAA but not TTC repeats ent each in one XL-SMA family and one synonymous C>T substitu- insertion downstream of reporter exons resulted in their partial or com- tion (c.1731 C>T, p.Asn577Asn) identified in additional four unrelated plete exclusion from the mature mRNAs and in the generation of a families . Each of these variants was demonstrated to segregate with variety of aberrant splicing products . Interestingly, the GAA expansion the disease . Absence of the missense mutations was demonstrated induced the accumulation of an upstream pre mRNA splicing interme- for 3550, absence of the silent mutation was shown in 7914 control diate, which is not turned over into mature mRNA . This effect of GAA X-chromosomes. These results yielded statistical significant evidence repeats was observed to be position and context-dependent, as their for the association of the silent substitution and the two missense mu- insertion at different distance from the reporter exons had a variable ef- tations with XL-SMA (P = 2 .416x10-10, P = 0 .001815) . We have also fect on splice site selection . Reduction of GAA triplets partially restored demonstrated that the silent C>T substitution leads to significant re- normal splicing consistent with a repeat length dependent phenotypic duction of UBE1-expression in patients and interestingly to a lesser ex- variability . tent also in carrier females and alters the methylation pattern of exon This data indicates, for the first time, an association between GAA 15, implying a plausible role of this DNA element in developmental non-coding repeats and aberrant pre-mRNA processing and suggests UBE1- expression in humans . UBE1 catalyzes in the ubiquitin-protea- an alteration of the coordination between transcription and pre-mRNA some system (UPS) the first step in ubiquitin conjugation to mark cel- processing in this disease . Transcribed GAA repeats might create a lular proteins for degradation . Our observations indicate that XL-SMA “decoy” exon that binding to trans acting splicing factors may interfere is part of a growing list of neurodegenerative disorders associated with with normal turnover of non-coding intronic RNA leading to degrada- defects in the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway . tion and lower transcript levels .Concurrent Sessions  c07.5 c08.1 VLDLR (very low density lipoprotein receptor) is the first gene the role of the interferon regulatory factor 5 gene in implicated in cerebellar hypoplasia and quadrupedal locomotion autoimmune diseases in humans G. Kristjansdottir1, S. Sigurdsson1, J. Sandling1, V. Dideberg1,2, H. Göring3, L. T. H. Ozcelik1, N. Akarsu2, E. Uz1, S. Caglayan1, S. Gulsuner1, O. E. Onat1, M. Milani1, V. Bours2, F. Matesanz4, L. Rönnblom5, A. C. Syvänen1; Tan3, U. Tan4; 1Molecular medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, 1Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Human Genetics, CHU de Liège, Liège, 3Baskent University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey. Belgium, 3Department of Genetics Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Re- Quadrupedal gait in humans is a rare phenotype . We studied four search, San Antonio, TX, United States, 4Instituto de Parasitología y Biomed- consanguineous families, reported as Unertan syndrome, all exhibit- icina López Neyra, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Granada, ing quadrupedal gait, dysarthric speech, mental retardation, and vary- Spain, 5Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala ing degrees of cerebro-cerebellar hypoplasia . Homozygosity mapping University, Uppsala, Sweden. linked the locus for this unique autosomal-recessive trait to chromo- IRF5 is a transcription factor involved both in the type I interferon and some 9p24 in families A & D and 17p13 in family B . Family C excluded toll-like receptor signalling pathways . We have found polymorphisms linkage to both loci . These results suggest that hereditary disorders in the IRF5 gene to be associated with several autoimmune diseases; associated with quadrupedal gait are genetically heterogenous . The systemic lupus erythematosus1, rheumatoid arthritis2, multiple scle- 9p24 region includes the gene VLDLR, which is a component of the rosis3 and inflammatory bowel disease4 . By statistical methods two reelin signaling pathway . Sequence analysis of VLDLR revealed two variants in the IRF5 gene have been shown to be independently as- distinct mutations, R257X in family A, and I780TfsX3 in family D . Both sociated to SLE . The variants are a CGGGG insertion-deletion (indel) of these mutations presumably truncate the protein, apparently leaving polymorphism located in the promoter region of the IRF5 gene and behind a non-functional product . Unlike chromosome 9p24, the chro- a SNP rs10488631 located at the 3´end . The indel contains 3 or 4 mosome 17p interval is large and contains at least 157 genes . We repeats of the sequence CGGGG and the longer allele confers risk adopted a bioinformatics approach to screen the 17p interval for tri to all of the autoimmune diseases tested . The risk allele contains an nucleotide repeats GAA, CAG, CGG and CTG, and neuronal expres- additional binding site for the transcription factor SP1 . Using electro- sion . This analysis revealed several genes including lissencephaly-1 phoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) we observed allele-specific dif- (LIS1, alternative symbol PAFAH1B1) . LIS1 interacts with VLDLR, and ferences in protein binding to the indel and by proximity ligation assay heterozygous LIS1 mutations in humans cause lissencephaly I . Nei- (PLA) we demonstrated increased binding of the transcription factor ther LIS1 nor four additional genes (WDR81, RUTBC1, MNT, TRPV1) SP1 to the risk allele . showed an expansion of their repeat sequences . The search for the Our study adds to the evidence that there might be genes or pathways chromosome 17p13 gene in Family B continues . Our data suggest that are common in multiple autoimmune diseases and that the type I that mutations in VLDLR impair cerebro-cerebellar function and confer interferon system is likely to be involved in the development of these a dramatic influence on gait in humans. diseases . Supported by grants TUBITAK-SBAG 3334 and ICGEB-CRP/TUR04- 1) Sigurdsson S et al . Hum Mol Genet (2007) Dec 6 01 (to TO); Baskent University Research Fund KA 07/47 and TUBI- 2) Sigurdsson S et al . Arthritis Rheum (2007) Jul;56(7):2202-10 TAK-SBAG-HD-230 (to MT) . 4) Kristjansdottir G, Sandling J et al . J Med Genet accepted manu- script c07.6 3) Dideberg V et al . Hum Mol Genet (2007) Dec 15 The utilization of T3/T4 screening of males with MR of unknown etiology to identify patients with Allan-Herndon-Dudley c08.2 syndrome Elevated expression of serotonin receptor type 3 genes may T. Wood1, D. Hobson2, B. Browning1, C. Rogers1, C. Skinner1, H. H. Ardinger3, contribute to irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea F. Collins4, A. Aronsky5, M. J. Friez1, C. E. Schwartz1; J. Kapeller1, L. Houghton2, J. Walstab3, D. Möller1, H. Bönisch3, F. Autschbach4, 1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Wake Forest N. Gassler5, C. Fischer1, P. Whorwell2, W. Atkinson2, C. Fell2, G. Rappold1, B. University, Winston-Salem, NC, United States, 3Children’s Mercy Hospitals and Niesler1; Clinics, Kansas City, MO, United States, 4Western Sydney Genetic Program, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2University of Manchester, Sydney, Australia, 5Newark New Jersey, Newark, NJ, United States. Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Bonn, Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHD; OMIM 309600) is an X-linked Germany, 4Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Institute of Pathology, recessive disorder presenting with hypotonia progressing to spastic- Aachen, Germany. ity, delay in developmental milestones, and severe mental retardation . Serotonin type 3 (5-HT) receptor antagonists are beneficial in some 3 Mutations in the MCT8/SLC16A2 gene have shown to be causative in but not all patients with irritable bowel syndrome and diarrhea (IBS-D) . clinically diagnosed AHD patients . MCT8 functions as a thyroid hor- As cis-regulatory variants can play a role in the etiology of complex mone transporter with an essential function in the transport of triio- conditions by affecting efficiency of translation, we investigated the 5´ dothyronine (T3) into neurons . An imbalance of certain plasma thy- and 3´ untranslated region (UTR) of the 5-HT and 5-HT subunit 3A 3E roid hormones has been identified in AHD patients. To investigate the genes . Mutation analysis was carried out in 200 patients with irritable clinical utility of thyroid screening in patients with MR, we measured bowel syndrome and 100 healthy controls . We found a HTR3A 5´UTR free T3 and free T4 in a cohort of 137 males with MR of unknown variant and a novel HTR3E 3´UTR variant associated with the IBS-D etiology. Twenty males were identified to have elevated T3 and mo- subtype. Functional studies showed that both variants lead to signifi- lecular analysis of MCT8 in these patients identified two (10%) with cant upregulation of subunit expression . In HEK293 cells, the HTR3A pathogenic changes . One mutation was an insertion of 2 amino acids, variant results in a higher density of 5-HT receptors at the cell sur- 3A p .G41_S42 dup, in exon 1 . The 40 year old male had profound MR, face compared to the wild-type control . The HTR3E variant affects a was ambulatory and non-verbal . He also had a seizure disorder and microRNA binding site and leads to a higher luciferase reporter gene a right spastic hemiparetic arm . The second mutation (p .G282C) was expression . Both HTR3E and the miRNA co-localize in enterocytes in a 5 year old boy with truncal hypotonia and hypertonia of his ex- of the mucosal cell layer of the gut epithelium as shown by in situ tremities with spasticity, dystonia and hyperreflexia - all consistent with hybridization . We suggest that the increased expression of 5-HT and 3A AHD . Additionally, 28 males enrolled in our XLMR study, with clinical or 5-HT subunits might result in a change in 5-HT receptor composition 3E 3 biochemical evaluations suggestive of AHD, were analyzed for MCT8 and/or density of 5-HT receptors in the epithelial cell layer of the mu- 3 mutations and seven (25%) had pathogenic changes . Based on our cosa and neurons of the enteric and central nervous system and could results, testing the T3 level may serve as a general screen for the AHD therefore contribute to the pathophysiology of IBS-D . syndrome and should certainly be considered in males with significant mental retardation and hypotonia .Concurrent Sessions  c08.3 quency of the C allele of SNP rs11886868, in the BCL11A gene, was Genome-wide association scan for serum tsH levels in 2375 significantly higher in Sardinian individuals with elevated HbF levels sardinians and patients with attenuated forms of β-thalassemia versus those with S. Sanna1, L. A. Lopez2, G. Usala1, G. Ceresini3, B. D. Mitchell4, M. G. Pilia1, thalassemia major, detected by screening for β-thalassemia. We also M. G. Piras1, N. Sestu1, A. Maschio1, F. Busonero1, M. Dei1, A. Mulas1, L. Cris- showed that the same BCL11A variant is strongly associated with fetal poni1, T. Tanaka5, S. Bandinelli3, A. Loi1, A. Prinzis6, S. Mariotti6, L. Ferrucci5, hemoglobin levels in a large cohort of sickle cell patients . G. R. Abecasis7, A. R. Shuldiner4, D. Schlessinger2, M. Uda1, R. Nagaraja2, S. These results indicate that BCL11A variants, by modulating HbF lev- Naitza1; els, act as an important ameliorating factor of the β-thalassemia phe- 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Monserrato, Italy, 2Labo- notype, and it is likely they could help in moderating other hemoglo- ratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, bin disorders . Further genetic and functional studies are in progress 3Riabilitazione Geriatrica, Azienda Sanitaria Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 4Division to characterize the molecular mechanisms of fetal globin regulation, of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland School of and could eventually lead to the development of new therapeutic ap- Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Clinical Research Branch, National proaches for β-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina “M. Aresu”, Universita’ di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 7Center for Statisti- c08.5 cal Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, Genome-wide association study and follow up: identification United States. of novel coeliac disease determinants related to the immune Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), the key regulator of thyroid func- response tion, regulates the growth of the thyroid gland and the secretion of the A. Zhernakova1, K. A. Hunt2, G. Turner3, L. Franke1, G. Heap2, J. Romanos4, thyroid hormones T4 and T3 .Thus, serum TSH concentrations are a F. Takeuchi5, G. Trynka4, C. J. J. Mulder6, M. C. Wapenaar4, P. Deloukas5, R. sensitive indicator of thyroid function, with increased levels indicative McGinnis5, R. McManus3, D. A. van Heel2, C. Wijmenga4; of primary thyroid failure (hypothyroidism) and decreased level indica- 1Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Dept Biomedical Genetics, University Medi- tive of thyroid hormone overproduction (hyperthyroidism); however cal Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cell and Molecular specific gene variants that influence levels are not known. To identify Science, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 3Depart- genetic factors associated with variation in TSH levels, we conducted ments of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College a genome-wide association scan in 2375 Sardinians volunteers from Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 4Genetics Department, University Medical Center and 564 families participating to the ProgeNIA project, genotyped using the Groningen University, Groningen, The Netherlands, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Affymetrix 500K and Affymetrix 10K Mapping Array . We evaluated the Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 6Department of Gastroenterology and De- additive effect of 362,129 SNPs that passed quality controls, adjusting partment of Pediatric Gastroenterology, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The the model for familiality and covariates. To control inflation of type I Netherlands. error due to outliers and departure from normality, quantile normaliza- Coeliac disease (CD) is a common inflammatory intestinal disease, tion was applied prior the analysis . The GWA scan revealed several caused by an immune response to wheat, rye and barley . HLA-DQ2/8 loci putatively associated with serum TSH level and thus we followed is necessary, but not sufficient for disease development. up all the markers reaching the genome-wide significance threshold To search for additional genetic factors predisposing to CD we have of 1 .3*10-7 in an internal independent Sardinian cohort of 1903 vol- performed genome-wide associations (GWA) study in 778 coeliac cas- unteers, 1164 Tuscans samples from the InCHIANTI study, and 987 es and 1422 controls from the UK using the Illumina HumanHap300 Amish samples from the HAPI study . Replication is ongoing, but pre- BeadChip . Above the strong and extended association to the HLA re- liminary results support the finding for the top associated chromosome gion, the 4q27 genomic locus, including two immune related genes 5 SNP (overall pvalue <10-14), with the same allele responsible for an IL2 and IL21, was associated at the genome-wide significance level increase in TSH levels in all studies . Further detailed SNP analysis of (p=2 .0x10-7) . Association with IL2/IL21 gene locus was confirmed in the gene is necessary to define the causal variant and verify its direct three independent coeliac populations . Moreover, we observed simi- implication on thyroid related pathologies . lar association of IL2/IL21 gene region in other autoimmune diseases (type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis), suggesting it as the common c08.4 autoimmune locus . In a more extensive follow up we investigated BcL11A is associated with persistent HbF and ameliorates the 1,020 top genome-wide associated SNPs in multiple independent β-thalassemia phenotype cohorts from three populations (5,049 samples). We identified seven M. Uda1, R. Galanello2, S. Sanna1, G. Lettre3,4, V. G. Sankaran3,5, G. Usala1, F. new loci (p<5 .0x10-7), six of which contain genes controlling adaptive Busonero1, A. Maschio1, S. Lai1, L. Crisponi1, S. Naitza1, I. Asunis1, M. Deiana1, immune responses, including: CCR3, IL12A, IL18RAP, RGS1, SH2B3 M. Marongiu1, L. Porcu1, M. Lovicu1, R. Nagaraja6, L. Perseu1, S. Satta2, P. and TAGAP . Three novel CD loci (IL2/IL21, CCR3 and SH2B3) overlap Moi2, S. H. Orkin3,5, G. R. Abecasis7, D. Schlessinger6, J. N. Hirschhorn3,4, A. with genomic regions that show association to type 1 diabetes (HLA- Cao1; mediated autoimmune disorder), whereas association in the IL18RAP 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, INN, Consiglio Nazionale delle loci overlap with another intestinal inflammatory condition - Crohn’s Ricerche, CNR, Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica, Ospedale Mi- disease. In the GWA study and the follow up we have identified new crocitemico, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Università biological mechanisms for coeliac disease . This study shows the pow- degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Children’s Hospital of Boston, Boston, er of GWA studies with proper replication to uncover the genetics of MA, United States, 4Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 7 Cambridge Center, complex traits . Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana- Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 6Gerontology Research c08.6 Center, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 7Center for Genome-wide association and functional studies identify Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann SLC2A9 (GLUT 9) as a novel uric acid transporter influencing Arbor, MI, United States. serum urate concentration, urate excretion and gout disease β-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia are among the most common V. Vitart1, I. Rudan2, C. Hayward1, N. Gray1, C. Palmer3, I. Kolcic4, J. Wilson2, inherited disorders worldwide, with a marked phenotypic heterogeneity J. Floyd5, O. Polasek4, Z. Biloglav4, L. Zgaga4, A. Vorko-Jovic4, J. Graessler6, N. related to environmental and/or genetic factors . The reasons for this Hastie1, H. Campbell2, A. Wright1; are not well understood, although the level of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Medicine, is one well characterized ameliorating factor in both of these condi- Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Medical School, Dundee, United Kingdom, 4Fac- tions . To dissect the genetic basis of this heterogeneity we conducted ulty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 5University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United genome wide scans with 362,129 common SNPs on 4,305 Sardinians Kingdom, 6University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. to look for genetic linkage and association with fetal hemoglobin levels . Aim. Uric acid is the end product of purine metabolism . Humans have Our approach allowed us to identify genetic variants at the BCL11A lo- lost hepatic uricase activity, leading to uniquely high serum uric acid cus strongly associated with this trait (p<10-35) . Importantly, we have concentrations compared with other mammals . We aimed to study ge- further shown that this BCL11A variant, by influencing the HbF levels, netic regulation of serum concentration of uric acid (SUA) . may moderate the phenotype of homozygous β-thalassemia. The fre- materials and methods. A genome-wide association scan usingConcurrent Sessions  317,503 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was carried out in a an incidence of unbalanced karyotypes (+21,+18,+13, X/Y aneuploi- sample of 986 individuals from Vis island, Croatia, in which about 100 dies other than XXX and XYY, true fetal mosaicism, supernumerary quantitative traits were (QT) measured . Pedigree-based genome-wide markers, and de novo rearrangements such as deletions, duplications, QT locus association method was used . reciprocal translocations, inversions) halved compared with the group Results. SUA was strongly associated with three SNPs (P<10-7 after with the indication “advanced maternal age” (≥35). First and second Bonaferroni correction), implicating the role of the major facilitator su- trimester antenatal screenings evaluate the risk mainly for trisomy perfamily member SLC2A9 and explaining 1 .7-5 .3% of the variance 21 and also for trisomy 13, 18, monosomy X and triploids with differ- in SUA concentrations. We then confirmed the association between ent detection rates (d .r .) ranging from 65% to 93%, depending on the SLC2A9 variants, low fractional excretion of uric acid and gout disease applied test and on the chromosomal alteration . In our survey these in several other population samples from United Kingdom, Croatia and abnormalities represent only a portion of the total fetal chromosomal Germany . In all samples the effects were substantially greater in fe- pathology varying from 38 .9% in women <35 in II trimester to 75 .8% males . A meta-analysis showed odds ratio for gout between 1 .34 and in those ≥35 in I trimester. Combining these data with the different 1 .38 for the three implicated SNPs: rs1014290 T allele, rs6449213 T reported d .r . it emerges that antenatal screenings are able to detect allele and rs737267 C allele . As SLC2A9 was a known fructose trans- less than half (30 .9-43 .8%) of the possible fetal chromosomopathy in porter, we conducted several functional experiments in Xenopus oo- women <35 and, interestingly, 50.8-62.9% in those ≥35. These find- cytes and showed strong uric acid transport activity of SLC2A9 . The ings provide the need to inform the couples about the actual limits of uptake of uric acid was 7-fold greater than of the known urate trans- antenatal screenings . porter URAT1 and 31-fold than in the control oocytes . conclusion. SLC2A9 (GLUT 9) is a novel uric acid transporter influ- c09.3 encing serum urate concentration, urate excretion and gout disease . ten years clinical application of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for β-haemoglobinopathies, cystic fibrosis, X- c09.1 linked and rare monogenic diseases: a Greek experience QF-PcR as a stand-alone prenatal test for targeted referral J. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Vrettou1, M. Tzetis1, A. Destouni1, G. Kokkali1,2, S. groups; results from the first year of a new UK diagnostic Davies3, M. Mastrominas3, G. Palmer4, D. Stavrou2, K. Pantos2, E. Kanavakis1; service 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Centre for Human K. Mann1, R. Ellis2, J. Burbridge2, M. Holloway3, S. Edwards3, D. Morrogh3, J. Reproduction, Genesis Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Embryogenesis Centre for Waters3, C. Mackie Ogilvie1; Reproduction & Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 4Mitera IVF Unit, Mitera Ma- 1Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2NWT ternity Hospital, Athens, Greece. Regional Genetics Service (KGC), London, United Kingdom, 3NEL Regional In Greece, PGD is now an established alternative to prenatal diagno- Cytogenetics Laboratory (Gt Ormond St Hospital), London, United Kingdom. sis (PND) for couples with unsuccessful reproductive history at risk of QF-PCR is widely used in European genetic laboratories as a rapid, transmitting common (CF, β-thalassaemia/sickle syndromes) or rare robust and accurate test for the prenatal diagnosis of trisomy of chro- monogenic diseases . During the past 10 years we have developed mosomes 13, 18 and 21 . To date, our laboratory has tested more than several single-cell genotyping methods for detecting a wide range of 25,000 samples using both QF-PCR and karyotype analysis . Recent genotypes associated with β-haemoglobinopathies, CF, Congenital Li- audits have found a low incidence of clinically significant non-trisomy poid Adrenal Hyperplasia (CLAH), Glycogen Storage Disease (GSD), chromosome abnormalities in prenatal samples referred for increased Leber’s Congenital Amaurosis (LCA), X-linked disorders and SMA . trisomy risk, which has led to debate in the UK over the clinical need Protocols involved denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and more for karyotyping such samples . In May 2007, the SE England Genetics recently real-time PCR, multiplex fluorescent RLFP and/or microsatel- Consortium therefore instigated a QF-PCR stand-alone service for a lite haplotyping . Over 10 years, requests for PGD have steadily in- sub-set of prenatal samples, with the aim of minimising the identifica- creased, presently reaching >60 cycles annually . To date 349 PGD tion of chromosome abnormalities of unknown clinical significance and cycles (335 for β-haemoglobinopathies, 12 for CF, 1 for CLAH and 1 reducing double testing . All prenatal samples are tested for trisomies for GSD) have been initiated in 250 couples, with 284 cycles to oo- 13, 18 and 21 using QF-PCR . Karyotype analysis is carried out only cyte-retrieval . Genotyping was performed either on blastomeres from for referrals with NT >3mm before 14 weeks or >6mm thereafter, ul- cleavage-stage embryos (267 cycles) or trophectoderm cells from trasound abnormalities (excluding single soft markers), from families 5-day blastocysts (17 cycles) . Genotypes were achieved in >80% of with a previous chromosome abnormality (excluding common triso- embryos biopsied, identifying at least one unaffected embryo for trans- mies) and to follow up abnormal QF-PCR results. During the first eight fer in 280 cycles . One hundred and nineteen pregnancies were HCG months of service, 1502 AF and 628 CVS were received . 26% of AF positive, although 40 were subsequently lost spontaneously . Currently, and 44 .9% of CVS were karyotyped . 8% of AF and 22% of CVS were 79 pregnancies have resulted in 102 unaffected live-births, with 10 abnormal . In the groups targeted for karyotyping, 3 .6% of AF and 7 .1% on-going (confirmed unaffected). This cohort represents a pregnancy of CVS had non-trisomy abnormalities . There was one discrepant QF- rate of 26 .6% per oocyte retrieval or 36 .25% per embryo transferred, PCR (trisomy 13)/karyotype (normal) case due to mosaicism (possibly and an embryo implantation rate of 20% . Our 10 years of experience confined to the placenta). The first year of this innovative approach to demonstrates that PGD can be reliably incorporated within the repro- prenatal diagnosis will be discussed . ductive choices for couples with unsuccessful reproductive histories at risk for transmitting serious genetic disorders . c09.2 chromosomal abnormalities detectable by prenatal screenings c09.4 cover only half of the significant fetal chromosomopathy: an Evaluation and validation of Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis evaluation based on 115’576 invasive prenatal diagnoses (PGD) by PcR analysis: comparison of the blastomere and F. Maggi1, F. R. Grati1, A. Barlocco1, M. Di Lernia2, B. Grimi1, S. De Toffol1, G. corresponding embryo genotype Frascoli1, A. M. Di Meco1, R. Liuti1, S. Milani1, A. Trotta1, S. Babucci3, F. Dul- J. Herbergs1,2, M. Drusedau1, H. Smeets1,2, C. De Die-Smulders1, J. Dumoulin1, cetti1, A. M. Ruggeri1, G. Simoni1; J. Evers1, J. Dreesen1,2, J. Geraedts1,2; 1Research and Development, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology, TOMA Lab- 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Maastricht Uni- oratory, Busto Arsizio, Italy, 2Clinical Chemistry and Tossicology, TOMA Labora- versity, Maastricht, The Netherlands. tory, Busto Arsizio, Italy, 3Clinical Chemistry and Tossicology, Cytogenetics and PGD can be an alternative for prenatal diagnosis for couples at high Molecular Biology, TOMA Laboratory, Busto Arsizio, Italy. risk of a monogenic disorder . The aim of the present study is to vali- A homogeneous survey of 115’576 prenatal diagnoses have been col- date the PGD-PCR procedure, and determine the diagnostic value . lected from our laboratory during the last 14 years: 84’847 on amniotic According to embryo morphology quality scores, embryos on day 4 fluid (AF) and 30’729 on chorionic villi (CV). This experience could be post fertilization were divided into class 1-4, with class 4 being the low- a source to draw practical and useful information since it includes a est embryo morphology score . The genotype from the biopsied blasto- great number of women <35 years that performed invasive prenatal mere and the corresponding embryo were compared . To establish the diagnosis without a pathologic indication (22’414 on AF and 5401 on validity of PGD-PCR procedure, sensitivity(Se), specificity(Sp), and CV). As expected, in both first and second trimester they demonstrate Likelihood Ratio(LR) were calculated for the total, class 4 excludedConcurrent Sessions  and class 4 embryo group . For the diagnostic value, Positive- (PPV) specifically hybridise to repetitive sequences on a range of different and Negative Predictive Value (NPV) were calculated . chromosomes . Based on the manufacturer’s protocol, with a hybridisa- In our centre 80 women underwent PGD-PCR, resulting in 793 em- tion step of 5 minutes, PGS for 8 chromosomes (2 x 4 chromosome bryo genotypes, 241 unaffected embryos were used for ET . PGD-PCR probe sets) was performed in 1 hour . Four different ODNs probe sets blastomere outcome, scored as affected or aberrant in 234/241 posi- for chromosomes (1) X, Y, 15,17 (2) X, Y, 16 (3) X, Y, 16q and (4) X, Y, tive embryos (Se; 97,1%), and scored unaffected in 181/206 negative 18 were validated using known normal donor lymphocytes . Validation embryos (Sp: 87,9%) . Out of the 7 false negative embryos, 6 were of ODNs probe sets for chromosomes X, Y, 15,17; X, Y, 16; X, Y, 16q graded as class 4 . The Se in the class 4 embryo group was 90,2% and and X, Y, 18 scored >80% for probe efficiency using a short hybridisa- Sp 93,2% . Exclusion of class 4 embryos resulted in Se of 99,4%, Sp of tion time of 5 minutes. With modifications, we expect to reach > 95% 86,4% and LR positive test of 7 .3 and LR negative test of 0 .006 . The efficiency for each probe set. The short length of ODN probes permits PPV of an abnormal PGD-PCR is 89 .1%, the NPV of a normal PGD- rapid hybridisation, a significant advantage for time critical procedures PCR is 99 .3% in this group . such as PGS . PGD-PCR procedure is validated as a diagnostically reliable method for selecting unaffected embryos for ET . Accuracy of PGD-PCR analy- c10.1 sis improves by rejecting class 4 embryos for ET . BRcA1 mutations and prostate cancer in Poland J. Lubinski1, C. Cybulski1, B. Gorski1, J. Gronwald1, T. Huzarski1, T. Byrski1, c09.5 T. Debniak1, A. Jakubowska1, D. Wokolorczyk1, B. Gliniewicz1, A. Sikorski1, M. Multiple displacement amplification (MDA) in preimplantation Stawicka2, D. Godlewski2, Z. Kwias3, A. Antczak4, K. Krajka5, W. Lauer6, M. Sos- genetic diagnosis (PGD) nowski7, P. Sikorska-Radek8, K. Bar9, R. Klijer10, Z. Romuald1, B. Malkiewicz11, M. De Rycke1,2, C. Spits2, W. Verpoest3, K. Sermon2, J. Vanderelst3, I. Li- A. Borkowski7, T. Borkowski9; ebaers1,2; 1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Prophylactic and Epidemi- 1Centre for Medical Genetics UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of ology Center, Poznan, Poland, 3Medical University in Poznan, Poznan, Poland, embryology and genetics Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre 4Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland, 5Medical University of Gdansk, for Reproductive Medicine, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Gdansk, Poland, 6Institut für Biomedizinische Technologien, Aachen, Germany, Introduction 7Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 8Medical University, Poznan, Poland, PGD is an alternative to prenatal diagnosis, performed on single blasto- 9Medical University, Lublin, Poland, 10University Hospital of Lublin, Lublin, Po- meres from in vitro cultured embryos . Since many of the PGD requests land, 11Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. for single-gene disorders involve new developments and the workup of Evidence to date that BRCA1 mutation carriers are at an increased risk single-cell multiplex-PCR is technically demanding and requires time of prostate cancer is mixed - both positive and negative studies have and manpower, we evaluated a different approach relying on single- been published . To establish whether inherited variation in BRCA1 in- cell whole genome amplification (WGA) using MDA as a universal first fluences prostate cancer risk we genotyped 1793 men with prostate step, followed by regular PCRs for specific loci. cancer in Poland and 4570 controls for three founder mutations (C61G, Materials and Methods 4153delA, 5382insC) . BRCA1 mutation was present in 0 .45% of cases During pre-clinical workup, MDA products from single lymphoblasts and 0 .48% of controls (OR=0 .9; P=1 .0) . The odds ratios varied sub- were used to assess the amplification efficiency, preferential ampli- stantially by mutation . The 5382insC mutation is the most common of fication (PA), allele drop out (ADO) and contamination rates of loci the three founder mutations . It was detected only in one case (0 .06%), (specific mutations and linked STR markers) involved in cystic fibrosis, whereas it was seen in 0 .37% of controls (P=0 .06) . In contrast, the Marfan syndrome, Huntington’s disease, spinal cerebral ataxia 7 and 4153delA was more common in prostate cancer cases (0 .22%) than in neurofibromatosis type 1. controls (0.04%) (OR=5.1; 95% confidence interval: 0.9-27.9; P=0.1). Nine couples underwent 18 clinical PGD cycles, in which 100 embryos The C61G mutation was also found in excess in cases (0 .17%) com- were biopsied . pared with controls (0.07%) (odds ratio=2.6; 95% confidence interval: Results 0 .5-12 .7; P=0 .5) . Eight men with prostate cancer carried a mutation . The pre-clinical results showed an amplification efficiency of 96%; no Only one of these carried the 5382insC mutation, compared with 17 contamination was detected . This is similar to PCR-based protocols . of 22 individuals with mutations in the control population (P=0 .003) . The PA and ADO rates varied for the different loci and the average rate These data suggest that 5382insC mutation is unlikely to be pathogen- of 25% was five fold higher than with PCR. Still, the diagnostic efficien- ic for prostate cancer in Polish population . The presence of one of the cy in the clinical cycles was 93 % . Twenty embryos were transferred other alleles was associated with an increased risk for prostate cancer in 13 cycles, resulting in two biochemical pregnancies, one singleton (OR=3.6; 95% confidence interval: 1.1-11.3; P=0.045); in particular baby, one twin and one pregnancy ongoing . for familial prostate cancer (OR=12; 95% confidence interval: 2.9-51; Conclusions P=0 .0004) . We consider that the risk of prostate cancer in BRCA1 car- The relatively high ADO and PA rates associated with single-cell MDA riers varies with the position of the mutation . in PGD was overcome by analysis of at least four loci . The diagnostic efficiency is similar to PCR-based protocols. These results prove the c10.2 applicability of single-cell MDA in PGD . Genomic differences between retinoma and retinoblastoma M. Amenduni1, K. Sampieri1, F. Ariani1, M. Bruttini1, M. A. Mencarelli1, M. C. c09.6 Epistolato2, P. Toti2, S. Lazzi2, A. Marozza1, F. Mari1, T. Hadjistilianou3, S. De Fluorescence in-situ Hybridisation using Oligonucleotide Francesco3, A. Acquaviva4, A. Renieri1; probes (Oligo-FisH): a new strategy for Preimplantation Genetic 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Department of human pathology and oncology, screening (PGs). Siena, Italy, 3Retinoblastoma referral center,Department of ophtalmology, Si- L. Robertson1, S. Doubravska1, M. Grigorova1, D. K. Griffin2, A. H. Handyside1, ena, Italy, 4Department of pediatrics,obstetrics and reproductive medicine,italian A. R. Thornhill1; retinoblastoma registry, Siena, Italy. 1Bridge Genoma, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Kent, Canterbury, Genomic copy number changes are involved in the multi-step process United Kingdom. transforming normal retina in retinoblastoma (RB) after RB1 mutation- The principle of preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) is to biopsy 1 al events . Previous studies on tumor samples led to a multi-step model cell from a 6-10-cell embryo and determine chromosomal copy number in which after two successive RB1 mutations, the following genomic within a 24 hr time frame before transferring chromosomally ‘normal’ changes accompany malignancy: 1q32 .1, 6p22 and 2p24 .1 gains and embryos to the patient . Current PGS consists of sequential multicolour 16q22 losses . Recent data have demonstrated that retinoma, a rare FISH using two or more probe sets derived from BACs . Our current benign retinal lesion, represents an early stage in the pathway to RB . clinical method consists of two rounds of FISH as follows: (1) chromo- In order to catch somatic events that determine retinoma-RB transition, somes 13, 16, 18, 21 and 22 with a 2 .5hr hybridisation time and 2) X, we investigated genomic copy number changes in DNA isolated by la- Y, 15 with a 16-18 hr hybridisation time allowing results to be reported ser capture from retinoma and retinoblastoma tissues of two different in 24hr facilitating Day 4 embryo transfer . Recently FISH probes using patients . We employed both genome wide array-CGH technique and labelled 30-mer oligonucleotides (ODNs) have been developed which Real-Time qPCR at four genes involved in RB pathogenesis (MDM4,Concurrent Sessions 0 MYCN , E2F3 and CDH11) . Our results showed that some genomic 12 with (4;11) MLL/AF4, 4 with t(10;11) MLL/AF10), 1 with t(11;19) rearrangements thought to belong only to RB (Dup6p including E2F3, MLL/ELL and 1 with t(11;19) MLL/ENL); in total of 201 AML patients gains of MDM4 and MYCN) are already present in retinoma . Tumor there were 33% with translocations (21 with t(9;11) MLL/AF9, 19 with tissues show a higher level of genomic instability, with additional rear- t(8;21) AML/ETO, 16 with t(15;17) PML/RARA, 8 with inv16 and 4 with rangements and progressive amplification of E2F3 and MYCN . Inter- t(6;11) MLL/AF6); 24 children with CML had t(9;22) BCR/ABL p210 estingly, in one of the two RB cases, we found a deletion in 16q12 .1- and of 27 with non-Hodgkin lymphomas 4 (15%) had t(2;5) NPM/ALK . 16q12, absent in retinoma . This region includes RBL2 (p130), an ef- In conclusion, we developed a biochip platform to diagnose primary ficient inducer of cellular senescence when the major arrest pathway leukemia and to monitor MRD that is fast, accurate, convenient and determined by pRb/p16INK4a is abolished . In conclusion, these data cost-effective . confirm the pre-malignant nature of retinoma and indicate interesting candidate genes that could have a key role in the progression to ma- c10.5 lignancy . Disruption of Ikaros function by the CALM/AF10 fusion protein might be responsible for abortive lymphoid development in c10.3 CALM/AF10 positive leukemia High resolution analysis of chromosomal changes in colorectal P. A. Greif, B. Tizazu, A. Krause, E. Kremmer, S. K. Bohlander; tumors matched with normal tissues from the same patients HelmholtzZentrum München, München, Germany. using 500,000 sNPs The t(10;11)(p13;q14) translocation leads to the fusion of the CALM G. Brown1,2, D. L. Worthley3,4, G. P. Young3, D. Brookes1,2, J. Ross1,2, G. N. and AF10 genes . This translocation can be found as the sole cyto- Hannan1,2; genetic abnormality in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid 1CSIRO Preventative Health Flagship, North Ryde, NSW, Australia, 2CSIRO leukemia and in malignant lymphomas . The expression of CALM/AF10 Molecular and Health Technologies, North Ryde, NSW, Australia, 3Flinders in primary murine bone marrow cells results in the development of an Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA, Australia, 4Queensland Institute of Medical aggressive myeloid leukemia that is propagated by cells with lymphoid Research, Herston, Qld, Australia. traits (Deshpande et al, Cancer Cell, 2006) . Using a yeast two-hybrid Previous studies have identified many chromosomal abnormalities screen, we identified the lymphoid regulator Ikaros as an AF10 inter- which occur amongst common colorectal cancers (CRCs) . Until now acting protein . Interestingly, Ikaros is required for normal development these have been observed using fairly low resolution screening tech- of lymphocytes, and aberrant expression of Ikaros has been found in nologies so that it has been difficult to match changes to specific genes leukemia . In a murine model, the expression of a dominant negative or to specific pathways. Another confounding issue has been the use isoform of Ikaros causes leukemias and lymphomas . The Ikaros in- of composite reference sets of “normal” DNAs to identify changes in teraction domain of AF10 was mapped to the leucine zipper domain tumor DNAs, leading to greater background noise in the estimations of AF10, which is required for malignant transformation both by the of copy number (CN) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) . We have used CALM/AF10 and the MLL/AF10 fusion proteins . The interaction be- microarrays containing probes for 500,000 single nucleotide polymor- tween AF10 and Ikaros was confirmed by GST pull down and co-im- phisms (SNPs) in genome wide scans to provide very high resolution munoprecipitation . Coexpression of CALM/AF10 but not of AF10 alters estimations of CN change and LOH for each of five pairs of common the subcellular localization of Ikaros in murine fibroblasts (Greif et al, colorectal tumors, pair-wise matched with normal tissues from the Oncogene, in Press) . The transcriptional repressor activity of Ikaros is same patients. We show that pair-wise matching gave better defini- reduced by AF10 . These results suggest that CALM/AF10 might inter- tion of CN changes and regions of LOH than by comparing the tumor fere with normal Ikaros function, and thereby block lymphoid differen- genome profiles against a composite genome profile derived from a tiation in CALM/AF10 positive leukemias . reference set of 40 normal individuals . Our high resolution data al- lowed precise identification of many chromosomal changes in CRC c10.6 tumors. We also report improved definition of some changes that have Assessment of X chromosome inactivation Pattern in BRCA been observed previously using lower resolution methods . We show mutation carriers: Evidence for an Effect of chemotherapy the importance of having LOH data as well as CN data to better un- M. Miozzo1, C. Allemani2, F. R. Grati3,1, S. M. Tabano1, B. Peissel4, P. Anton- derstand the mechanisms involved in chromosomal rearrangements azzo5, V. Pensotti6, S. M. Sirchia1, P. Radice6,7, S. Manoukian4; in CRC . These include likely instances of hemizygous deletions, gene 1Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University conversions and uniparental disomy . We also present our analysis of of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Analytical Epidemiology Unit, Department of Preventive regions gained, lost or showing LOH, that contain genes potentially and Predictive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, involved in CRC . Milan, Italy, 3Units of Research and Development, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology, TOMA Laboratory, Busto Arsizio, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Depart- c10.4 ment of Experimental Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Leukemia biochip analysis of chromosomal translocations in Tumori, Milan, Italy, 5Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology I “L. Mangiagalli”, childhood leukemia in Russia using hybridization and on-chip University of Milan, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico, Mangiagalli and Regina PcR approaches. Elena, Milan, Italy, 6Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare, Milan, N. A. Guseva, O. S. Nurutdinova, A. V. Chudinov, E. N. Timofeev, S. V. Pankov, Italy, 7Genetic Susceptibility to Cancer Unit, Department of Experimental Oncol- A. S. Zasedatelev, T. V. Nasedkina; ogy, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. BRCA1, a major breast/ovarian cancer predisposing gene, has been Leukemia is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease that suggested to play a role in the mechanisms leading to X chromosome requires accurate molecular diagnostic approaches to generate treat- inactivation (XCI) in female cells . In addition, a high frequency of non- ment strategies and to minimize toxicity of therapies . random (skewed) XCI was reported in carriers of BRCA1 mutations af- Here we present biochip diagnostic tool to detect 14 most signifi- fected with ovarian cancer . To verify whether constitutional alterations cant translocations of childhood leukemia together with quantitative of the gene may influence XCI status, we analyzed the occurrence of approach to evaluate minimal residual disease (MRD) . Biochips are skewed XCI in blood cells from 224 female BRCA1 mutations carriers, three-dimensional oligonucleotide microchips consisting of gel pads both with and without cancer, and 177 healthy controls. Significant re- attached to a hydrophobic plastic surface . For diagnostics of primary duced odds of skewed XCI respect to controls were found in younger leukemia, the multiplex RT-PCR was used in combination with hybrid- carriers (<55 years) (OR=0 .35;0 .13-0 .92), but not in elderly individuals ization on biochips . The quantitative method was based on real-time (≥55 years). Using a multivariable logistic regression model, we ob- on-chip PCR, which allowed identification of chimeric transcript copies, served that, when adjusted for age, the odds of skewed XCI in BRCA as measured by PCR-synchronized fluorescent microscope. The data mutation carriers without cancer and in carriers with cancer untreated obtained by on-chip PCR method for t(8;21) patients was validated by with chemotherapy, cumulatively considered, were significantly lower conventional real-time PCR . Leukemia biochip was used to screen 753 than in controls (OR=0 .39; 0 .16-1 .18) . Conversely, no statistically sig- children from newborn up to 17 years . In total of 501 primary ALL chil- nificant difference was observed in carriers with cancer who received dren we found translocations in 23% of cases (69 children with t(12;21) chemotherapy (OR=1.17; 0.61-2.26). Taken together, our findings are TEL/AML, 23 with t(9;22) BCR/ABL p190, 12 with t(1;19) E2A/PBX, consistent with: i) a possible selection against X skewed embryos car-Concurrent Sessions  rying BRCA1 mutation, leading to a low frequency of females with a c11.3 skewed XCI respect to the general population; ii) an effect of chemo- comprehensive clinical and molecular assessment of 32 therapy on XCI status that should be taken into account when analyz- probands with congenital contractural arachnodactyly: report of ing XCI in cancer patients . 14 novel mutations and review of the literature B. L. Callewaert1, B. L. Loeys1, A. Ficcadenti2, S. Vermeer3, M. Landgren4, H. c11.1 Y. Kroes5, Y. Yaron6, M. Pope7,8, N. Foulds9, O. Boute10, F. Galan11, H. Kings- Identification of causative mutations, including a ZRS sonic ton12, N. Van der Aa13, M. E. Swinkels5, I. Salcedo14, C. Wallgren-Pettersson15,16, hedgehog regulatory variant, in an unselected cohort of 203 O. Gabrielli2, J. De Backer1, P. J. Coucke1, A. M. De Paepe1; patients with congenital limb malformations 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, D. Furniss1,2, S. Kan1, P. S. Critchley2, H. Giele2, A. O. M. Wilkie1; 2Paediatric department, Salesi Children Hospital, Ancona, Italy, 3Department 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Depart- of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, ment of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oxford, United Kingdom. The Netherlands, 4Department of Paediatrics, Skaraborg Hospital, Skövde, Congenital limb malformations (CLMs) are common: major aetio- Sweden, 5Department of Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utre- logical factors are genetic mutations and intrauterine disruptions . We cht, The Netherlands, 6Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel have characterised the causative mutations in an unselected cohort Aviv, Israel, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, of patients with CLMs requiring reconstructive surgery . At operation, United Kingdom, 8Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, Cambridge, blood was taken for DNA extraction and karyotype analysis . Candidate United Kingdom, 9Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospi- genes were screened for point mutations using DHPLC and sequenc- tal, Southampton, United Kingdom, 10Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre ing, and for deletions by MLPA . Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Lille, France, Lille, France, 11Centro de From a cohort of 203 patients, causative genetic changes were identi- Genética Humana, Universidad de Alicante, Spain, Alicante, Spain, 12Regional fied in 22 (11%). In addition to 4 chromosome abnormalities, these Genetic Service, St-Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, UK, Manchester, United King- comprised mutations in GLI3 (5), HOXD13 (5), the ZRS of SHH (3), dom, 13Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, SALL1 (2) and SALL4, TBX5 and ESCO2 (1 each) . Factors that pre- Belgium, 14Center for Medical Genetics, Hospital Comarcal Santiago Apostol, dicted the discovery of a genetic cause included bilateral malforma- Miranda De Ebro, Burgos, Spain, 15Department of Medical Genetics, University tion, positive family history, and increasing numbers of limbs affected of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 16The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, (all p<0 .01) . Furthermore, 39 patients had a family history of consistent Finland. limb malformations, and 5 patients had identified syndromes, strongly Background: Beals-Hecht syndrome or congenital contractural suggesting a genetic basis . Therefore, at least 32% of CLMs have a arachnodactyly (CCA) is a rare, autosomal dominant connective tis- genetic aetiology . sue disease characterized by crumpled ears, arachnodactyly, contrac- This study is the first to systematically screen for genetic mutations in tures and scoliosis . Recent reports also mention aortic root dilatation, an unselected cohort of patients with CLMs. Specific clinical features a finding previously thought to differentiate the condition from Marfan predict a genetic aetiology, and help to refine the selection of patients syndrome (MFS) . In many cases, the disorder is caused by mutations for referral to a Clinical Geneticist . Mutations of GLI3 and HOXD13 in the fibrillin 2 gene (FBN2) with 26 mutations reported so far, all lo- are particularly common causes of CLM and genetic testing is now of- cated in the middle region of the gene (exons 23-34) . fered by the clinical molecular diagnostic service in Oxford . In addition, methods: We directly sequenced the entire FBN2 gene in 32 pro- we have defined a new and frequent cause of triphalangeal thumb, bands clinically diagnosed with CCA . We reviewed the literature and caused by a regulatory mutation affecting the SHH gene . compared the phenotypic findings of all patients harboring a FBN2 mutation with the clinical characteristics of patients in whom no FBN2 c11.2 mutation was found . Genotype and phenotype of stickler syndrome caused by Results and conclusions: In 14 probands, we found 13 new and one mutations in the cOL2A1 gene previously described FBN2 mutation including a mutation in exon 17, K. P. Hoornaert, C. Dewinter, I. Vereecke, P. J. Coucke, G. R. Mortier; expanding the region in which FBN2 mutations occur in CCA . Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium. The phenotype in FBN2 positive patients was comparable to all pre- Background: Stickler syndrome is an autosomal dominant connec- viously published FBN2 positive patients . Cardiovascular involve- tive tissue disorder caused by mutations in different collagen genes . ment included mitral valve prolapse in 2 adult patients and aortic root Characteristic clinical features include severe myopia, spontaneous enlargement in 3 patients . Whereas the dilatation regressed in one retinal detachment, Pierre-Robin sequence, midface hypoplasia, sen- proband, it remained marked in a child proband (z-score 4,09) and sorineural hearing loss and early-onset osteoarthrosis . The aim of this his father (z-score 2,94), warranting echocardiographic follow-up . We study was to investigate and correlate the allelic heterogeneity and confirm paradoxical patellar laxity and report keratoconus, shoulder phenotypic variability in Stickler syndrome patients with a COL2A1 muscle hypoplasia and pyelo-ureteral junction stenosis as new fea- mutation . tures . In addition, we illustrate large intrafamilial variablility .FBN2 neg- Materials & Methods: In 188 probands with the referring diagnosis of ative patients were clinically indistinguishable from patients harboring Stickler syndrome, the 54 exons and intronic boundaries of COL2A1 a FBN2 mutation, suggesting locus heterogeneity . were amplified by PCR and analysed by either a mutation scanning technique or bidirectional fluorescent DNA sequencing. The effect of c11.4 splice site alterations was investigated by analysing RNA . Phenotypic characterization of Poland syndrome Based on a Results: We identified 100 heterozygous COL2A1 mutations, including series of 122 Patients 1 entire gene deletion, 27 nonsense mutations, 35 frameshift muta- A. Baban1, A. Buluggiu2, M. T. Divizia1, S. Bianca3, M. Torre2, S. Gimelli4, M. tions, 25 splice site alterations, 1 synonymous mutation altering splic- Valle5, M. G. Calevo6, G. Gimelli1, F. M. Sénès7, R. Ravazzolo1,8, V. Jasonni2, M. ing, 5 arginine-to-cysteine substitutions and 5 glycine alterations . Each Lerone1; of the 13 investigated splice site mutations was shown to result in a 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics, Gaslini Children Hospital, premature stop codon . A binary logistic regression analysis of the clini- Genova, Italy, 2Department of Pediatric Surgery , Gaslini Children Hospital, cal features, revealed 7 major indicators for a type 2 collagenopathy in Genova, Italy, 3Center of Genetic and Teratologic Counselling, Fetomaternal Stickler syndrome: vitreous abnormalities, retinal detachment, retinal Department, ARNAS Garibaldi-Nesima, Catania, Italy, 4Department of Genetic abnormalities, low nasal bridge, cleft palate, micrognathia and positive Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, and Univer- family history . sity Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Department of Radiology, Gaslini Children Conclusions: We confirmed that Stickler syndrome type 1 is predomi- Hospital, Genova, Italy, 6Epidemiology and Biostatistics Section of Scientific nantly caused by loss-of-function mutations in the COL2A1 gene and Direction, Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, 7Department of Orthopedic we developed a phenotypic scoring system that facilitates distinction and Traumatology, Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, 8Department of between patients with and without a COL2A1 mutation . Pediatrics and CEBR, University of, Genova, Italy. Poland syndrome (PS) was first described by Alfred Poland in 1841 and classically consists of unilateral hypoplasia/ aplasia of the pecto- ralis muscles in isolated entity or in association with ipsilateral upperConcurrent Sessions  limb or thoracic anomalies(ULA or TA) . burg, Germany. Clinical characterization of PS has not been described in literature on a Deletions of 11q23 are associated with mental retardation, craniofa- wide patient series . We have considered the following parameters: cial dysmorphism, microcephaly and short statue . We present a pa- • Describe the disease phenotype in a wide range of patients . tient with similar clinical findings plus absence of thumbs, hypoplasia • Verify the current data present in literature of radii and ulnae, additional vertebrae and ribs, retarded bone age • Classify disesase severity according to clinical features and identify and genital hypoplasia . Using microarray based comparative genomic risk factors according to gender, affected side and other phenotypic hybridization and microsatellite analysis, we identified an ~8 Mbp de characteristics . novo deletion on the paternal chromosome 11, which includes the pro- • Definition of associated malformations or syndromes. myelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF) gene . In humans PLZF is one • Obtain best methods in management of patients from diagnostic, of five partners fused to the retinoic acid receptor alpha in acute pro- therapeutic and prognostic points of view myelocytic leukaemia . Plzf-deficient mice show severe malformations • Possibility to identify new etiopathogenetic hypotheses (genetic ver- of the vertebral and appendicular skeleton and male genital hypopla- sus environmental factors) and validate those present in literature sia . Since patients with a deletion of 11q23 do not normally present We have studied 122 poland patients (64 M, 48 F) in the period 2003- with skeletal malformations and genital hypoplasia, we sequenced the 2007 . maternal PLZF allele in our patient and identified a missense mutation The management of these patients was based on multidisciplinary ap- (c .1849 A>G), which leads to the substitution of a highly conserved proach. At the first phase of the study all included patients had un- methionine to valine within the eighth zinc finger motive. The mutation dergone Specialistic Counselling (Genetic, Psychologic, Surgical, and was inherited from the mother, who does not have skeletal defects . In Orthopedic) . vitro reporter gene assays show that the mutation impairs the repres- The second phase was based on medical indication and included high sive function of PLZF. In summary, this is the first report on a germline resolution karyotyping or array-CGH . Moreover, the standardization mutation of PLZF. Our findings as well as observations in Plzf-deficient of pectoral muscle and tendon components by ultrasound is ongoing . mice demonstrate that PLZF is a key regulator of skeletal and male Other investigations included chest X-ray, Echocardiography, Abdomi- germline development . Furthermore, our case highlights the impor- nal ultrasound, and thoracic CT scan . tance to search for a recessive mutation on the non-deleted allele in In collaboration with AISP (Italian Association of Poland Syndrome) patients with a microdeletion and atypical clinical findings. A Spoken presentation on this topic was awarded young researcher prize at the Italian Socitey of Human Genetics Conference 2007 c12.1 Mutations in Pericentrin cause microcephalic dwarfism c11.5 (seckel syndrome) with defective AtR-dependent DNA damage Distal limb deficiency, micrognathia syndrome (OMIM 246560) signalling and syndromic forms of split hand foot malformation (sHFm) are A. P. Jackson1, E. Griffith1, S. Walker2, C. Martin1, P. Vagnarelli3, T. Stiff2, B. caused by chromosome 10q genomic rearrangements Vernay1, N. Al Sanna4, A. Saggar5, B. Hamel6, W. C. Earnshaw3, P. A. Jeggo2, B. I. Dimitrov1, T. d. Ravel1, C. d. Die-Smulders2, A. Toutain3, J. R. Vermeesch1, M. O’Driscoll2; J. Fryns1, K. Devriendt1, P. Debeer1; 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Genome Damage 1Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom, 3Well- 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Maastricht, University come Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Genetic Service, University Hospi- Kingdom, 4Pediatric Services Division, Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi tal Bretonneau, University of Tours, Tours, France. Arabia, 5Southwest Thames Regional Genetics Service, St. George’s Hospital As a part of screening for genomic rearrangements in patients with Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 6Radboud University Nijmegen Medi- unexplained syndromic limb defects, arrayCGH was performed in a cal Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. cohort of patients with various syndromic limb defects . A 10q24-mi- Expansion of the brain is one of the defining characteristics of modern croduplication was detected in 6 individuals with distal limb deficiency, humans. In microcephalic dwarfism, brain and body size are markedly associated with micrognathia, hearing problems and renal hypoplasia . reduced to a similar degree to that seen in the recently discovered In addition, in a family with two affected siblings, somatic mosaicism Indonesian hominid, Homo Floresiensis . Previously, only a single hy- for the 10q24-microduplication was detected in the apparently healthy pomorphic mutation in the ATR gene has been found as a cause of this mother . genetically heterogenous group of disorders . This chromosomal region has previously been implicated in SHFM . Here, we report that homozygous truncating mutations in pericentrin SHFM3 was mapped to a large interval on chromosome 10q24 . The (PCNT) cause microcephalic dwarfism, resulting in its loss from the corresponding Dactylaplasia mouse model was linked to the syntenic centrosome, where it has key functions anchoring both structural and locus on chromosome 19 . When it was shown that the two existing regulatory proteins. Furthermore, we find that PCNT-mutated patient Dac alleles result from MusD-insertions upstream of or within Dacty- cells have defects in ATR-dependent checkpoint signalling, providing lyn (Fbxw4), this gene seemed a plausible candidate causing SHFM3 . the first evidence linking a structural centrosomal protein with DNA However, all efforts to identify mutations in this gene failed . Likewise, damage signalling. These findings also suggest that other known mi- no mutations were found in other genes within the linkage area includ- crocephaly genes implicated in either DNA repair responses or centro- ing FGF8, despite the fact that the observed limb defects resemble somal function, may act in common developmental pathways deter- those detected in conditional Fgf8-knockout mice . mining brain and body size, pathways potentially important in human However, recently, a 10q24-microduplication was detected in a total evolution . of 15 familial and 4 sporadic SHFM3 cases . In contrast to the present patients, the previously reported individuals had an isolated form of c12.2 SHFM . This difference cannot be explained by a difference in size of Polycomb complex shapes the higher order of D4Z4 chromatin the duplication, since a similar size was present in all individuals . structure during differentiation of normal and FsHD muscle These findings extend the clinical spectrum of SHFM3. Genetic coun- stem cells seling should consider the observed somatic mosaicism . B. Bodega1, S. Brunelli2,3, F. Grasser4, N. Locatelli1, R. Meneveri2, A. Marozzi1, S. Mueller4, E. Battaglioli1, E. Ginelli1; c11.6 1Dept. of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Biallelic loss of function of the promyelocytic leukaemia zinc Italy, 2Dept. of Experimental Medicine, University of Milan-Bicocca, Monza, finger (PLZF) gene causes severe skeletal defects and genital Italy, 3Stem Cell Research Institute (SCRI), DIBIT H San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, hypoplasia 4Dept. of Biology II – Anthropology and Human Genetics, Ludwig Maximilians B. Horsthemke1, S. Fischer1, J. Kohlhase2, D. Böhm2, B. Schweiger1, M. Heit- University, Munich, Germany. mann1, D. Wieczorek1; Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal 1Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Frei- dominant neuromuscolar disorder . FSHD involves a complex cascade of epigenetic events following contraction of a D4Z4 repeat located on chromosome 4q35 .2 (FSHD locus) . Previous work has indicated thatConcurrent Sessions  transgenic mice overexpressing FRG1, a gene proximal to the dele- Disruption of one of the members of the USH network can lead to mal- tion, showed a phenotype resembling the FSHD disease . However, in- function and degeneration of both photoreceptor cells and hair cells . creased expression of FRG1 in FSHD patients has not been a uniform To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms of Usher syndrome, we finding, and up to now several studies have failed in identifying the searched for novel interacting partners for the intracellular region of molecular mechanism affecting the FSHD locus functionality . USH2A isoform B . This revealed the interaction with a centrosomal We took advantage of ChIP/MeDIP and 3D immuno-FISH assays as protein . Interestingly, simultaneous screens for interactors of the re- complementary approaches to depict the higher order of chromatin or- cently identified lebercilin (LCA5, and associated with Leber congenital ganization of 4q35 .2 region during myogenic differentiation of healthy amaurosis, LCA), identified the same centrosomal protein. In order to and FSHD myoblast and mesoangioblast stem cells . We found that clarify the role of this protein in vivo, knockdown studies in zebrafish FRG1 undergoes to muscle specific regulation through a two-step were performed . This gave rise to a classical planar cell polarity phe- activation mechanism, whereby removal of H3-K27 methylation and notype, similar to the defects observed after knockdown of the genes Polycomb complex components precedes MyoD recruitment on the involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) . Yeast two-hybrid interaction FRG1 promoter; intriguingly, the same chromatin structure and PcG analysis subsequently revealed a specific physical interaction between recruitment were contemporaneously found on D4Z4 array, rendering the centrosomal protein and BBS6 . the Polycomb complex the first molecular player that links FSHD locus Our data indicate that the same centrosomal protein interacts physical- to myogenic differentiation . Moreover, D4Z4 H3-mK27 signals were ly with USH2A, lebercilin and BBS6, thereby linking the retinal ciliopa- strongly reduced in FSHD myoblasts in respect to controls, suggesting thies Usher syndrome, Leber congenital amaurosis and Bardet-Biedl the severe impairment of the PcG complex recruitment . syndrome at the molecular level . The physical and genetic interactions Nevertheless, molecular alterations of the D4Z4 array do not have in between proteins/genes involved in Usher syndrome and Bardet-Biedl FSHD myoblasts an effect in cis on FRG1 gene expression . These syndrome suggest a putative role for the Usher interactome in the es- observations evidence a role of 4q35 D4Z4 in muscle differentiation, tablishment of planar cell polarity, with a central role of the cilia . probably through inter-chromosomal interactions . c12.5 c12.3 study of the role of the Ofd1 transcript in limb patterning and Active transport of the ubiquitin ligase miD1 along the endochondral bone development microtubules is regulated by protein phosphatase 2A S. Bimonte1, L. Quagliata1, R. Tammaro1, M. Ascenzi2, B. Franco1,3; B. Aranda Orgilles1, J. Aigner1, R. Schneider1,2, S. Schweiger1,3; 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine-TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Department 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of of Orthopaedic Surgery, Biomechanics Research Division, University of Cali- Biochemistry, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Division of Pathology and Neuroscience, fornia, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom. Federico II, Naples, Italy. Mutations in the MID1 protein have been found in patients with Opitz Oral-facial-digital type I (OFDI) syndrome is an X-linked dominant male BBB/G syndrome (OS), which is characterised by multiple malforma- lethal developmental disorder characterized by oral, facial and digital tions of the ventral midline . MID1 is a microtubule-associated protein abnormalities . Recent data ascribed OFDI to the growing number of that stabilizes microtubules and, in association with the regulatory sub- diseases due to dysfunction of primary cilia . Ofd1 null mutants recapit- unit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), α4, provides ubiquitin ligase ulate the phenotype observed in OFDI patients and displayed skeletal activity for the ubiquitin-specific modification of PP2A. Using Fluores- defects . To overcome the embryonic male and perinathal female le- cence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP) technology, we show thality observed in Ofd1 null mutants we have generated a conditional here that MID1 is actively and bi-directionally transported along the mi- model with Ofd1 limb mesenchyme specific inactivation. These mice crotubules, and that this movement is directly linked to its MAP kinase displayed a severe polydactyly with loss of antero-posterior digit pat- and PP2A-mediated phosphorylation status . Intact transport depends terning, aberrant cilia formation, and shortened long bones . Defective on both kinesins and dyneins and is inhibited upon taxol and colce- digit pattering was found to be associated to progressive loss of Shh mide treatments . MID1 proteins carrying missense mutations in the signaling and impairment of Gli3 processing . Shortening of long bones α4 binding domain still bind the microtubules but can not be actively was found to be associated to misregulation of Ihh expression and ac- transported. Likewise, knock-down of the α4 protein, inhibition of PP2A tivity during endochondral bone formation as revealed by RNA in situ activity by okadaic acid and fostriecin or the simulation of permanent studies . Immunoistochemical analyses to assess the proliferative state phosphorylation at Ser96 in MID1 stop the migration of MID1-GFP, of chondrocytes revealed an increase in the number of proliferating while preserving its microtubule-association . In summary, our data un- pre- and hypertrofic chondrocytes in male mutants. This data suggest cover an unexpected and novel function for PP2A, its regulatory sub- that the shortening of long bones observed in Ofd1fl|Prx1Cre mice is unit α4 and PP2A / α4 / mTOR signalling in the active transport of the likely due to an increase in the number of proliferating chondrocytes MID1 ubiquitin ligase complex along the cytoskeleton . Furthermore, associated to a delay in terminal chondrocytes differentiation . Finally a failure in the microtubule directed transport of this protein complex Von kossa staining and RNA in situ studies demonstrated defective would be an attractive mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of OS bone mineralization accompanied by loss/reduction of bone collar de- in patients with B-box1 mutations . velopment suggesting a defect in osteoblast differentiation . Altogether our data demonstrate that Ofd1 is a pattering factor that c12.4 plays multiple roles in limb and endochondral bone development . A centrosomal protein molecularly links Usher syndrome to Leber congenital amaurosis and Bardet-Biedl syndrome in the c12.6 retina integration into molecular diagnostic procedures of systematic H. Kremer1,2, E. van Wijk1,3, F. Kersten3,1, N. Zaghloul4, T. Peters1, A. Kartono3,2, screening for sequence variants of unknown significance using S. Letteboer3,2, U. Wolfrum5, N. Katsanis4, R. Roepman3,2; a splicing reporter minigene 1Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical M. Vezain1, I. Tournier1, A. Martins1, C. Bonnet1, S. Krieger2, S. Baert-Desur- Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, mont1, A. Killian1, A. Hardouin2, T. Frébourg1,3, M. Tosi1; Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Human 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Laboratory of Clinical and Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Nether- Oncological Biology, Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France, 3Department lands, 4Departments of Ophthalmology and Molecular Biology and Genetics, of Genetics, University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, McKusick Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University France. School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Department of Cell and Unclassified variants (UVs) found in genes involved in genetic dis- Matrix Biology, Institute of Zoology, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, eases may have an effect on pre-mRNA splicing . In clinical practice, Mainz, Germany. the interpretation of UVs is limited because patient blood samples Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common cause of hereditary deaf- are often not suitable for RNA analysis . We have recently developed blindness in man . Ten loci are known for Usher syndrome, and we and a screening strategy based on genomic DNA from patients, using a others provided evidence for the existence of a protein network of the splicing reporter minigene . We have now applied this screening proto- USH proteins at different subcellular sites in the retina and inner ear . col to more than 150 UVs from many genes including MSH2, MLH1,Concurrent Sessions  APC, BRCA1 and BRCA2. The protocol steps have been streamlined complex, switching haplotypes at several intervals during an exchange for routine application as follows: 1) PCR amplification of the relevant event . Most of these occurred within the boundaries of the hotspot while exon, including flanking intronic sequences, 2) cloning into a two-exon 22% occurred beyond the hotpot, implying a broader region involved splicing reporter minigene, 3) selection of wild-type- and variant-car- during intermediate stages of recombination . Several hotspots showed rying plasmids, 4) transfection into HeLa cells, 5) RNA extraction crossover frequency variation between men, including two cases of and RT-PCR using primers targeting minigene sequences, and 6) complete presence/absence polymorphism . Instances of extreme or sequence analysis of all RT-PCR products . Variants associated with subtle biased gene conversion accompanying crossover were observed total absence of correct exon inclusion in this monoallelic assay are within some hotspots, in some cases correlating with crossover frequen- considered as most likely pathogenic but UVs inducing partial altera- cy variation between men . Curiously none of the most active hotpots tions of normal mRNA sequences are also considered as biologically showed polymorphism or strongly biased conversion, in contrast to the significant. In spite of our initial concern that exons are tested in a het- prediction that these hotpots should be the most vulnerable to attenua- erologous context, extensive comparisons with in vivo RNA data have tion/extinction by meiotic drive in favour of recombination suppressors . shown that this minigene-based approach is sensitive and specific. Comparisons with results from in silico analysis indicate that current c13.3 bioinfomatic predictions are sensitive and rather specific concerning A full survey of common copy number variation in the human changes in splice site strength, activation of cryptic sites or generation genome of new splice sites, but are still inadequate for predicting the presence R. Redon1, D. F. Conrad1, L. Feuk2, C. Lee3, S. W. Scherer2, M. E. Hurles1, N. of relevant exonic splicing regulatory elements . P. Carter1; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2The Hospital c13.1 for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Bos- A genome-wide scan of adult human stature and skeletal size ton, MA, United States. N. Soranzo1, F. Rivadeneira2, U. Chinappen3, M. Inouye1, B. J. Richards3, S. Copy number variation (CNV) in the genome is extensive and yet is Potter1, R. Gwilliam1, K. Papadakis4, E. Wheeler1, I. Barroso1, D. Hart5, G. grossly under-ascertained . As smaller CNVs are expected to be far Livshits6, R. J. F. Loos7, D. Strachan4, N. J. Wareham7, T. D. Spector3, A. Uit- more numerous than larger CNVs, improved CNV detection resolution terlinden2, P. Deloukas1; will dramatically increase the numbers of known CNVs . The Genome 1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Erasmus Structural Variation Consortium has performed comparative genome MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3School of Medicine, King’s College London, hybridisation on a genome-wide set of tiling oligonucleotide arrays to London, United Kingdom, 4St George’s, University of London, London, United discover the majority of common copy number variants >500bp in size Kingdom, 5St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Tel Aviv University, in two populations with African and European ancestry . This set covers Tel Aviv, Israel, 7Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom. the assayable portion of the human genome with 42,000,000 probes Human adult stature is a classical quantitative trait and a paradigm with a median spacing of ~50bp . In addition we have generated data for genetic association studies of quantitative trait variation . We have on a single chimpanzee to provide information on the ancestral state carried out a meta-analysis of four genome-wide association scans of observed variants . The results reveal, as expected, that previous of stature produced using the Illumina HumanHap300 SNP panel in surveys captured only 5-10% of the CNVs within a single genome . 10,050 adults from four population-based cohorts (TwinsUK, EPIC Because the boundaries of thousands of CNVs are defined precisely Norfolk and 1958 Birth Cohort from the UK and the Rotterdam Study by this probe set, we can identify accurately functional sequences in- from the Netherlands). We have identified eighteen loci showing as- cluded in copy number variable regions . This provides new insights sociation with height with P-values of less than 10-5, which we have into the mechanisms generating chromosomal rearrangements and brought forward for replication in an independent sample of 9,000 in- the biological functions of common CNVs . dividuals . The signals identified provide strong evidence for replication in genom- c13.4 ic regions previously implicated in height, including HMGA2 (rs8756, Gene expression variation from peripheral blood in the general P-value = 5x10-13) and GDF5-UQCC (rs4911494, P-value = 1 .5x10-10) . population - the KORA study In addition, we have identified novel candidate genetic loci for human D. Mehta1, K. Heim1, T. Illig2, H. Wichmann2,3, T. Meitinger1,4, H. Prokisch1,4; height, some of which are in or near genes implicated in cellular growth 1Helmholtz Zentrum München - Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, and development (HHIP, ADAMTSL3 and DLEU7) . In an attempt to 2Helmholtz Zentrum München - Institute of Epidemiology, Munich, Germany, dissect the mechanisms underlying human growth, we have tested the 3Institute of Medical Informatics,Biometry and Epidemiology, LMU, Munich, association of these novel candidate height loci with different mea- Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical surements of skeletal growth . Our results provide both novel and con- University Munich, Munich, Germany. firmatory evidence for the implication of genes and pathways in human Interrogation of gene expression variation in humans will provide better growth, thus contributing to the understanding of the biological pro- understanding of functional genetic variation and help identify disease cesses underlying many common and severe human diseases . variants . At present, the nature and extent of variation in transcript lev- els across the entire genome is largely unknown . c13.2 We assessed normal variation in gene expression from 350 KORA super-hotspots for meiotic Recombination in the Human individuals, using the Illumina Human Ref-6 v2 whole genome micro- Genome array . Special features of inter individual variation in peripheral blood I. L. Berg, A. J. Webb, A. J. Jeffreys; expression could be traced to gender and age differences . Several Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, United significant age-related genes and distinct gender-specific gene sig- Kingdom. natures were identified. Using the PAM algorithm, it was possible to Homologous recombination is a vital process for ensuring proper chro- predict the gender with an accuracy of 98% . mosome segregation during meiosis, as well as increasing diversity by Using available KORA Affymetrix 500k genotypes, we performed a reshuffling haplotypes between generations. In this study, we analysed genome-wide association study to compare peripheral blood eQTLs Phase II HapMap data to identify autosomal regions showing extreme (Expression Quantitative trait loci) to published lymphocyte cell culture breakdown of linkage disequilibrium (LD) . Sixteen of these regions were eQTLs . selected for crossover analysis directly in sperm . All contained active Expression data can be used to prioritize candidate genes with expres- sperm hotspots, with similar characteristics as at previously studied sion levels significantly correlated to the trait. In this context, a recent hotspots, i .e . normally-distributed crossover breakpoints within regions genome wide association study using the KORA population found the 1-2 kb wide . These new hotspots were on average 10 fold more ac- most significant SNPs associated with urate levels mapped within an tive than previously characterised autosomal hotspots and include the uncharacterized carrier gene SLC2A9. Our analysis revealed a signifi- most active crossover hotspots yet discovered in the human genome . cant association between SLC2A9 expression and urate levels (Doer- Their activity is however poorly predicted from LD data . Most crossovers ing et al, Nature Genetics in print) . in these hotspots were simple, exchanging haplotypes within a single Analysis of further candidate genes where genome-wide association interval between markers . However, 0 .3% of exchanges were more signals have been obtained is currently underway .Concurrent Sessions  c13.5 colleagues; to obtain funding directed to transnational projects; to gain the genetic control of microRNA expression variation in access to facilities and research participants; to acquire kudos, aca- Humans demic advancement, or commercial benefits; or to undertake activities C. Borel, S. Deutsch, H. Attar, M. Gagnebin, C. Gehrig, E. Falconnet, Y. Dupré, that would not be permitted in their own country, due to legal or ethical S. E. Antonarakis; constraints . Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medi- This paper considers the last reason and when it is ethical for scien- cal School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland. tists to do research abroad that is banned at home . The author argues C .B . and S .D . contributed equally to this work . that such research may sometimes be ethical, provided it is scien- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that regu- tifically rigorous and accords with international ethical principles and late the expression of protein-coding . Each miRNA is thought to have ethical oversight requirements . But it is not ethical when the proposed multiple target genes that are regulated at the post-transcriptional research is widely regarded as unethical in the home country . The au- level .Inter-individual variation of miRNA gene expression is likely to thor uses her own image of Skene’s Ethico-Legal Barometer to gauge influence the levels of target genes, and may therefore contribute to the activities that attract this degree of sensitivity and would be unethi- some phenotypic differences, including susceptibility to common disor- cal wherever they are done . This research is in the red zone of the ba- ders . The aim of this study was to characterize the natural variation in rometer and the closer an activity falls to the red zone, the greater the miRNA expression levels present in different individuals, and to iden- need for ethical review and oversight before being ethically acceptable tify loci that control this variation . in the home country . We established primary fibroblasts from 200 unrelated umbilical cord The author illustrates these arguments with examples like human em- samples of Caucasian origin (GenCord collection) .All of these samples bryonic stem cell research, somatic cell nuclear transfer and research have been genotyped using the Illumina Hap550 SNP array . After mul- involving human subjects . tiple filtering steps 433’000 were retained for statistical analyses. Taq- man real-time PCR in all cell lines was used to measure the expres- c14.2 sion of 365 known mature microRNAs in each sample . This revealed Direct-to-consumer services. A review of the debate substantial differences in miRNA expression levels between individu- P. Borry; als, which were up to 50-fold in some cases . Normalized miRNA levels Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Leuven, Belgium. for each individual were used to perform quantitative whole genome Background . The rapid expansion of the internet has meant that there association studies using the Plink software . We will present the de- is now a global marketplace for a multitude of health care products and tailed genome-wide association analysis of SNPs that control in cis- or services that are available directly to the consumer . Related to this, in trans- miRNA expression . the field of genetics, the rapid expansion of knowledge about the rela- This is the first attempt to characterize the genetic regulation of miRNA tionship between genetics and human disease has set the groundwork expression levels. Loci identified through this approach are likely to be for commercial enterprises that use direct-to-consumer (DTC) adver- important determinants of human phenotypes . tising for genetic tests and, in some cases, bypass the supervision of a health professional to offer DTC purchase of the tests . Various c13.6 companies (e .g . Sciona (UK), DNA direct (US), Genelink (US), Test comparison of different methods to estimate genetic ancestry Kimball Genetics (US), Geneticom (The Netherlands)…) have been and control for stratification in genome-wide association studies identified where direct-to-consumer tests are offered (e.g. for paternity E. Salvi1,2, G. Guffanti1, A. Orro2, F. Torri1, S. Lupoli3, J. Turner4, D. Keator4, J. testing, ancestry testing, susceptibility tests for cardiovascular diseas- Fallon4, S. Potkin4, C. Barlassina1, D. Cusi1, L. Milanesi2, F. Macciardi1; es, hereditary hemocromatosis, osteoporosis, Factor V Leiden, type 2 1Department of Science and Biomedical Technology, University of Milan, Milan, diabetes…) . Italy, 2ITB CNR, Segrate, Milan, Italy, 3INSPE, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Psy- Objective . This paper wants to investigate the existing ethical and legal chiatry and Human Behavior University of California, Irvine, CA, United States. framework of direct-to-consumer services . In case-control association studies, population subdivision or admix- Method . It will offer a review of the debate through a systematic analy- ture can lead to spurious associations between a phenotype and un- sis of the position papers, reports, guidelines or statements emanating linked candidate loci. Population stratification can occur in case-con- from international and national organisations, bioethics committees, trol association studies when allele frequencies differ between cases and professional associations, together with the academic literature and controls because of ancestry . identified after an extensive literature search. We evaluated five methods (Fst, Genomic Control, STRUCTURE, Results. This paper offers an overview of the debate. It identified weak- PLINK and EIGENSTRAT) using 317K SNPs (Illumina HumanHap300) nesses in the existing regulatory framework and suggested further in a case-control sample of 200 American subjects with different races pathways for research . (Caucasian, African and Asian) in order to identify and to correct for stratification. Fst, Structure and Genomic Control are based on the c14.3 usage of few genetic markers while PLINK and EIGENSTRAT are Preventive genetic screening in the isolated community: lessons computationally tractable on a genome-wide scale . Fst, STRUCTURE learned and Genomic Control did not detect a significant stratification in our L. Basel-Vanagaite1,2, E. Taub3, L. Rainshtein3, V. Drasinover3, N. Magal3, J. sample, as well as EIGENSTRAT and PLINK . However, these last two Zlotogora4, M. Shohat3; methods, using a much larger information from the whole set of SNPs, 1SCMCI and Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Tel Aviv University, Tel graphically suggested the presence of a partial stratification, due to Aviv, Israel, 3Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Department of Com- African and Asian individuals while the estimated inflation factor of 1 munity Genetics, Ministry of Health and Hadassah Medical School Hebrew didn’t statistically confirm stratification. This brought to the decision to University, Jerusalem, Israel, Tel Hashomer, Israel. further enlarge the sample with hundreds of controls coming from Cau- In the countries with high rates of consanguinity, many inherited dis- casian populations . When we enlarged the sample to 650 individuals eases are present with a high frequency only in a limited geographi- we found a high value of inflation factor as statistical confirmation of cal region . We present a comprehensive strategy for genetic diseases the population stratification. The substructure still depends only on Af- prevention program in the isolated community in Israel and examine rican and Asian subjects that are separated from the Caucasian homo- the impact of the screening on the population . geneous sample . Therefore the sample size is crucial to get enough During years 2003-2007, we carried out carrier screening among the power to detect a possible stratification. residents of an isolated village of 10,500 inhabitants with a high fre- quency of non-syndromic mental retardation (MRT3), spinal muscular c14.1 atrophy, spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress and cystic the ethics of undertaking research in other countries fibrosis. The subjects were pregnant women visiting the women’s L. Skene; health station for routine monitoring . The medical geneticist or genetic University of Melbourne, University of Melbourne, Australia. counselor provided counseling . A three-generation pedigree was con- There are many reasons for scientists to undertake research with col- structed by interviewing the women and the nurses . The screening was leagues in other countries: to share knowledge and experience with provided free of charge, financed by the Israeli Ministry of Health . WeConcurrent Sessions  identified 215 carriers for one of the diseases and 14 carrier couples. orders, especially untreatable diseases . The most important reason Carrier frequency for MRT3, SMA, SMARD and cystic fibrosis was mentioned was: to prevent a long diagnostic quest . Obtaining informa- 1:11, 1:13 and 1:10 and 1:21, respectively . Among carrier couples, 15 tion to enable reproductive choices in future pregnancies was hardly pregnancies were recorded and 2 pregnancies of affected fetuses ter- mentioned . minated . More than 50% of carrier couples accepted prenatal testing . Since a relevant part of the Dutch population seems interested in con- While the women in the village were willing to collaborate, an increase sidering screening newborns for untreatable disorders we argue that in the willingness to collaborate among men was observed gradually . further debate is needed between policy, public and health care pro- The availability of genetic counseling locally and education of the popu- fessionals to discuss pros and cons . lation are essential for the success of the prevention program . Ethi- cal aspects of preventative programs based on genetic screening of c14.6 premarital, pre-conceptual couples or couples during pregnancy will Promoting clinically relevant genetics education for medical be discussed . trainees: the importance of educational outcomes and resources for each stage of medical training c14.4 M. Martyn1, S. Burke2, C. Bennett1, A. Stone3, E. Harvey1, R. Newton1, P. Farn- Differences and similarities in breast cancer risk assessment don1; models in clinical practice: which model to choose? 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, C. J. Van Asperen1, G. H. De Bock2, B. Siegerink1,3, C. E. Jacobi3; United Kingdom, 2Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Dept. Epi- Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Thornley Street Practice, 40 Thornley Street, demiology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Wolverhampton, United Kingdom. 3Dept. Medical Decision Making, Leiden, The Netherlands. It is widely acknowledged that the genetics education of healthcare Background: Models regarding breast cancer risk assessment focus staff across the world has not kept pace with advances in genetics . on family history and some use personal risk factors additionally . Aim The NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre is of this study is to show differences and similarities between the differ- working to address this situation in the UK by promoting clinically rele- ent models in risk estimates for breast cancer in healthy women from vant genetics education for healthcare professionals across all stages BRCA1/2-negative or untested families . of education and training . To achieve this, it is important to develop methods: After a systematic literature search seven models were se- clinically relevant educational outcomes and to identify and develop lected: Gail-2, Claus Model, Claus Tables, BOADICEA, Jonker Model, resources to support these across all stages of training . This will be Claus-Extended Formula, and Tyrer-Cuzick . Life-time risks (LTRs) for illustrated by results from the UK . developing breast cancer were estimated for two healthy counsellees The first step in promoting clinically relevant genetics education was to with variety in family histories and personal risk factors . The estimated develop educational outcomes linked to clinical practice at each stage LTRs and the threshold for individual mammographic screening based of training . Outcomes have been developed for medical students and on guidelines were compared . general practice and specialty trainees by working with health pro- Results: Without a clinically significant family history LTRs varied from fessionals to define genetics relevant to practice for these stages of 6 .7% (Gail-2 model) to 12 .8% (Tyrer-Cuzick Model) . For counsellees training . To promote incorporation of these outcomes into curricula, with low and moderate risk, the models mostly agreed. Difficulties in the Centre worked with education bodies to raise awareness of the screening decisions were encountered in some moderate and high risk importance of clinically relevant genetics education . individuals, and when including personal risk factors into the estima- Now the outcomes have been incorporated into medical training cur- tions . ricula, the Centre is focusing on supporting teachers and learners conclusion: Older models (i .e . Gail-2 and Claus) are likely to under- through the development and evaluation of learning and teaching re- estimate the LTR for developing breast cancer as their baseline risk sources and professional development for educators . Resources cov- for women without a significant history of breast cancer is too low. ering core genetics concepts for medical students and resources to Current guidelines have been formulated on breast cancer risks based support general practice training are currently being developed . on family history alone . When models include personal risk factors, The educational outcomes and many of the resources will be made surveillance thresholds have to be reformulated as other factors are freely available online at www .geneticseducation .nhs .uk and may be applied . For current clinical practice, the Tyrer-Cuzick Model and the of use to those involved in genetics education across Europe . BOADICEA Model seem good choices . c15.1 c14.5 systemic antisense-mediated exon skipping studies in mouse treatable and untreatable diseases in the neonatal-screening models for Duchenne muscular dystrophy programme: the opinion of future parents in the Netherlands A. Aartsma-Rus1, H. A. Heemskerk1, C. L. de Winter1, M. van Putten1, A. A. M. A. C. Plass1,2, L. Krijgsman1,2, L. Gieling1,2, C. G. van El1,2, T. Pieters1, M. C. Janson2, S. de Kimpe2, J. C. T. van Deutekom2, G. B. van Ommen1; Cornel1,2; 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Prosensa BV, 1VU University medical center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2EMGO-institute, Leiden, The Netherlands. Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe, progressive neuro- In the Netherlands, in 2007, the neonatal screening program was ex- muscular disorder leading to loss of muscle function and generally pre- panded from 3 to 17 disorders for which screening met the Wilson and mature death before the age of 30 . The disease is caused by mutations Jungner criteria, especially regarding treatability . The desicion whether in the DMD gene that disrupt the open reading frame and lead to com- or not to add diseases to the newborn screening programme has of- plete abolishment of functional dystrophin . Our group has pioneered ten been made by expert groups, whereas the opinion of those whom antisense-based exon skipping to restore the reading frame . Here, it concerns: the parents-to-be remains unknown . In our research we antisense oligoribonucleotides (AONs) induce specific exon skipping investigated the opinion of future parents concerning screening new- during pre-mRNA splicing . They have been successful in repairing the borns also for incurable, but to some extent treatable or even untreat- disrupted open reading frame and the generation of internally deleted, able disorders . partially functional Becker-like dystrophins . Proof of concept has been A structured questionnaire consisting of 3 parts in which similar ques- achieved in cultured muscle cells from patients and the mdx mouse tions were posed about treatable, incurable, but treatable, and untreat- model . Recently, exon 51 skipping and dystrophin restoration was able childhood onset disorder was posted on the website of a national confirmed after a single intramuscular dose of AON in a local-adminis- pregnancy fair. 1631 prospective parents filled out the questionnaire. tration clinical trial in 4 patients . Our current research focuses on op- 259 were excluded because they did not meet our inclusion criteria . timizing systemic delivery of 2’-O-methyl phosphorothioate AONs and In contrast to current policy, overall they showed a positive attitude comparison of different routes of administration and dosing regimes . towards inclusion of incurable, but treatable [88%] or non-treatable We show that after systemic injection, AONs are preferentially taken disorders [73%] within the national newborns screening programme . up by dystrophic muscle compared to healthy fibers. Furthermore, we Respondents who already had children at the time of filling out the were able to induce exon skipping and dystrophin restoration in all questionnaire were even more in favour of uptake of childhood dis- muscles, including the heart after short term treatment with high AONConcurrent Sessions  doses and long term treatment with lower doses . This was accompa- c15.4 nied by functional improvement and improved muscle integrity, without Rescue of a Lethal murine model of methylmalonic Acidemia any apparent toxicity. These findings are encouraging for future clinical using AAV 8 mediated Gene therapy trials and eventual systemic application of this approach . R. J. Chandler, C. Venditti; National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, c15.2 Bethesda, MD, United States. Restoration of aberrant splicing and neurofibromin function Methymalonic acidemia (MMA), a severe organic acidemia, is caused in three NF1 deep intronic mutations by antisense morpholino by deficient activity of the ubiquitous mitochondrial enzyme methylmal- oligonucleotides (AmOs) onyl-CoA mutase (MUT) . MMA patients exhibit increased methylmalo- E. Pros1,2, J. Fernández1, B. Canet1, L. Benito3, A. Benavides4, F. J. Ramos5, M. nic acid levels in the plasma, urine and CSF and display a clinical phe- A. López-Ariztegui6, G. Capellá1, I. Blanco7, E. Serra8, C. Lázaro1; notype of lethal metabolic decompensation, growth retardation, renal 1Laboratori Recerca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de failure and metabolic strokes . To assess the potential of genetic thera- Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genetics Department, IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet py for MUT MMA, we employed a mouse model of MMA that produces de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unitat Consell Genètic, Institut Català no detectable Mut transcript or protein . AAV 8 CBA-Mut was injected d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 4Genética, Hospital directly into the liver of newborn Mut-/- pups . Currently, 28 out of the 29 Universitario Central de Asturias (HUCA), Oviedo, Spain, 5Dpto. Pediatría, Mut-/- mice injected with 1 or 2x1011GC of AAV 8 CBA-Mut are alive Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 6Genética, beyond DOL 90 with some treated Mut-/- mice older than 200 days . Hospital de Cruces, Bilbao, Vizkaya, Spain, 7Unitat de Consell Genètic, Institut All the untreated mutants (n=21) perished before DOL 72 . The treated Català d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 8Genetics De- Mut-/- mice are thriving and indistinguishable from their wild-type (WT) partment, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. littermates . AAV 8 CBA-Mut treated Mut-/- mice achieved body weights Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant comparable to controls while untreated mutants experienced post-na- disorder caused by mutations in the NF1 gene . Aproximately 2% of tal growth retardation and reached only 40% of the weight of the WT . the germline mutations identified in our population consists in deep Plasma methylmalonic acid levels in the treated mutant mice on an intronic mutations . Such nucleotide changes create new splice sites unrestricted diet were significantly reduced compared to uncorrected that produce the insertion of a cryptic exon in the mature mRNA . We animals, indicating that substantial Mut enzymatic activity was restored used antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (AMOs) to restore nor- after AAV therapy . At DOL 90 the liver from a treated Mut-/- mouse had mal splicing in three NF1 deep intronic mutations (c .288+2025T>G, WT levels of Mut protein by Western blot analysis . These experiments c .5749+332A>G and c .7908-321C>G) . All of them generate a cryptic provide the first evidence that gene therapy has clinical utility in treat- 5’ splice donor site and result in the inclusion of a cryptic exon in the ment of MMA and support the development of gene therapy for other mature RNA by the use of an existent 3’ cryptic splice site . AMOs were organic acidemias designed to target the newly created 5’ splice sites in order to avoid the incorporation of cryptic exons and promote the use of wild-type c15.5 splice sites, by the splicing machinery . Our results demonstrate that Evaluating suppression of nonsense mutations by AMOs treatment effectively restore normal NF1 splicing at the mRNA aminoglycoside antibiotics as an intervention for vision loss in level in primary fibroblast and lymphocyte cell lines derived from differ- type i Usher syndrome ent patients carrying the three deep intronic mutations . In addition, we A. Rebibo Sabbah1, I. Nudelman2, Z. M. Ahmed3, T. B. Friedman3, T. Baasov2, observed a decrease in the ammount of Ras-GTP (equivalent to wild T. Ben-Yosef1; type fibroblast levels) in primary fibroblasts from patients after AMOs 1Genetics Department, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Is- treatment, consistent with the restoration of neurofibromin function. rael, 2Department of chemistry, Institute of Catalysis Science and Technology, To our knowledge this is the first time that an antisense technique is Technion, Haifa, Israel, 3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute used successfully to restore NF1 mutations, opening the possibility of on Deafness and other Communication Disorders, NIH, Rockville, MD, United a therapeutic strategy for this type of NF1 mutations . States. Type 1 Usher syndrome (USH1) is a recessively-inherited condition, c15.3 characterized by profound prelingual deafness, vestibular areflexia, Antisense therapeutics for a new deep intronic variation and prepubertal onset of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), which to date has identified in two Methylmalonic Acidemia patients no effective treatment . USH1 can be caused by mutations in each of A. Rincón, L. R. Desviat, M. Ugarte, B. Pérez; at least six genes . While truncating mutations of these genes cause Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa. CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. USH1, missense mutations of some of the same genes cause non- Isolated methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is a life threatening organic syndromic deafness, suggesting that partial or low level activity of acidemia caused by defects in the methylmalonylCoA mutase (MCM) the encoded proteins may be sufficient for normal retinal function, al- or in enzymes involved in the synthesis of the active cofactor adeno- though not for normal hearing . Interventions to enable at least some sylcobalamin. In this work we describe a new point change identified translation of full-length protein, may delay the onset and/or progres- in two MMA affected patients located deep in intron 11 of the MUT sion of RP in individuals with USH1 due to nonsense mutations . One gene (IVS11-898A>G) . This change increases the splicing score of such possible therapeutic approach is suppression of nonsense muta- a 5´cryptic splice site and provokes the intronic inclusion of 76 bp tions by aminoglycosides . We demonstrated up to 91% suppression (r .1957ins76) between exons 11 and 12 . Using a splicing assay we of PCDH15 nonsense mutations by commercial aminoglycosides in have demonstrated that the change caused exonization of this intronic vitro . We also demonstrated ex vivo suppression, by the same amino- sequence and by morpholino antisense oligonucleotide transfection glycosides, of the R245X mutation . We are now testing suppression of we have demonstrated that the insertion is a disease-causing muta- several CDH23 nonsense mutations . In parallel, we are developing a tion in these two patients . The antisense oligonucleotide was targeted series of new aminoglycoside-derived compounds, which includes two to the 5’ cryptic splice sites to block access of the splicing machinery to new promising derivatives, NB30 and NB54 . Based on cell toxicity as- the pseudoexonic region in the pre-mRNA . After transfection of the pa- says and on acute toxicity measurements in mice, the toxicity of both tient’s fibroblasts we have performed RT-PCR analysis and enzymatic compounds is significantly reduced, in comparison to commercially assay to determine MCM activity . Using this antisense therapeutics we available aminoglycosides . Based on in vitro and ex vivo experiments, have obtained correctly spliced mRNA that was effectively translated their suppressive activity is maintained . The research described here and methylmalonyl CoA mutase activity was rescued in patient’s fibro- will have important implications for development of targeted interven- blasts close to 100% of control activity . The effect of AMO is sequence tions that are effective for patients with USH1 and nonsyndromic RP and dose dependent and was not effective in patients where the in- caused by various nonsense mutations . sertion was produced by splicing background noise. These findings add to previous results providing a new therapeutic strategy in this genetic disorder and potentially applicable to large numbers of cases with deep intronic changes that, at the moment, remain undetected by standard mutation-detection techniquesClinical genetics  ESHG POSTERS genital malformations (CM) . Assistance in creation of modern National register of Congenital malformations and hereditary disorders corre- P01. Clinical genetics sponding to European standards . Methods . Were obtained 747, 598 and 453 questionnaires for the pe- P01.001 riod of 2005 - 2007, respectively . Were used standard methods of sta- Most Encountered Genetic Disorders in Egypt: Classification & tistical analysis . Registry Results . The prevalence of CM per 10000 births decreased from 2005 to M. O. Elruby; 2007 and was 199 .29 in 2005, 160 .00 in 2006 (X2=15 .795, OR=1 .246, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. p<0 .001) and 118 .96 in 2007 (X2=22 .196, OR=1 .345, p<0 .001) . We Diseases with genetic bases have been a major health problem to ev- are investigated changes in prevalence of sentinel CM . In 2006 de- ery society . Heavy economic, social and health burdens are imposed creased frequency of anal atrezia (4 .80 v . 1 .07, X2=7 .642, OR=4 .487, on the afflicted family as well as the society. In general genetic dis- p=0 .006), esophageal atresia (6 .40 v . 1 .07, X2=12 .833, OR=5 .983, eases are relatively prevalent among the Arab population . Incidence of p=0 .003), limbs reduction (7 .20 v . 0 .54, X2=19 .785, OR=13 .461, congenital malformations among Egyptians ranges from 1,16 to 3,17 p<0 .001), polydactilia (14 .41 v . 2 .67, X2=28 .741, OR=5 .384, p<0 .001), % . This is probably due to the high consanguinity rate (20 - 40 %) . omphalocele (14 .41 v . 3 .21, X2=28 .741, OR=5 .384, p<0 .001), Down Early diagnosis of various genetic disorders with proper intervention syndrome (25 .61 v . 6 .42, X2=41 .735, OR=3 .989, p<0 .001) and will reduce the burdens of genetic disorders at the all levels . multiple CM (22 .41 v . 10 .70, X2=14 .762, OR=2 .094, p<0 .001) . In A comprehensive classification system is necessary for genetic dis- 2007 decreased frequency of omphalocele (3 .20 v . 0 .54, X2=4 .688, eases in order to provide a framework in which to study the etiology, OR=4 .545, p=0 .030), dysplasia of hip joints (36 .55 v . 12 .31, X2=20 .146, pathogenesis and treatment of diseases in an orderly fashion . Such OR=2 .256, p<0 .001), and increased frequency of polydactilia (2 .67 v . system gives clinical geneticists a way to organize the health care 5 .08, X2=4 .888, OR=0 .399, p=0 .030) . needs of their patients. We revised different classifications to deter- Conclusion . The data from Moldavian Registers are valid statistical mine which classification to follow. However these classifications were tool to make surveillance of CM in the region . Cooperation with EU- based on the etiological diagnosis, pathological diagnosis, phenotypic ROCAT register can improve planning of medical service in Moldova diagnosis and / or mode of inheritance . Therefore, we established our and will enlarge European database of CM cases . own classification, as a modification of the previously mentioned. The main purpose of our classification is to include four major descriptive P01.004 categories (axes), that geneticists consider to identify the genetic dis- Sensitivity and Specificity of MCV Test for Screening of α and β orders . The Final Report of the study (1/7/2004 - 30/6/ 2007) included thalassemia traits 3417 cases. We established an integrated classification for the genetic M. Mohammadi, M. Jafari Nezhad, Z. Moghadam, B. Zarbakhsh, A. Kordaf- disorders referred to Genetic Clinic. This classification considers the shari, M. Karimipour, S. Zeinali; etiological, phenotypic, differential diagnosis and referral axes& is en- Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. titled “Genetic/Diagnostic/Referral Classification Aim: To evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of mean corpuscular volume (MCV) for screening of both Alpha and Beta thalassemia trait P01.002 Method: Diagnostic test was conducted on 1500 patients; MCV was Genetics Epidemiology study of Bashkortostan Republic measured in all samples using an automated hematology Analyzer S. S. Murzabaeva1, Y. I. Grinberg2, I. M. Khidiyatova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova2, R. [sysmexkx21] . HemoglobinA2 measured by column chromatography . A. Zinchenko3, E. K. Ginter3; Cut off value for HbA2 was 3 .5% . PCR tests were done in all cases 1Bashkirs state medical university, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Bio- for detecting about 4 different deletional mutations in α- globin genes chemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center of Russian Academy of Scienc- such as- α 3 .7, - α 4 .2 , es, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for Medical Genetics, Russian - α 20 .5, and --MED for other non detectable mutation we used sequenc- Academy of Medical Sciences, Моscow, Russian Federation. ing and analysis about 25 different mutation. MCV≤80 fl showed a sen- The results of genetic epidemiological study of five Districts (Burzyan- sitivity of 93.5% and specificity 91.5%. sky, Baimaksky, Abzelilovsky, Salavatsky and Archangelsky) of Bash- Conclusion: MCV evaluation is a useful tool for screening of alpha thal- kortostan Republic are reviewed . The total size of the investigated assemia and β thalassemia traits because of its simplicity, low cost and population was 168050 persons, including 135748 southern- east and high sensitive . northern-east ethnographic group the Bashkir . Medical genetic re- search included all population of five districts, indigently of a nationality P01.005 and was carried out under the standard report developed in laboratory Molecular Characterization of Two Families With δβ Thalassemia genetic epidemiology Research Centre for Medical Genetics . Segre- F. Bayat, A. Valaei, A. Amirian, A. Kordafshari, M. Karimipoor, S. Zeinali; gation analysis demonstrated good agreement between the observed Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and expected segregation frequencies for both AR and AD diseases . β- thalassemia is the most common genetic disorder in Iran, caused The prevalence rates of hereditary disorders (autosomal dominant, by reduced or absence of globin gene synthesis in β-globin chain.More autosomal recessive and X-linked) for urban and rural, Bashkirs and than180 different mutations in the β-globin gene have been reported. other ethnic groups were calculated. Significant differences in the Most of theses mutations are point mutations, and large deletions are prevalence rates were revealed between the prevalence rates AD and not common. δβthalassemia normally results from deletions involving AR disorders in rural and urban populations . The prevalence rare for either the δ,β globin genes or the Aγ, δ and β genes. It is useful to AD and AR disorders was twice lower in the urban populations than broadly divide δβ-thalassemia in to the (δβ)+and(δβ)º thalassaemia to those in the rural ones . The prevalence rate of all Mendelian disor- indicate whether there is any output of δ and β chains from the affected ders varied in the investigated populations from 1 .54 in Baymak sity chromosome. (δβ)º thalassaemia usually results from large deletions from 6 .12 per 1000 persons in Burzyansky District . Spectrum of AD involving the εγδβ-globin-gene cluster, which remove the β,δ genes but diseases consisted of 83, spectrum of AR diseases - 48 nosological which leave either one or both of the γ-globin genes intact. As already forms, and X-linked - 13 forms . mentioned they can be divided in to the(δβ)ºand (Aγδβ)º thalassemia, depending on the length of the deletion, that is, whether the Aγ genes P01.003 are involved or not . Carriers of thalassemia that were referred to the the National Register of congenital malformations in moldova: Primary Health Center were investigated . 5 ml of blood for molecular comparative Analysis for Years 2005-2007 analysis and 2 ml of fresh blood for hematological lab was used . In this V. V. Egorov, V. C. Sacara, A. Varzar, L. P. Rusu; study, two families are investigated because of low MCV and MCH, National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Re- normal HbA2 and high HbF. First, specific primers for δβ-thalassemia public of Moldova. were designed. DNA fragments were amplified by PCR. Known dele- Objectives . Since 1989 conform to Order of Ministry of Health N-129 tions causing δ β-thalassemia and HPFH were screened for in these from 27 .04 .89 was introduced a national system of monitoring of con- families by gap-PCR method . DNA fragments were visualized on a 2%Clinical genetics  agarose gel . The results showed that two families are carriers for the P01.008 Asian-Indian inversion and deletion . Genotype-phenotype correlation Co-inheritance of Hemoglobin D and β-Thalassemia Trait in three was performed the same as globin gene server database . iranian families M. Taghavi, M. Karimipoor, M. Jafarinejad, L. katouzian, A. Valaei, A. Amirian, P01.006 F. Bayat, A. Kordafshari, N. Saeedi, S. Zeinali; Genotyping of α-globin genes in Iranian α-thalssemia carriers Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. E. Shafieiyeh, M. Karimipour, Z. Kaini Moghaddam, A. Kordafshari, S. Zeinali; β-thalassemia is the most common genetic disorder in Iran, occurring Institute Pasteur, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. more frequently in Northern and Southern areas . IVSII-I and IVSI-5 Introduction: are the most common mutations reported in the country . HbD, a he- Alpha thalassemia is more often caused by deletions involving one or moglobin variant occurs mainly in north-west India, Pakistan and Iran both of the α-globin genes. and differs structurally from normal HbA at 121 positions on β chain. A small number of point mutations, usually within the α2, have been Co-inheritance of HbD and thalassemia minor is not common and may characterized . The aim of alter the Hb electrophoresis pattern . Here we report three cases with This study was molecular analysis of α-globin genes in some Iranian combination of β-thalassemia and Hb D. None of them had symptoms people with low MCV, MCH and normal HbA2 and HbF . of profound anemia and hematological indices were similar to the β- Materials and Methods: thalassemia heterozygote . Hb variant level in carriers was increased After obtaining informed consent, DNA was extracted from blood sam- and no HbA was detected electrophoretically . After obtaining informed ples of 100individuals referred from Primary Health Care (PHC) cen- consent, the blood samples were collected in tubes containing EDTA . ters by salting out method. Multiplex Gap-PCR for common α-globin Genomic DNA was extracted using the salting out method . The mu- gene deletions was performed . Then for individuals who did not have tation in β-globin gene was revealed by ARMS-PCR technique and known deletions, α2 and α1-globin genes were sequenced by chain confirmed by DNA sequencing. The region containing exon 3 was am- termination method . plified for HbD and the PCR product of this amplicon was digested The sequences were aligned against Z84721 accession number in by EcoRI . The electrophoresis pattern suggested that all cases were GenBank and results were compared with globin gene server data- homozygote for HbD. But, molecular analysis confirmed the presence base . of Cd 121 GAA>CAA in heterozygous form in combination with IVS Results: II-I and IVS I-5 . Hematological family study showed the mutations Among 100 individuals, 47 individuals have had deletions in α-globin and HbD are in trans position . These mutations produce an unstable gene including: mRNA without any product and almost all of the globin output is from -α3 .7(27), --Med (8), -α4 .2 (7), -α20 .5(5) . the chromosome carries HbD . of the 53 remaining individuals who did not have known deletions in α- globin genes,23 samples had different mutations; including: PolyA(8), P01.009 4 PolyA & 5nt(5), C .S(1),hemoglobin Adana,Cd28 . The most common Analysis of haplotypes associated with iVsi nt 130 of beta-globin 6 deletions and point mutation were -α3 .7 and PolyA, respectively . gene reveals intriguing results Conclusion:Non deletion mutations can interact with each other or M. Feizpour1, P. Fouladi1, S. Foroughi1, F. Rahiminejad1, F. S. Hashemi1, R. α0thalassemia deletions to produce severe forms of HbH disease or Vahidi1, S. Zeinali2; - even Hb hydrops fetalis.Thus screening for α-thalassemia should be 1Kawsar Biotech Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pasteur considered during genetics counseling of high risk couples of thalas- Institute and Kawsar Biotech Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of semia for prenatal diagnosis. In addition, α-thalassemia may alter the Iran. hematologic parameter in β-thalassemia carriers. Prevention of thalassemia is a national program . Premarital screening and prenatal diagnosis (PND) is in effect . For performing PND, we P01.007 usually use direct mutation detection techniques like ARMS PCR . We A new polymorphism causes different restriction pattern by β- routinely screen for more than 42 mutations identified in our center RsaI in β-globin cluster: application in PND so far . If now mutation is detected we resort to direct DNA sequenc- A. Valaei, F. Bayat, M. Taghavi, M. Karimipoor, S. Zeinali; ing . We also use beta-globin gene linked RFLPs or SNPs for PND to Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. increase the accuracy of PND . Sometimes haplotype analysis can be The β-globin cluster is located at chromosome 11 and contains five very helpful as well . functional genes .There are at least nine RFLP markers distributed all We have so far analyzed more that 6394 chromosomes from carriers over the cluster .These markers are used routinely for carrier testing, of beta-thalassemia and in 16 cases the mutation was IVSI nt 130 . prenatal diagnosis and haplotype analysis . This mutation is regarded as rare mutation in Iranian population . The Working on the β-globin cluster haplotypes of some Iranian β-thalas- families were mostly from two distinct geographical areas, namely semia carriers and their families, we observed a different pattern of Aghghola in Golestan province, west of Caspian Sea in the north of digestion by RsaI restriction enzyme in many people .The aim of this Iran (6 cases or 37%) and Meshkin shahr in Ardabil province, east study was to find out the cause of this pattern. of Caspian Sea, in north of Iran (5 cases or 31%) . The other 4 cases This study was performed on carriers of β-thalassemia and normal were from Khozestan in South West and Gilan in North of Iran equally . controls . After obtaining informed consent, DNA was extracted from Since populations in these two regions do not have much in common peripheral blood.ARMS-PCR method was exploited for finding the we decided to see if they share the same haplotype . We tested Hind common mutations in β-globin gene.PCR-RFLP was performed on III ψβ, AvaII β, and HinfI β RFLP sites for this purpose. All cases from β-RsaI polymorphic site. The primers and PCR conditions are from Aghghola were + - + and all cases from Meshkin Shahr were - - + for Weatheral & Cleggs . DNA sequencing was performed on PCR prod- these sites . ucts of β-RsaI marker by the same primers. This shows that there were two different founder effects for this muta- Some of the carriers of β-thalassemia and their parents had a different tion . digestion pattern in β-RsaI polymorphic site. In the carrier people dif- ferent mutations were found(IVSII-1, IVSI-110, IVSI-6, -88) .When poly- P01.010 morphic restriction site of RsaI is absent in the sample, after digestion, Non-Invasive prenatal diagnosis of β-thalassaemia by SNP the 1200 bp PCR product is cut to 694, 411 and 95 bp bands due to analysis using PNAs and Arrayed Primer Extension(APEX) two constant restriction sites . In our cases the constant restriction site T. Papasavva1, A. Kyrri2, L. Cremonesi3, S. Galbiatti3, M. Kleanthous1; at position 411 has been changed(GTAC to GCAG)in heterozygous 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Thalassae- form . Hence, the restriction pattern by this enzyme creates 694 and mia Center, Archibishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Fondazione 506 bp bands. This polymorphism is not associated to a specific muta- Centro San Raffaele del Monte Tabor, Milan, Italy. tion in β-globin gene and also was found in normal control people. The recent discovery of relatively abundant quantities of cell free fetal DNA in maternal plasma and serum has opened up new possibilities for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. β-thalassaemia is one of the most common autosomal recessive single-gene disorders in Cyprus .Clinical genetics 0 In Cyprus, the mutation IVSI-110 accounts for 81% of all the cases . and molecular analysis of mutations in β-globin gene. We have started Therefore, the development of a non-invasive method for the Cyprus to perform DNA sequencing for all samples especially for unknown population is based on the detection of paternally inherited Single cases since July of 2005. We find that DNA sequencing is very suit- Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) as well as the direct detection of able and informative for screening of mutations except deletions . DNA paternal beta-thal mutations . samples are usually tested for mutations like IVS-II-I, IVSI-5, IVS-I- Eleven SNPs with high degree of heterozygosity in the Cypriot popula- 110, codon 5, codon 17,codon 41/42(-TTCT) and many common mu- tion were selected and analyzed on 34 families and the informative tations and deletions . We have decided to use a comprhensive mu- SNPs were determined. In order to find a higher number of informative tation screening apprach and sequenced the gene by 3130 Genetic SNPs, the degree of heterozygosity in the Cypriot population was de- Analyzer . After detection of 2654 sequences in 2 years, we have found termined for 130 SNPs on 75 random samples using the Sequenom® very different abundance for these mutations:-28tata box,-29tata box,- MALDI-TOFF Mass Array genotyping analysis . 30 tata box,-88,-101,codon 2,codon15,codon36-37,codon39,codon82- One of the approaches that are being developed is the Arrayed Primer 83,codon121,IVS-I-5,IVS-I-110,IVS-II-1,IVS-II-666 and more than 35 Extension (APEX) method on the Genorama® QuattroImager™ . We other mutations . developed a DNA chip called “thalassochip” that contains 60 beta-thal mutations and 10 SNPs linked to the beta-globin locus . The APEX as- P01.013 say was applied on maternal plasma of 7 families using the informa- molecular characterization of beta-thalassemia intermedia in tive SNPs; paternal allele of the fetus was non-invasively detected in Antalya population, turkey 5 families . I. Keser1, A. D. Sanlioglu1, E. A. Aydemir1, A. Yesilipek2, D. Canatan3, G. Lu- Peptide Nucleic Acids (PNA) probes are used to suppres amplifica- leci1; tion of the maternal allele and unmask the fetal allele. The efficiency 1Akdeniz University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Antalya, of PNA-mediated PCR clumping technique was tested on APEX and Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Antalya, sequencing analysis . Turkey, 3The State Hospital, Thalassemia Center, Antalya, Turkey. Beta-thalassemia intermedia (Beta-TI) is a term used to define a group P01.011 of patients with β-thalassemia in whom the clinical severity of the dis- Delineation of deletions in beta globin gene cluster causing ease is somewhere between the mild symptoms of the β-thalassemia HPFH in iran trait and the severe manifestations of β-thalassemia major. Beta-TI M. T. Akbari1, M. T. Akbari2, B. Keikhaee3, S. Zare-Karizi2, M. Karimipour4, L. shows both clinic and genetic heterogeneity . The purpose of this study Mottaghi2; was to analyze the relation between the genotype and phenotype in 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical Turkish patients with beta-TI living in Antalya, Turkey . A total of 32 Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Ahwaz Medical Sci- patients with beta-TI were evaluated for mutations and their clinical ences University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Pasteur Institute of Iran, findings. Eight different mutations [-30 (T-A), Cod 3 (+T), Cod 8(-AA), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Cod 39 (C-T), IVS1 .6 (T-C), IVS1 .110 (G-A), IVS2 .1 (G-A), IVS2 .745 Background: Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) and (C-G) ] were found in our study . The IVS1 .6 (T-C) was the commonest äâ thalassemia are heterogeneous disorders characterized by el- beta-mutation, occurring in both homozygous state in five patients and evated levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in adult life . The distinction compound heterozygous state in eight patients . The IVS2 .1 (G-A) was between these conditions is subtle and is made on clinical and hema- the second beta-mutation in eight patients as homozygous state in two tological grounds . Most HPFHs are caused by large deletions involv- patients . In a family with beta-thalassemia, two sibs were compound ing a variable extent of DNA segment on the beta-globin gene cluster . heterozygote for IVS2 .1(G-A) and IVS1 .110 (G-A) . One of them was There are eight common forms of such deletions reported in different female with beta-TI, while other was male with beta-thalassemia ma- populations . In this study ten unrelated individuals with characteristic jor. In addition, our findings were compared with literature and the mu- HPFH hematological profile were investigated to delineate their beta- tation profile in beta-TI patients was differently found in our population globin gene cluster deletions . than others. In conclusion, our data suggest that modifier genes should Aims and objectives: Molecular analysis of 10 Iranian patients with be screened together with beta-globin gene mutations in patients with low MCV and MCH, Normal HbA2 and high level of HbF (5%-15%) beta-thalassemia intermedia to give correct genetic counseling and to was carried out . They were referred from primary health care centers provide the effective treatment . involving in the national prevention program for thalassemia . Materials and methods: After obtaining informed consent, genomic P01.014 DNA was extracted from peripheral blood . Multiplex gap PCR method Effect of α-gene numbers and XmnI Polymorphism on the was exploited for characterizing of 8 different deletions in beta-globin phenotype of HbE/β thalassemia patients cluster causing delta-beta thalassemia or HPFH . V. Sharma, B. Kumar, R. Saxena; Results and discussion: Seven individuals from this group were shown All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. to be heterozygous for the 13 .4 kb Sicilian deletion, two were hetero- introduction: HbE [β26 (B8) Glu-Lys] with β thalassemia (HbE/β thal- zygous for the Asian-Indian form of inversion-deletion Ggama(Agama- assemia) results in a clinically severe condition . HbE/ß thalassemia delta-beta)0 thalassemia and mutation for one of them was not identi- has a very variable clinical phenotype . Some of the possible explana- fied. So far three types of deletional mutations in Iranian patients have tions for the observed variable clinical severity are coinheritance of been reported. These results confirm the previous findings. α-thalassemia and XmnI polymorphism. Objective: To determine the frequency of XmnI polymorphism, α deletion and triplication in HbE/ P01.012 β thalassemia patients and to study their effect on the phenotype of Reporting of Beta talassemia mutations frequency by DNA Patients . material and methods: Subjects were 85 HbE/ßthalasse- sequencing analysis in iran mia patients .Patients were divided into three subgroups according to M. Sajedifar1,2,3, M. Moshirazin1,2, S. Mousavi1,2, Z. Shahab Movahed1,2, A. Joo- a scoring system based on seven clinical criteria as mild (score 0-3 .5), daki1,2, S. Zeinali1,2,4; moderate (score 4-7) and severe (score7.5-10). α deletions and XmnI 1Kawsar Human Genetic Reaserch Center- KGBC, Tehran, Islamic Republic polymorphism were studied by GAP-PCR and PCR-RFLP respective- of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, ly . Results: α deletion was found in 18 (21.2%) out of these 18 patients Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Researchers Club of research and science 12(11 αα/-α3 .7 & 1 αα/--SA) were from Gp1 and 6(αα/-α3 .7) were from branch of Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Human Gp2 .α triplication was found in 7(8.2%) out of these 7 patients 5 were Genetics Unit, Dept of Biotech Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of (αα/αααanti-3 .7) from Gp3 and 2 were (αα/αααanti-3 .7)from Gp 2 .XmnI was Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. found in 53(62 .3%), out of which 43 were heterozygous(+/-) &10 were Beta-thalassemia is the most prevalent genetic disorder in Iran . In or- homozygous(+/+) .XmnI +/+ was present in 6 Gp1 & 4 Gp2 patients, der to control this autosomal recessive disorder several plans are in while XmnI +/- was present in 8 Gp1 ,15 Gp2 & 20 Gp3 patients . con- effect, including premarital genetic counseling and blood tests . Our clusion: Patients with coexisting α deletion, required lesser transfu- unit has been chosen as National Reference Center for Prenatal Diag- sions and had less severe phenotype while patients with α triplication nosis . We are actively involved in prenatal diagnosis, carrier detection were on frequent transfusions and had severe phenotype . XmnI poly-Clinical genetics  morphism in homozygous state was observed to alleviate the severity P01.017 while in heterozygous state it had no effect on the disease severity . molecular analysis of thalassemia intermedia in iran M. Karimipoor1, A. Arab1, A. Rajabi2, K. Arjmandi3, S. Zeinali1; P01.015 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modares Delineation of deletions causing causing δβ thalassemia and University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Aliasghar hospital, Tehran, Islamic HPFH in iran Republic of Iran. M. Akbari1,2, M. Karimipour2,3, S. Zare karizi2, B. Keikhaee4, M. Izadyar5, L. Background: β-thalassemia is an autosomal recessive disorder caused Mottagi2; by more than 200 different mutations in gene coding for β-globin (HBB) 1Department of Medical Genetics,Tarbiat Modares university, Tehran, Islamic of the hemoglobin tetramer Thalassemia intermedia is a clinical defini- Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Re- tion applied to patients whose clinical phenotype is milder than thalas- public of Iran, 3Molecular Medicine Dept., Biotechnology Research Center, semia major . Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ahwaz Medi- Aims and objectives: Molecular analysis on α- and β-globin genes mu- cal sciences university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Childeren Medical tations in 49 Iranian thalassemia intermedia patients . center,Tehran university of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Materials and Methods: After obtaining informed consent the patients Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) and δβ thalasse- were included in the study . The genomic DNA was extracted from mia are heterogeneous disorders characterized by elevated levels of peripheral blood using standard salting out method. Allele-specific fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in adult life . The distinction between these con- polymerase chain reaction was performed for common β-thalassemia ditions is subtle and is made on clinical and hematological grounds . alleles and then direct β-globin gene sequencing amplification was Most HPFHs are caused by large deletions involving a variable extent performed. β-globin gene haplotypes were constructed from eight re- of DNA segment on the β-globin gene cluster. There are eight com- striction fragment length polymorphism (RFLPs) in the β-globin cluster mon forms of such deletions reported in different populations . In this and also -158GgXmnI (C to T) . Screening of common a-globin gene study ten unrelated individuals with characteristic HPFH hematological deletions and triplication was performed by Gap-PCR . profile were investigated to delineate their β-globin gene cluster dele- Results and discussion: Among 49 thalassemia intermedia patients, tions . 17 had IVSII-1 (G to A) mutation in homozygous form and 10 in com- Aims and objectives: Molecular analysis of 10 individuals with low MCV pound heterozygous with other mutations. -α3 .7 and -MED gene dele- and MCH, Normal HbA2 and high level of HbF (5%-15%) was carried tions were found in heterozygous form in two and one of the above out . They were referred from primary health care centers involving in cases, respectively. In five cases only one mutation was found in the national prevention program for thalassemia . β-globin gene and in these patients one had α -globin gene triplica- Materials and methods: After obtaining informed consent, genomic tion . Analysis of polymorphic markers in patients with IVSII-1 mutation DNA was extracted from peripheral blood . Multiplex gap PCR method showed haplotype III and allele T in XmnI marker . was exploited for characterizing of 8 different deletions in β-globin These data show the heterogeneity of molecular basis of thalassemia cluster causing δβ thalassemia or HPFH. intermedia in Iran and suggest the role of modifier genes other than α Results and discussion: Seven individuals from this group were shown -globin gene determinants . to be heterozygous for the 13 .4 kb Sicilian deletion, two were hetero- zygous for the Asian-Indian form of inversion-deletion Gγ(Aγδβ)0 thal- P01.018 assemia and mutation for one of them was not identified. So far three A novel frameshift mutation (-G) at codon 24 of the beta-globin types of deletional mutations in Iranian patients have been reported . gene in an iranian woman These results confirm the previous findings. P. Fouladi, S. Ghahremani, S. Foroughi, F. Rahiminejad, M. Feyzpour, R. Va- hidi, S. Zeinali; P01.016 Kawsar Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Detection of the most prevalent deletional and non deletional Thalassemia is an inherited disorder characterized by an imbalance in mutation among iranian carriers of Alpha-thalassemia the synthesis of α- or β-globin chains. This leads to a decreased hemo- B. Zarbakhsh, S. Zeinali, M. Karimipour, R. Habibi; globin synthesis and causes a hypochromic microcytic anemia . Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Since 1997, in Iran, every couple that wants to marry is referred to Background: A variety of deletions and point mutations have been one of the Primary Health Centers (PHC) by the marriage registry of- described which decrease α globin gene expression. Most affected fices. These couple to be are tested for thalassemia by doing cell blood fetuses do not survive till birth or die shortly thereafter . count (CBC0 and A2 level measurement . Eventually they may be sent Objectives: The exact determination of gene defect for thalassemia to one of several medical genetics centers dedicated for prenatal diag- carriers is essential for premarital screening . It will also help the ge- nosis of thalassemia . netic counselor to advise the family accordingly . Individuals with low MCV (<80 fl) and MCH (<27 pg) and high Hb Methods: One hundred and thirty subjects having referred to us . Multi- A2(>3 .5%) level are referred for further investigation which may in- plex Gap PCR, And some molecular methods was carried out to detect clude prenatal diagnosis . any existing deletional or nondeletional mutation in their alpha globin During investigating one of these couples with low MCV and MCH and genes . raised A2 were investigated by molecular methods . A previously unde- Results: The following genotypes were identified: scribed mutation causing a frameshift [ (-G) Codon 24] in the beta-glo- {-α4 . 2/αα }, {- α3 .7/- α3 .7},{-α 3 .7/-α4 . 2 } bin gene was identified in a 23 years old Iranian woman . The hemato- Poly A signal mutation (AATAAA > AATAAG ) logical data for this lady was (MCV=63 .0, MCH=19 .0, A2=5 .9 , F=0 .2) . Termination codon Mutation ( TAA > CAA ) Or: -5nt deletion ; Her DNA was tested for 19 common beta-globin gene mutations . No (α 3 .7 / - α 20 . 5) & (--Med / α α) mutation was detected . Direct DNA sequencing showed absence of a Frequencies of these mutations was determined which revealed the G nucleotide in Codon 24 on both strands . We looked up data bases 3 .7 Kb deletion as the predominant mutation among alpha-thallase- and available references for this mutation . No reported case was seen . mia . carriers in this study . The frequency of all other types were less We believe that this is a novel mutation causing a frameshift . We are in than 35% . the process of investigating the frequency of this mutation by design- Conclusions: Among nondeletional mutation, α-5nt, was the most fre- ing ARMS/PCR primers . quent allele in our study population (9.25%) Followed by αPA-2(4A>G) (4 .12%) . In regard to cd19 that has a 12 .2% prevalence in south of P01.019 Iran(Harteveld, et al,2003) it seems that this mutation is not dominant molecular analysis of two families with Hb Lepore in our studied population . A. Amirian, M. Karimipour, Z. Moghaddam, A. Kordafshari, A. Valaei, M. Dominant mutations in poly A signal in our study was αPA-2 (4A>G) which Taghavi, L. Katouzian, F. Bayat, M. Jafarinegad, N. Saeidi, A. Sanjari, M. Chou- has a replacement in nucleotide 4 A>G . bini, M. Mohammadi, S. Zeinali; Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Thalassemia syndromes are among hemoglobinopathy disorders in- herited as autosomal reccesive trait, caused by mutation in β-globinClinical genetics  gene . Most of these mutations are point mutation and large deletions deletion in the other chromosome . are not common . A considerable number of deletions of variable size The correct diagnosis, improved after the case history, included the and position that involve the β-globin gene cluster on chromosome 11 presence of the base substitution causing Hb Torino and the α 3.7 are associated with the clinical entities of δβ thalassemia. deletion, both in the heterozygous state . δβ-thalassemia normally results from deletion involving either δ- and Our data underline that the molecular screening of α thalassemia, as- β-globin genes or the Aγ-,δ- and β-globin genes. sociated to the family study are useful to better characterize the geno- In this study six individual from two families were investigated because types involved and perform an appropriate genetic counselling . of low MCV and MCH, high HbF and normal HbA2 referred from pri- mary health care (PHC) centers to our lab for further investigations . P01.022 PCR amplification was performed for known deletions causing δβ-thal- Hemoglobin Lepore chromosome in serbia: a report of a novel assemia and HPFH by gap-PCR methods . Lepore haplotype In Hb electrophoresis an extra band was appeared . Molecular analysis S. Pavlovic1, B. Zukic1, M. Stojiljkovic1, L. Perisic1, J. Jovanovic1, L. Dokma- showed that the two affected individuals from one of the families are novic2, D. Janic2; homozygous for Hb Lepore and the remaining four cases carry Hb 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, Lepore in heterozygous form . One of the affected cases was transfu- 2University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia. sion dependent . Genotype Phenotype correlation was compatible with Hemoglobin (Hb) Lepore is a thalassemic hemoglobin variant char- cases presented in giobin gene server database . Hb Lepore usually acterized by normal alpha-globin and fused delta/beta-globin chains . causes mild anemia with microcytosis and hypochromia in the hetero- Heterozygosity for this abnormality resembles a beta-thalassemia zygote (beta+-thal) . The molecular basis of this Hb variant is a (aprox) trait, while homozygotes have a severe form of beta-thalassemia . 7 kb deletion from the distal part of δ-globin gene to proximal region Hb Lepore-Boston Washington (BW) is the most common type of Hb of β-globin gene. Lepore . The chromosomal background heterogeneity has been as- sessed in Hb Lepore BW chromosomes, suggesting its multicentric P01.020 origin . Molecular characterization of Serbian patients with thalasse- Hb F malta i in association with Hb F sardegna and Hb Valletta; mia syndromes in last ten years revealed that Hb Lepore is the most triple heterozygosity at the human Gγ, Aγ and β globin genes common cause of thalassemia phenotype in the population of Serbia suggest interplay between flanking regulatory sequences in the (25%) . Three thalassemia major patients (compound heterozygotes developmental control of globin gene switching for Hb Lepore and beta-thalassemia mutation) and 36 heterozygous J. Borg, R. Galdies, W. Cassar, C. A. Scerri, A. E. Felice; Hb Lepore carriers were characterized in 15 unrelated families . Mo- Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malta, and lecular detection of Hb Lepore gen was carried out by gap-PCR analy- Section of Molecular Genetics, Mater Dei Hospital., Msida, Malta. sis . Sequencing analysis showed that all Hb Lepore genes were of Here we document for the first time data on unique families from Malta BW type . Moreover, they were all associated with the same intragenic in whom heterozygosities at the Gγ, Aγ, and β globin genes have seg- beta-globin gene polymorphisms, framework 2 . Additionally, we have regated among families to produce probands that were heterozygotes studied beta-globin gene cluster haplotypes and their association with at the three major non-α genes, such that the six globin products could Hb Lepore gene in Serbian population by PCR-RFLP analysis of 8 be separated and quantified. 136 newborn were found with Hb F Malta polymorphic sites (Hinc II/epsilon, Xmn I/5’Ggamma, Hind III/Ggam- I on isoelectricfocusing . Further testing by reverse phase LC showed ma, Hind III/Agamma, Hinc II/pseudobeta, Hinc II/3’pseudobeta, Ava heterozygosities at the β globin gene (βA /βValletta) and the Aγ globin II/beta, BamHI/3’beta) . Haplotype analysis revealed a novel haplotype gene (AγI / AγT) confirmed by DNA sequencing in 8. The probands associated with Hb Lepore BW gene (+--+--+-) . The same haplotype were genotyped at the Xmn I site in the 5’ Gγ promoter that is known was found in healthy individuals of Serbian descent . The high frequen- to be associated with increased γ globin gene output in anaemic adults cy of Hb Lepore BW hemoglobin variant in Serbian population, the and the (AT) T polymorphism in the 5’ β globin gene region known homogeneity of Hb Lepore BW haplotype, as well as its uniqueness, X Y to down-regulate β globin gene expression subject to BP1 binding. suggest that it most probably originated in Serbia . Seven were Xmn I negative and (AT)T and with [GγFMaltaI+ AγI] / [Gγ0 7 7 + AγT] = 0.90 that was significantly different from the other triple het- P01.023 erozygote with Xmn I negative and (AT)T and [GγFMaltaI+ AγI] / [Gγ0 control of thalassemia in iran, a National success story 9 5 + AγT] = 0.80 (p < 0.037). The data suggested interplay between the S. Zeinali1, A. Samavat2; Xmn I and the (AT) T sites around a fulcrum of the Y / PYR sequences 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Center for Disease X Y close to the pseudo-β sequences and that acted to control globin gene Control, Ministry of Health, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. expression differentially between neonates and adults . Thalassemia is the most prevalent single gene disorder in Iran and most part of the world . Now more than 18000 patients live in Iran . P01.021 Prenatal diagnosis of thalassemia started, in Iran, as early as 1991 by A case of Hb torino in an italian family sending samples abroad and as early as 1994 it became feasible to C. Lodrini, M. Garatti, D. A. Coviello, A. Biasi, C. Melles, R. Salvi, C. Domzelli, do it in Iran . National Program for Prevention of Thalassemia has been C. Curcio; started in 1997 and the religious FATWA was given in 1996 to allow Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Ele- prenatal diagnosis (PND) . From 1997 every couple who wants to get na, Milan, Italy. married is tested for being a carrier of thalassemia . If both partners are Alfa thalassemias are haematologic diseases arising from more than carriers or are in doubt of their carrier status are referred to one of sev- 80 different genetic alterations, affecting one or both copies of the du- eral prenatal diagnosis centers throughout the country . Regular visits plicated α globin genes (α1 and α2) located in 16p13.3. and inspections are carried out to ensure the best performance . Every Although most causative alterations are large genomic deletions, at PND done is reported to the Genetics Office at CDC. least 48 non-deletional point mutations have also been reported so There are more than 10 medical genetics labs in Iran and most of them far . active in doing PND for thalassemia . Most of these laboratories have We report here a case of Hb Torino found in an Italian family: the pro- been organized as being a network and families are referred to one of band is a young boy aged six, who presented haematological param- these labs via the Health Centers throughout country . eters similar to α thalassemia. In our medical genetics lab at Kawsar Genomics and Biotechnology The α-globin2-specific PCR product were amplified. Direct sequencing Complex we have performed more than 2000 PNDs . We have also of amplified PCR product showed the presence of Hb Torino (Cod43 analyzed more than 4000 samples referred to us for thalassemia . Only TTC->GTC, Phe->Val) in both cromosomes in the proband . Since Hb one mistake has been made out of 2000 PNDs which may indicate Torino was detected in the homozygous state and it is quite a rare vari- application of best QA and QC . ant we decided to extend the analysis to patient’s parents . The father resulted to be an heterozygous carrier for Hb Torino, while the mother had a 3 .7 deletion in the heterozygous state . Then we con- cluded that proband had the Hb Torino in one chromosome and α 3.7Clinical genetics  P01.024 Since 1996,we have performed 102 prenatal diagnoses for 76 couples molecular mechanisms underlying thalassemia intermedia in with 11 different genotypes .One case included twin pregnancy and an- iran other a CF affected mother .In one family-at-risk parent was a carrier of M. Neishabury1, A. Azarkeivan2, C. Oberkanins3, F. Esteghamat1, N. Amiriza- complex allele (two mutations in cis) . deh2, N. Amirizadeh2, H. Najmabadi1,4; Total of 63 families were fully informative for direct DNA analysis,which 1Genetics Research center University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation was performed using heteroduplex analysis (PAGE),ARMS-PCR (Elu- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Thalassemia Clinic and Research cigenetmCF 29 kit,Orchid) and DGGE analysis of PCR amplified exons Center, Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO), Tehran, Islamic Repub- 1-24 .In other 13 families,only one parental mutation was known,so pre- lic of Iran, 3ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 4Kariminejad and natal analysis was done by indirect DNA analysis (haplotype analysis Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. for 6 diallelic sites and one tetranucleotide repeat) .Materials used for To improve the differentiation of thalassemia intermedia from other he- fetal DNA analysis were mostly CVS samples (68 cases),amniocytes moglobinopathies in Iran, four known genetic mechanisms, including in 28 cases and fetal blood in 6 cases .Results showed that 19 fetuses XmnI Gγ polymorphism, inheritance of mild and silent β-thalassemia were affected,50 were carriers and 33 fetuses were healthy . alleles, δβ deletion and coinheritance of α- and β-thalassemia, were Since 2006,we have started screening for the presence of CFTR muta- investigated in 52 Iranian individuals, suspected to have thalassemia tions in couples with echogenic bowel detected on ultrasound investi- intermedia based on clinical and hematological characteristics . Beta- gation during the second trimester of pregnancy .From 21 cases,in 16 globin mutations were studied using a reverse-hybridization assay and only the couple was tested,and in 3 cases both parents and fetus were sequencing of the total β-globin gene. The XmnI Gγ polymorphism, tested .No positive cases were found . the Sicilian δβ deletion and four α-globin mutations (-α3 .7, -α4 .2, --MED, If the causative mutations were identified before pregnancy,results αααanti-3 .7) were studied using PCR-based techniques . The inheritance were given within few days,indicating that the current strategy using of the XmnI Gγ polymorphism with severe β-thalassemia alleles in the a combination of methods mentioned above provide rapid and reliable homozygous or compound heterozygous state was the predominant prenatal diagnosis for all families at risk in our country . mechanism observed in 56 .5% of individuals . In 8 .7% of cases, this status overlapped with the -α3 .7/αα genotype. The second most fre- P01.027 quent cause for thalassemia intermedia (15 .2%) was the inheritance cFtR haplotypes associated with p.s466X mutation among of mild β-thalassemia alleles, including IVS-I-6 (T>C), -88 (C>A) and iranian cF patients +113 (A>G). In 4.3% of subjects the Sicilian δβ deletion was iden- R. Alibakhshi1,2, M. Zamani3, R. Kianishirazi ‎2, J. Cassiman 4‎, H. Cuppens4; tified. HbS in association with β0-thalassemia was found in 2 .2% of 1Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kermanshah University of patients, who had been misdiagnosed as thalassemia intermedia . In Medical Sciences(KUMS), kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Division 21.7% of cases no causative genetic alteration could be identified. Our of Medical Genetics, Reference Laboratory, Kermanshah University of Medi- results reflect the diversity underlying thalassemia intermedia in Iran, cal ‎Sciences, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical and the limitations of the applied clinical, hematological and molecu- Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical ‎Sciences, Tehran, lar approaches for correct diagnosis . Some of our unresolved cases Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Center for human Genetics, KULeuven, Leuven, will offer an opportunity to discover additional molecular mechanisms Belgium. leading to thalassemia intermedia . Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common inherited disorder in Cau- casian populations, with over 1400 mutations identified in the Cystic P01.025 Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene . We Prenatal diagnosis of cystic fibrosis: the 18-year experience of have screened 69 Iranian CF patients, and 1 CBAVD patient for mu- Brittany (western France) tations and polymorphic sites in the complete coding region, and its I. Duguépéroux1,2, V. Scotet1, M. Audrézet1,2, M. Blayau3, P. Boisseau4, H. Jour- exon/intron junctions, of their CFTR genes, using different methods, nel5, P. Parent6, C. Férec1,2; such as ARMS (amplification refractory mutation system)-PCR, SSCP 1INSERM U-613, Brest, France, 2CHU - Lab Génétique Moléculaire, Brest, (single stranded conformation polymorphism) analysis, restriction en- France, 3CHU - Lab Génétique Moléculaire, Rennes, France, 4CHU - Lab Gé- zyme digestion analysis, direct sequencing, and MLPA (Multiplex Liga- nétique Moléculaire, Nantes, France, 5CH - Unité Génétique Médicale, Vannes, tion mediated Probe Amplification). France, 6CHU - Dpt Pédiatrie et Génétique Médicale, Brest, France. Based on our work, the third most prevalent mutation in Iran was Objective: This study reports 18 years of experience in prenatal di- p .S466X . It was found in 5 .7 % (8/140) of the CFTR genes from Iranian agnosis (PD) of cystic fibrosis (CF) in a region where CF is frequent CF patients, and was only observed in homozygous state . These 4 pa- and the uptake of PD common (Brittany, western France) . method: tients were from Tehran, Khorasan, Hamadan and Markazi provinces . All PDs made over the period 1989-2006 in women living in Brittany The parents of these patients all had consanguine marriages, however were collected . Results: We recorded 268 PDs made in 1 in 4 risk since that the mutation was present in families from different regions; it couples, plus 22 PDs directly made following the sonographic find- seems to be a relative frequent mutation in Iran . This mutation is rare ing of echogenic bowel . Most of the 268 PDs were done in couples worldwide, but has a frequency of 0 .5% in Serbia and Montenegro . already having CF child(ren) (n=195, 72.8%). Close to one fifth fol- Interestingly, the patients with p .S466X mutation were homozygous at lowed cascade screening (n=49, 18.3%), which identified 26 new 1 in 4 some of intragenic polymorphic sites and showed similar haplotypes . risk couples among the relatives of CF patients or of carriers identified These were: IVS8 TGm and Tn (TG12-T7__TG12-T7), IVS6a (TTGA6/ through newborn screening . The remaining PDs were mainly made TTGA6), intron 9 nt1525-61 (G/G) and exon 10 nt1540 (A/A; M470/ in couples whose 1 in 4 risk was evidenced following the diagnosis M470) . The polymorphisms were seen in direct sequencing . of echogenic bowel in a previous pregnancy (n=22, 8 .2%) . Although patients’ life expectancy has considerably improved, in our population P01.028 the great majority of couples chose pregnancy termination when PD Identification and characterization of three CFTR gene partial indicated that the fetus had CF (95 .9%) . conclusion: This study de- duplications scribes the distribution of PDs according to the context in which the 1 M. Legendre1, A. Le Floch1, F. Niel1, C. Gameiro1, J. Martin1, D. Grenet2, J. Der- in 4 risk was discovered and highlights the real decisions of couples as elle3, V. Izard4, C. Costa1, M. Goossens1, E. Girodon1; regards pregnancy termination after a positive PD . 1CHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 2Hôpital Foch, Pneumologie, Suresnes, France, 3Hôpital d’Enfants, Médecine infantile, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France, P01.026 4CHU Bicêtre, Urologie, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. Strategy for prenatal diagnosis of cystic fibrosis in Serbia Background: Cystic fibrosis and disorders related to Cystic Fibrosis D. Radivojevic, T. Lalic, M. Djurisic, M. Guc-Scekic, M. Miskovic, V. Ivanovski; transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) pathology are mainly Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. due to point mutations scattered over the whole CFTR gene . Search Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disease in for large CFTR rearrangements using semi-quantitative fluorescent Caucasians,caused by more then 1500 mutations in CFTR gene .In multiplex (QFM) PCR assays is now part of the molecular diagno- Serbian CF patients 21 different CF mutations were found accounting sis and allows to identify 2% of CF alleles . Rearrangements mainly for 82% of CF alleles . comprise single or multiple exon deletions; duplications are rare andClinical genetics  are indeed more difficult to detect and characterize. Of the four CFTR 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821delT, L138ins, G542X, duplications reported, three were detected in our laboratory by QFM- W1282X, N1303K, 3849+1C-T, R334W, CFTRdele2,3) mutations have PCR, in two CF patients and a CBAVD patient . They involved exons been previously identified in 112/120 (93,3%) patients including 76 4-8, 10-18 and 11-13, respectively, in trans of another CFTR mutation . (63,3%) with two revealed mutations and 36 (30%) with one revealed Methods: The duplications were characterized by using a combina- mutation . The current study present the result of investigations by us- tion of long-range (LR) PCR, digestion of LR-PCR products and se- ing a commercial kit (CF OLA assay, Abbot, Rungis-France) in the 44 quencing . Results: Two duplications were fully characterized, in direct remaining samples with only one or without revealed CFTR mutation . tandem each: dup10_18 (≈70kb long), and dup11_13 (≈17kb long). Three CFTR mutations at four patients have been in addition identified. Characterization of the remaining dup4_8 is in process . However, Mutation 2789+5g>a was identified in two patients (0,8%). Two muta- given the classical CF phenotype of the patient, we hypothesize that tions were identified in one patient each (0,4%): R1162X, 3120+1g>a. the duplicated region is located inside the CFTR gene and interferes Mutations identified by using a commercial kit in addition in 4 (1,6%) of with the transcription, translation or maturation process, thus resulting the 240 CFTR chromosomes in investigated group . in a null mutation . Conclusion: Effective tools are required to detect duplications, which may indeed be under-diagnosed. Refinement of P01.031 the breakpoints is important to confirm a deleterious effect and should Identification of novel mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis contribute to understand the duplication mechanism . transmembrane conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene in the Greek population P01.029 M. Poulou1, M. Mastrominas2, K. Pantos3, S. Doudounakis4, E. Kanavakis1, M. A French collaborative study indicative of a very low classical- Tzetis1; cF penetrance of R117H; implications for genetic counselling. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Embryo- C. Thauvin-Robinet1, A. Munck2,3, F. Huet1,2,4, G. Bellis5, E. Gautier6, C. Férec7, genesis Centre for Reproductive and Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 3Centre M. Audrézet7, M. Claustres8, M. Des Georges8, G. Lalau9, T. Bienvenu10, E. for Human Reproduction, Genesis Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Cystic Fibrosis Bieth11, B. Gérard12, I. Sermet13, G. Rault14, J. Flori15, J. Lafitte16, G. Bellon17, Clinic, St Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. D. Hubert18, C. Binquet6, L. Faivre1, M. Goossens19,20, M. Roussey2,21, E. Gi- Cystic Fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disorder, with rodon19,20; 5% carrier rate in the Greek population . The Greek population has one 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2AFDPHE, Paris, France, 3CF Care Cen- of the highest rates of CFTR mutation heterogeneity . tres, Paris, France, 4CF Care Centres, Dijon, France, 5INED, Paris, France, In this study we report 16 novel variants in the CFTR gene identified 6CIC-CEC, CHU, Dijon, France, 7CF laboratory Network, Brest, France, 8CF by DGGE analysis and direct sequencing. Of these five were synony- laboratory Network, Montpellier, France, 9CF laboratory Network, Lille, France, mous variants, 7 missense mutations, 2 frameshift mutations leading 10CF laboratory Network, Hôpital Cochin,, Paris, France, 11CF laboratory Net- to premature termination codon and two intronic substitutions . The ef- work, Toulouse, France, 12CF laboratory Network, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, fects of these mutations were assessed in combination with the clinical France, 13CF Care Centres, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, phenotype and using in silico analysis . The missense mutations were 14CF Care Centres, Nantes, France, 15CF Care Centres, Strasbourg, France, assessed using “PolyPhen” and “SIFT” . The impact of the silent muta- 16CF Care Centres, Lille, France, 17CF Care Centres, Lyon, France, 18CF Care tions and the intronic substitutions on splicing elements was analysed Centres, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 19CF laboratory Network, Créteil, using “SSF: Splicing Sequences Finder”. Majority of findings included France, 20Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, changes in splicing factor binding . France, 21CF Care Centres, Rennes, France. Novel Mutation/ Other cFtR mu- case clinical Phenotype Polyphen siFt Background: The R117H-associated phenotypes vary from classical variant tation/ variant c .538_539insAC 111 .5 mEq/L; Classical CF to no clinical disease and have made genetic counselling difficult. 1 (L136H-fs153X) F508del CF; 3 mos Since implementation of CF NBS, the observed high R117H frequency 2 c .3946_3947delTG F508del 118 .6mEq/L; (V1272Vfs1300X) Classical CF ; 2 yrs among neonates with elevated IRT and two mutations has reinforced Fetal Echogenic bowel; possibly this issue . Methods: Two retrospective studies were conducted: 1) a 3 F319V TG11T5/ TG11T7 meconium ileus; damaging T 0 .48 59 .5 mEq/L phenotypic study on 263 patients with two CFTR mutations including at 90meq/L; azoospermia; Probably 4 L541P N1303K NT 0 .00 least one R117H; 2) a retrospective 2002-2005 epidemiological study, 38yrs Damaging aimed to determine the frequency of R117H and other frequent muta- 5 L1227L P936T Failure to Thrive; 6yrs tions in about 6000 healthy individuals without family history of CFTR 6 P936T Oligospermia Probably T 0 .38 Damaging pathology . Results: 1) Among the 263 patients, including 92 neonates, 7 R1158R T966I Oligoasthenospermia detailed clinical features were available for 247: severe classical CF, n= 2; isolated CBAVD, n= 60; other CFTR-related disorders (CFTR- 8 D1275D 50mEq/L; Malabsorption Syndrome; 5 yrs RD), n= 109; healthy, n= 76 (65 neonates, reduced follow up period); 9 2622+3A>G* Oligospermia 2) Based on R117H and F508del allelic frequencies in the general population of 0 .25% and 1 .0%, respectively, the [F508del]+[R117H] 10 V1212F GP possibly T 0 .42 damaging genotype prevalence was evaluated at 1/20,000, the CFTR-RD pene- 11 F305V GP benign T 0 .33 trance at 4 .2% and the CF penetrance at 0 .06% . Conclusion: The very low penetrance of R117H with regard to classical CF leads to consider 12 2752-18delT* GP R117H no longer as a CF-causing mutation and to reassure patients 13 S511C Azoospermia benign T 0 .06 and their families in view of genetic counselling . 14 L1414S GP possibly T 0 .06 damaging 15 L1408L Bronchiectasis; 30yrs P01.030 Pancreatic Dysfunction; the molecular genetic study CFTR gene in the group of Russia 16 L346L 7yrs cF-patients A. A. Stepanova, N. V. Petrova, A. V. Polyakov; * possible spicing mutation; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. GP: General Population; NT: not tolerated; T: Tolerated Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common and generally severe autosomal re- cessive disorder in the European population, caused by mutations in P01.032 the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) Molecular-genetic and clinical analysis of cystic fibrosis in on chromosome 7q31 . Republic of moldova In the Russian population, cystic fibrosis is characterized by the pres- N. I. Barbova1, V. V. Egorov2, A. P. Gavriliuc2; ence of two prevalent mutations, the F508del and CFTRdele2,3, which 1State University of Medicine and Pharmaceutics “N. Testemitanu”, Chisinau, account for ~55% and ~6% of the CF alleles, respectively . Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, 2National Center of Re- This study includes 120 unrelated Russian CF patients affected by a productive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. classical form of cystic fibrosis. Objective: We intended to study relations between genetic and clinic Using a comprehensive CFTR gene analysis protocol (ΔF508, ΔI507, polymorphism in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF).Clinical genetics  Methods: Were investigated 78 patients with CF aged from 2 months Increased MBL levels in CFLD patients could be resultant of increase to 2 years, 46 boys and 32 girls by mean of polymerase chain reaction growth hormone levels in childhood or predominance of “wild” MBL2 (PCR) . genotype in our patients . MBL2 genotyping is necessary to identify the Results: In 64,1% were detected mutations - delTAF508 - in 57,7% patients predisposed to develop CFLD . (15,4% homozygous and 42,3% heterozygous), R334W - heterozy- gous - 3,8%, N1303K - heterozygous - 1,3%, MetH polymorphism - P01.035 homozygous - 1,3% . In all homozygous and in 88% of heterozygous cFtR and ENac genes study in African patients with cystic of delTAF508 was mentioned pancreatic insufficiency and extremely fibrosis-like disease severe injury of lungs . In 94,3% of patients the process starts before L. Mutesa1, A. Abul Kalam2, C. Verhaeghe1, K. Segers1, J. Vanbellinghen1, L. one year . From 8 died patients 75% were homozygous for delTAF508 . Ngendahayo3, E. Rusingiza4, C. Oury1, L. Koulischer1, H. Cuppens2, V. Bours1; In 35% of patients with this mutation was revealed Ps . Aeruginosa, 1University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, in 40% of patients was hypotrophy . R334W characterized by slow Belgium, 3National University of Rwanda, Butare, Rwanda, 4National University progression of broncho-pulmonary injury and absence of pancreatic of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda. insufficiency. In homozygous of MetH polymorphism the disease was The defect in chloride and sodium transport in cystic fibrosis (CF) pa- slowly progressive, despite early start in 3 months . 12 patients (15,4%) tients is a consequence of loss of functional interaction between cystic were older than 18 years . In half f them were delTAF508 mutation fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and the epithe- (heterozygous), in 8 .3% - homozygous . In 16,7% mutations were not lial sodium channel (ENaC) . identified. To study patients with CF-like symptoms and to relate the disease to Conclusion . The clinical pattern and prognosis of CF depends from gene mutations of both CFTR and ENaC genes, we collected clinical type of mutations . The frequency of delTAF508 in Moldova is 57,7% . data and DNA samples from 60 African patients with CF phenotype . In 64,1% of cases mutations are identifiable. In 47,7% patients was de- The CFTR gene was first analysed for mutations in all patients by DH- termined only one mutation from compound with delTAF508, R334W, PLC followed by direct sequencing, whereas the SCNN1A, SCNN1B N1303K . It diminishes the possibilities of prenatal diagnosis and lead and SCNN1G subunits of ENaC gene were analysed by sequencing to necessity to wide range of major mutations of causal gene . in all patients who carried only one CF mutation . The frequency of all identified ENaC variants was established in control group of 200 health P01.033 individuals . Association of polymorphism in the endothelial nitric oxide In total, four different CFTR mutations, including one previously unde- syntase gene and clinical features in Russian cF patients scribed missense mutation (p.A204T) were identified in five patients. In homozygous for F508del mutation addition, ENaC gene sequencing in these 5 patients detected 8 ENaC E. E. Tymkovskaya, N. V. Petrova, N. J. Kashirskaya, R. A. Zinchenko; variants, (c .72T/C and p .V573I) in SCNN1A, (p .V348M, p .G442V, Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. c .1473+28C/T, and p .T577T) in SCNN1B, and (p .S212S, c .1176+30G/ The association of 27 b .p .VNTR polymorphism in 4 intron of eNOS C) in SCNN1G . The missense mutation (p .V348M) was not found in gene and the clinical features of cystic fibrosis was investigated in 101 the control group. We could also not find any p.T577T silent polymor- Russian CF patients homozygous for F508del mutation . All patients phism nor any c .1176+30G/C intronic nucleotide change . were subdivided for groups according to their eNOS genotype, the Our data thus show that an exploration of African patients with CF-like first group - A/A and A/B genotypes (33 patients); the second group symptoms is mandatory and should include ENaC gene sequencing in - B/B genotypes (68 patients) . The age of onset of lung and intestinal absence of identified two CFTR causing mutations. The combination disease symptoms, the age of diagnosis, severity of disease progres- of mutations in both genes could provide a genetic explanation for an sion, FVC index, height-weight indexes, colonization by S.aureus and involvement in disease . P.aeruginosa and other microorganisms, hepatobiliary disease, me- conium ileus and distal intestinal obstructive syndrome in anamne- P01.036 ses were evaluated. FVC index was significant lower in patients with Detection of cFtR gene rearrangements in spanish population A/A and A/B eNOS genotypes (69,37±4,09%) than patients with B/B M. Ramos, L. Masvidal, J. Gimenez, T. Casals; genotype (80,57±3,31%; p=0,032) . Liver cirrhosis was more frequent Idibell, Barcelone, Spain. among patients with B/B eNOS genotype (22,1%) than in patients with Over 1,500 mutations have been reported in the CFTR gene . We have A/A and A/B eNOS genotypes (6,1%; p<0,05) . No other associations identified more than 200 CF mutations in Spanish families (n=1,020) were revealed . accounting for 97% of CF alleles . The CFTR50kbdel mutation is a complex rearrangement involving exons 4-7 and 11-18 . This deletion P01.034 is relatively common in Spanish population (0 .3%) . In order to provide MBL influence cystic fibrosis associated liver disease in a faster detection than Southern blot we have applied quantitative real- children? time PCR analysis to asses this deletion in 11 uncharacterized alleles I. M. Ciuca1, I. Popa1, L. Pop1, Z. Popa2, L. Tamas3, A. Rosca4, R. Cioaca5; from patients fulfilling CF criteria diagnosis. We have designed primers 1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2National Cystic Fibrosis Centre, (Primer express 3.0 software) for 10 exons, 8 concerning the flanking Timisoara, Romania, 3Molecular Genetic Department, Timisoara, Romania, regions (3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 18, 19) and two other into the deleted re- 4Laboratory Department, Clinical County Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 5Imu- gions (6a, 17a) . Genomic DNA samples were scanned for each CFTR nology Department, Timisoara, Romania. region as well as for the b2-microglobuline, as endogenous gene, us- Background: Genetic modifiers like mannose binding lectine(MBL2) ing Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix in a quantitative real-time gene influence occurrence and severity of CF associated liver PCR (ABI 7300) . Positive CF controls and wild type samples were disease(CFLD) . Variants of MBL genotypes encode low serum levels included in the study . Comparative analysis of normalized C (2-ΔΔCt) t of MBL protein . Aim study was to asses the MBL serum levels in CFLD from patients and controls permitted us to estimate the dosage . We patients (pts), comparing to CF pts without liver disease . Methods: have detected dosage changes in four samples out of 11 analyzed . Study was performed in Pediatric II Department and National Cystic The CFTR50kbdel was detected in two patients . Another deletion and Fibrosis Centre Romania . 35 CF children aged 2-18 years, present- one insertion were also identified. ed to annual assessment were evaluated . We consider 3 groups of We conclude that this technique shows a high sensitivity and is suit- patients, as follows: group 1(21 CFLD patients), group 2(11 pts CF able to identify CFTR large rearrangements, deletions and insertions, no CFLD), group 3(15 controls) . Groups were age matched . Patients permitting us to improve the detection rate in Spanish CF patients . associating diseases who influence MBL level were excluded. MBL assay procedure was performed using MBL Oligomer ELISA kit . Data were statistically analyzed with ANOVA . Results: Among CFLD pts (group 1) MBL average was half of control’s average (p=0 .001) . Group 2 had an average lower with 13% comparing to controls . 46% CFLD pts were MBL deficient. Conclusions: Lower MBL average in CFLD patients sustains that MBL deficiency is associated factor for CFLD.Clinical genetics  P01.037 tiplex genotyping assay to detect 185 CF mutations . The methodol- Validating assays for relative quantification of CFTR cDNA from ogy is extremely sensitive, allowing the genotyping of very small dried nasal epithelial brushing blood spot samples usually employed in newborn screening programs . L. Masvidal1, A. Alvarez2, L. Ruano2, X. de Gracia2, T. Casals1; Furthermore, the Sequenom MALDI-TOF platform is a rapid and high 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Centre. IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 2Cystic throughput system, allowing to process a high number of samples si- Fibrosis Unit. Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. multaneusly in a cost-effective manner . We validated the system by Real-time PCR has proven to be a useful method to quantify gene ex- performing the assay on 348 dried blood samples in the Galician CF pression in samples with small number of cells . We have applied this newborn screening pilot program, and 75 samples in the American CF technology to validate the relative quantification of CFTR RNA from proficience testing (CDC) and the European CF aqality assessment nasal brushing of CF patients in a Taqman assay (ABI 7300) . Four scheme (CF European Network) . In the 2006-2007 period we detected endogenous genes have been evaluated (HPRT1, beta2-M, GUSB, 11 new CF cases, of wich 4 cases would be missed using the ACMG/ PMCA4) . Standard curves were performed for CFTR and endogenous ACOG minimal panel of 25 mutations . genes from the cell line HEK293 over expressing CFTR, nasal polyp and nasal epithelial (NE) samples . The selection of suitable endog- P01.040 enous genes for normalization is a prerequisite for accurate determi- A retrospective analysis of patients tested for cystic fibrosis nation of expression level. Hence, PCR efficiencies have been deter- mutations in a reference Genetics center in izmir, turkey mined and two different software programs (NormFinder, qBase) have B. Durmaz1, H. Onay2, G. Itirli2, H. Akin2, O. Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1; been used to evaluate expression stability in NE samples from CF 1Department of Pediatrics, Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, patients (n=9) and controls (n=9) . DNAs from all individuals were ana- 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, lyzed for CFTR gene . RNA quality was determined and only samples Turkey. with a RIN above 5 .2 were included . The experiment has been car- Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder of epithelial ion ried out twice from two independent RT reactions and each sample transport caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane was analyzed in triplicate. We have identified three endogenous genes conductance regulator (CFTR) gene . The CFTR gene is located at suitable for accurate normalization of CFTR data expression . 7q31 .2 and functions as a chloride channel and controls the regula- Supported by Spanish ISCiii project PI050804 . tion of other transport pathways . More than 900 mutations and vari- ants have been described in the CFTR gene . We have restrospectively P01.038 evaluated the molecular test results of 550 CF patients referred to the A diagnostic approach for characterization of the cFtR gene Molecular Genetics Laboratory of Medical Genetics Department, Fac- defects by mRNA analysis ulty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir - Turkey in the last three years . L. Porcaro, L. Costantino, V. Paracchini, D. Coviello, L. Claut, M. Di Cicco, A. Patients had been tested for 36 mutations in the CFTR gene using the Monti, P. Capasso, D. Degiorgio, C. Colombo, M. Seia; strip assay method (Innogenetics, Belgium) . Out of 550 patients (1100 Fondazione Policlinico Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. alleles) tested, 488 (88 .73%) did not carry any mutations, while 27 A significant percentage of CF alleles remain unidentified in most pop- patients (4 .91%) were either homozygous or compound heterozygous, ulation, even after extensive studies of the CFTR gene by PCR based 35 (6 .36%) carried only one detected mutation . Allelic frequencies for procedure . We believe that mRNA analysis may allow researchers to the six most common mutations in the positive groups were 41 .57% define the pathogenic role of sequence variations not yet defined and (F508del), 14 .61% (I148T), 11 .24% (2183AA-G), 7 .87% (N1303K), particularly splicing defects . After an extensive analysis at DNA level, in 4 .49% (W1282X) and 4 .49% (R347P) . The rest of the alleles (15 .73%) a cohort of 745 CF patients, 81 alleles (6%) were still unknown . Aim of showed rare mutations which were 3210+1G-A, 3199del6, 621+1GT, this work was to evaluate the role of the CFTR analysis at mRNA level G85E, 2789+5GA, G542X, R117H, 3849+10kbCT . No patient showed as a diagnostic method for the characterization of molecular defects in the mutations 2184delA, I507del, 1717-1GA, R334W, 3659delC, CF patients who still had one or two unidentified alleles. RNA was ex- G551D, 1078delT, R1162X, R560T, A455E, 711+5GA, R553X, Q552X, tracted from nasal epithelial cells and collected using cyto-brush from 394delTT, E60X, 2143delT, 3905insT, CFTRdele2,3(2 .1kb), 711+1G-T, 7 CF patients and 3 non-CF controls. The cDNA was amplified in six 3272-26A-T, 1898+1G-A . In conclusion, the referrals for CF mutation overlapping fragments spanning the entire CFTR gene .Disease-relat- analysis increased annually . The low mutation detection rate may be ed mutations were identified in two patients; mRNA analysis performed associated with the physicans’ attitudes as they started to use molecu- on two other related patients with a deletion of exon 2 at DNA level, lar testing in the differential diagnosis of the diseases . showed two novel transcription products carrying a deletion of exon 2-3 and an insertion of intron sequence of about 80bp near exon 6b, P01.041 respectively . Two patients presented low level of mRNA product and Allelic heterogeneity of glycogen storage disease type iii: a should be analyzed by quantitative technique . One patient showed a study of 34 patients normal profile. In conclusion our data suggest that the defects at RNA M. Hebert1, F. M. Petit1, A. Nadaj2, L. Capel1, F. Parisot1, A. Mollet-Boudjem- level could explain the pathogenic role of abnormal mRNA products in line3, P. Laforêt2, P. Labrune3; Cystic Fibrosis onset . In our experience, CFTR mRNA analysis rep- 1Department of biochemistry, hormonology and genetics, Antoine Béclère Hos- resents an effective diagnostic tool for the identification of unknown pital (AP-HP), Clamart, France, 2Institute of Myology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital molecular defects of the CFTR gene . (AP-HP), Paris, France, 3Department of paediatrics and genetics, referral Cen- ter for Inherited Metabolic Liver Diseases, Antoine Béclère Hospital (AP-HP), P01.039 Clamart, France. mALDi-tOF based multiplex assay for cystic Fibrosis newborn Introduction screening Glycogen storage disease type III (GSDIII) is due to the deficiency of P. Raña1, C. Colon2, A. Carracedo1, F. Barros1; the glycogen debranching enzyme (AGL). Deficiency of AGL activities 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, causes an incomplete glycogenolysis resulting in the accumulation, in Spain, 2Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, liver and/or muscle of an abnormal glycogen . Clinical symptoms in- Spain. clude variable tolerance to fasting, hypoglycaemia and hepatomegaly, Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a heterogeneus disease and one of the most frequently accompanied by muscular hypotonia and hypertrophic car- common autosomal recessive deseases known in the European popu- diomyopathy . To date, 71 genetic alterations of AGL gene have been lation. Since the identification of the responsible gene, CFTR, more described in GSDIII patients . than one thousand mutations have been identified, most of which are Material very rare . The number and the selection of mutations tested for vary Here we report the molecular characterisation of 34 GSDIII patients . among laboratories and countries, being common to tailor the muta- The 33 AGL gene coding exons were screened by single strand con- tion panels to local patiente population served . Limited sets of muta- formation polymorphism and sequenced when an abnormal electro- tions, as the ACMG/ACOG 25 mutations and commercially available phoretic profile was observed. The allelic distribution of the c.3199C>T panels, are insufficiently sensitive for certain groups within a diverse and c .3343G>A polymorphisms were determined on 64 control healthy population . We developed and evaluated a MALDI-TOF based mul- patients by PCR-amplification and enzymatic digestion.Clinical genetics  Results and discussion P01.044 In this population 65/68 pathologic alleles were identified, including 21 monozygotic sisters with mPs i: a year later new mutations . Our molecular study on French GSDIII patients of vari- M. O. Mkheidze1, D. S. Poliakov2, M. M. Schavlovsky1; ous ethnic ancestries confirms both the allelic heterogeneity of AGL 1Medical Academy for postgraduate study, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, gene mutations and the strong influence of individual genetic back- 2Paediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. ground on genotype-phenotype relationships . Nevertheless in some Mucopolysaccharidose type 1 (MPS1, Hurler syndrome) is an heredi- ethnical groups, some specific mutations were prevalent, probably tary because of founder effects . As previously reported, we were not able disease caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-L- to show genotype-phenotype correlations . Even so we raise the hy- iduronidase (IDUA; EC 3 .2 .1 .76) . Non degraded glycosaminoglycans pothesis of the role of the c .3199C>T and c .3343G>A polymorphisms (GAGs) are stored in the lysosomes and excreted with urine . Last on the severity of the clinical symptoms . We postulate that these muta- year we reported on a family with monozygotic sisters suffered from tions do not confer by themselves GSDIII phenotype, but their associa- MPS1 (EJHG 2007,15(S1):77) . The probands are homozygous for tion with other disease-causing mutations could accentuate muscular Q70X/Q70X . Last year they were under observation by a geneticist, manifestations . a lung diseases specialist, a neurologist, an orthopedist, an otorhino- laryngologist, a pediatrician and a surgeon . Every specialist found a P01.042 lot of the pathologic features . The disease was taking a severe pro- Clinical and molecular findings of metachromatic gressive course . Clinical symptoms of MPS I become progressively leukodystrophy; A case report of an iranian family worse . Children’s general state is serious . It was possible to launch an S. Seyedhassani1,2, T. Majidzadeh2,3, M. Rostami3, M. Dehghan Manshadi3, M. enzyme treatment (Aldurazyme® (laronidase) . Each child was treated Houshmand2,3; with enzyme infusion five times. After this treatment, both the liver and 1Research and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Na- the spleen enlarged were found to abate their size, however some tional institute of genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re- allergic symptoms appeared . The immunological study has revealed public of Iran, 3Special medical center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. antibodies to Aldurazyme . Probands need a complex follow-up . Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of impaired breakdown of sulfatides that occur throughout the P01.045 body, but are found in greatest abundance in nervous tissue, kidneys, Niemann-Pick disease, clinical course and molecular Findings; and testes . The three clinical subtypes of MLD include late-infantile A case Report of an iranian Patient MLD, comprising 50-60% of cases; juvenile MLD, comprising about T. Majidizadeh1,2, M. Dehghan Manshadi2, M. Rostami2, M. Banoei1, K. Bani- 20-30%; and adult MLD, comprising about 15-20% . Age of onset within hashemi2, M. Sanati1, M. Houshmand1,2; a family is usually similar . All individuals eventually lose motor and in- 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic tellectual functions . The disease course may be from three to ten or Republic of Iran, 2Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. more years in the late infantile-onset form and up to 20 years or more Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) is an autosomal recessive inherited in the juvenile- and adult-onset forms . lipid storage disorder that results from deficiency of the enzyme-acid ARSA is the only gene associated with arylsulfatase A deficiency. This sphingomyelinase . In people with this condition, this enzymatic defect is located on chromosome 22q13, consists of eight exons encoding causes harmful amounts of lipids to accumulate in the spleen, liver, the 507 amino acid enzyme . Over 90 largely missense mutations and lungs, bone marrow, and brain . Thus patients present with progressive polymorphisms have been identified in the ARSA gene. The majority of lung disease, hepatosplenomegaly, short stature and pancytopenia . mutations identified in patients with MLD are unique within individual NPD is divided into four main types based on the genetic cause and families . the signs and symptoms (Niemann-Pick disease type A ., B, C & D) . The patient was 5 years old boy and was referred with delayed devel- Mutations in the SMPD1 gene cause NPD types A (neurodegenerative opment, mental retardation, loss of speech, urinary incontinence, sei- form) and B (visceral form) . This gene provides instructions for produc- zure, spastic quadriplegia and hyporeflexia. EEG was abnormal and ing an enzyme called acid sphingomyelinase . Mutations in either the brain advanced dysmyelogenesis was reported in MRI . His parents NPC1 or NPC2 gene cause NPD type C . The NPC1 gene provides had consanguineous marriage and three similar cases were seen in instructions for producing a protein that is involved in the movement of familial pedigree. The identity of the mutation was confirmed by am- cholesterol and lipids within cells . plifying all eight exons by PCR which was followed by direct DNA se- The SMPD1 gene consists of six exons located on chromosome 11q quencing . The individual described in our study showed a homozygous and the NPC1 gene contains of 20 exons located on 18q11-q12 are known missense mutation at c .1173C>G (p .T391S) in exon 7 . found responsible for the most NPD cases . A 16 year old girl second of two children born of third degree consan- P01.043 guineous marriage was referred to our clinic . The long term of jaun- two cases of morquio iVB type in Bulgaria dice, delayed motor milestones, abnormal function of liver and Bone E. Paschke1, M. Stancheva2, B. Radeva2; marrow aspiration were showing Niemann Pick’s Disease . Using di- 1University of Graz,Laboratory of Metabolic diseases, Department of Pediatrics, rect-sequencing of the entire coding region and splice junctions of the Graz, Austria, 2University Children`s Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. SMPD1 and NPC1 genes is obtained and analyzed . A G/C mutation at The authors report two cases with Morquio IVB type .The first child exon 5 was found in SMPD1 gene . present with typical clinical presentation -normal intelligence, dysos- tosis multiplex .The DMB test showed increased level of MPS .Electro- P01.046 phoresis showed chondroitin sulfate.The diagnosis was confirmed by Growth and nutritional status of some micronutrients and trace low beta-galactosidase in leukocytes . The DNA analysis showed the elements in patients with phenylketonuria most common in Europe mutation W273L/W273L .The second child E. R. Raouf, N. A. Mohamed; present with skeletal anomalies, coarse facial features, astigmatism, National Research Center, Cairo - Giza, Egypt. myopia, joint hyperflexibility, dyslalia, cortical atrophy with enlarged certain micronutrient deficiencies occur either due to rigid therapeutic subarachnoidal spaces on the convex , ventricules and basal cisterns, dietary restriction, aversion to certain food stuffs or due to recurrent slightly expressed hypotonia. The electrophoresis showed unidentified episodes of vomiting and diarrhea . Semi-synthetic formula containing oligosaccharides .The enzyme assays -low beta galactosidase in leu- low phenylalanine (Phe) content provides the majority of protein and kocytes and fibroblasts.The DNA -analysis showed two nonpathogenic energy in the diet while the rest of phenylalanine are met by low protein polymophysms c .29C>T/heterozygote/, c .34T>C/homozygote/ and a natural foods . Restricted intake of high biological value protein, let chil- heterozygous state for a common mutation R201H in exon 6 of GLB1 dren with phenylketonuria (PKU) vulnerable to have lower than normal gene and a novel mutation P597S in exon 16 of GLB1 gene .A genetic plasma concentrations of certain micronutrients . Aim of the study is to counseling, carier testing was proceded to the parents and the brother assess the effects of phenylalanine restricted diet on the growth of our of the child . PKU patients after one year of dietary management . We also aimed to investigate the nutritional status of the following trace elements and micronutrients; zinc, copper, vitamins C, E, A, and B-carotene amongClinical genetics  17 PKU patients following dietary intervention coupled with multivita- P01.049 min supplementation . Data were compared to those of their matched Novel mutations in AtP7B gene detected in patients with Wilson normal controls. PKU patients have marginal vitamin A deficiency ( disease from Bashkortostan mean plasma level ; 25 .2+/-6 .62ug/dl versus 48 .5+/-10 .1ug /dl of A. Magzhanova1, A. Karunas2, R. Magzhanov1, E. Khusnutdinova2; control;highly significant (p>0.0001). Mean plasma levels of B-carotene 1Bashkirian State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Insitute of was also less than that of controls with a highly significant difference Biochemistry&Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center Russian Academy Science, (50 .65+/-15 .37ug/dl vs . 75 .80+/-19 .60 ug /dl; p<0 .001) . Mean plasma Ufa, Russian Federation. levels of zinc, copper, vitamins C and E were comparable to those of Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of hepatic copper controls without statistical significance (p<0.05). Physical growth pa- metabolism caused by mutation in the gene encoding a copper-trans- rameters were not significantly different between the two groups. Nutri- porting P-type ATPase (13q14 .3-q21 .1) and leading to heavy hepatic tional care plan for dietary intervention managing PKU children should and neurological disorders . The purpose of this research was the anal- involve periodic assessment of protein and calorie nutritional status in ysis of correlation between clinical features (neurological, neuropsy- addition to regular careful evaluation of micronutrients . chological and liver disorders) and types of mutations . We observed 71 patients and 96 members of their families from Bash- P01.047 kortostan, using clinical examination, biochemical analyses of blood the role of copper metabolism in the clinical and biochemical and instrumental methods (hepatic scanning, hepatography) . polymorphism in Phenylketonuria We had carried mutation analysis in 28 families with WD from Bash- N. Usurelu1, V. Tsourea2, V. Gordiichiuk2, O. Usurelu3; kortostan . 1The National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Using SSCP analysis followed by sequencing 19 exons (2,3,4,5,6,7 Republic of Moldova, 2State University of Medicine & Pharmacy”N. Testemit- ,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20) of ATP7B gene were identi- sanu”, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, 3Ass.of Reabilitation of Children with fied 8 mutations and 3 polymorphisms in 83,9 % of chromosomes. Phenylketonuria, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. We have detected 2 novel mutations: Ala718Pro and Lys1315_Arg- Phenylketonuria(PKU) is an inborn poly-enzymatic multi-system pathol- 1316delinsGlu . The most common mutation in Bashkortostan were ogy of the metabolism, its primary block being the Phenylalanine(Phe) His1069Gln - 48,2% and Lys1315_Arg1316delinsGlu - 10,7% .We hydroxylation that leads to severe mental retardation with clinical and found correlation between type of mutation and clinical manifestations . biochemical polymorphism . The activity of other participating enzymes Patients with new deletion had more severe clinics with early manifes- depends on the presence of microelements . Microelements determine tation and hard liver disorders . the conformation of the protein part of enzymes and their activity . The Copper is included in Phe metabolic way . There is an antagonism be- P01.050 tween the elements: Cu-Zn . The correlation change of microelements Functional characterization of 4 cBs mutations found in brings to the irregularity of the enzymes’ activity . homocystinuric patients Methods: 30 PKU children presented the troubles of sleep(83%), skin M. Cozar1,2, C. Esteves1, R. Urreizti1,2, D. Grinberg1,2, S. Balcells1,2; rashes (exudativ, maculoerythematous papules, sclerodermic)-63%, 1Departament de Genetica; IBUB, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, tics, convulsions(13%), motor stereotypy(47%), 60% children were 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBER- absolutely blond . They were investigated for the blood level of Cop- ER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain. per, Zinc and ceruloplasmin, along with the level of free amino acids Homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency (MIM#236200) is a rare auto- in blood and urine . somal recessive disorder characterized by extremely elevated levels Results: In addition to the amino acids troubles, the medium level of of homocysteine (Hcy) in plasma . More than 140 different mutations Copper was 23 .38+1 .05 µmol/l, the Zinc level -10 .5+0 .52 µmol/l, the have been described worldwide and near 1/3 of these mutations have ceruloplasmin level -234 .88+11 .93 mg/l . The low level of Zinc leads to been heterologously expressed and tested for CBS activity . In the Ibe- the process when Copper takes the place of Zinc in enzymes, and it rian Peninsula and South America the p .T191M mutation is particularly leads to functional abnormalities of enzymatic systems containing Zinc prevalent and accounts for approximately 50-70% of the alleles . The with their clinical manifestations . remaining mutations are found in a few pedigrees being mostly private . We added to the traditional diet the drug metabolical correction con- We had found 3 new mutations (p .M173del, p .P200L and p .D281N) taining the preparations of Zinc (25-50 mg/day) . As the result, the skin and a previously described one (p .P49L) in four homocistinuric pa- rashes, troubles of sleep, motor stereotypy, tics disappeared; the hair tients (tree Spanish and one Indian) . color became darker . With the aim to assess the pathogenicity of these mutations they were Conclusion: The effectiveness of the PKU treatment increases if com- expressed heterologously in E. coli and their enzyme activities were bining the low Phe diet with drug metabolical correction, considering assayed in vitro, both in the absence and presence of the CBS acti- all metabolical components . vators PLP and SAM . The wild-type CBS activity in the presence of PLP was taken as reference (100%) . The expression of the mutant P01.048 proteins was confirmed by Western-blotting in denaturing conditions. cardiomyopathy the presenting feature pathology in propionic Mutations p .M173del and p .D281N showed null activity and a com- acidaemia plete lack of response to the activators, confirming their pathogenicity, S. Farshidi, S. Saber; whereas p .P49L and p .P200L exhibited activities close to 30% and a Welfare Organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. strong response to PLP . Furthermore, p .P200L showed good response We describe cardiomyopathy as the presenting feature in two teen- to SAM . These mutations were found in two patients with a mild phe- age years boys with propionic acidaemia . 15 year old and 13 year old notype . Mutation p .P49L was found, in combination with p .R125Q, in a brothers were well and normally active until the occurrence of chest 53 year-old male who presented with a stroke and in his asymptomatic pain and dyspnoea in the elder boy. The parents were first cousins and 51 year-old sister . a 7 year old sister had died of an idiopathic cardiomyopathy 20 years earlier . Mitochondrial vitamin & cofactor cockail therapy and carnitine P01.051 therapy did not alter his symptoms; the carnitine level was normal . Hereditary hyperferritinemia cataract syndrome: characterization During his workup an elevated propionyl-carnitine level was detected, of two mutations in the L-ferritin gene similar to that observed in severe neonatal propionic acidaemia . Direct O. M. Messina-Baas1, L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta2, V. Ramirez-Sanchez1, S. A. assay of propionyl-CoA carboxylase (pcc) revealed 4% residual activ- Cuevas-Covarrubias3; ity . Mutation analysis demonstrated that both brothers had G188R and 1Hospita General de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Hospital General de Mex- N536D mutations resulting from c .562 G>A and c .1606 A>G . These ico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Hospita General de Mexico, Fac Medicina, UNAM, brothers represent unique cases of propionic acidaemia with initially Mexico D.F., Mexico. normal cardiac function . This presentation of metabolic cardiomyopa- Hereditary hyperferritinemia cataract syndrome, an autosomal domi- thy may be amenable to medical therapy if detected before irreversible nant disease, is characterized by early onset bilateral cataract . Affect- cardiomyopathy has occurred . ed individuals show high levels of serum ferritin without iron overload . Elevated serum ferritin results from misregulation of L-ferritin transla-Clinical genetics  tion . Ferritin is the major intracellular iron store protein and consists H vere phenotype than single knockouts: single mutants which are het- (heavy) and L (light) subunits which are encoded in chromosomes 11 erozygote for the other subunit and double mutants show less viability, and 19, respectively . The iron responsive element (IRE) in the 5’ un- higher stone rate and a more severe urinary system damage . translated region (5’-UTR) of L-ferritin mRNA interacts with trans-act- Supported by MEC (SAF2003-08940-01/02 and BFU2006-14600- ing iron regulatory proteins (IRPs) to regulate ferritin translation . Muta- C02-01/02/BMC), The European Union (EUGINDAT; LSHM-CT- tions in the 5’UTR of the L-ferritin gene, result in reduced affinity for 2003-502852), Generalitat de Catalunya (2006 SGR00018 and 2005 IRPs and subsequently in constitutive L-ferritin synthesis which results SGR00947) . in congenital cataract . In the present study, we analyzed two fami- lies with early onset bilateral cataract and marked hyperferritinemia . P01.054 Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood and the IRE L-fer- Single exon deletions in the PAH gene in Polish PKU patients ritin gene was completely sequenced . Morphology of cataracts of both M. Bik-Multanowski, J. J. Pietrzyk; families showed different phenotypes . Onset of cataract symptoms Chair of Pediatrics, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. ranged from 15 year-old to 40 year-old . No other ocular or systemic The majority of molecular defects causing phenylketonuria (PKU) are anomalies were found to be present . Propositi underwent surgery with missense mutations of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH), satisfactory results . Levels of ferritin serum were compatible with hy- which are detectable with use of classical molecular techniques basing perferritinemia . DNA analysis of both families detected two different on single exon amplification, heteroduplex analysis and sequencing. misssense mutations in the loop region of the L-ferritin gene, one of The cumulative mutation detection rate in various groups of PKU-pa- them previously reported, these mutations in the L-ferritin gene result tients reaches 90-99% . However, the above procedure fails to detect hereditary hyperferritinemia cataract syndrome . single exon deletions . The aim of this study was to establish simple, non-laborious PCR- P01.052 based methods for detection of three PKU-causing single exon dele- Analysis of the CTNS gene in spanish patients with cystinosis tions and to assess their frequency in Polish PKU-patients . disease methods: An attempt to detect Ex5del955, Ex5del4232ins268 and J. Macias, M. Rodes, J. M. Hernandez, M. J. Coll; EX3del4765 deletions was undertaken with use of published data on Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic. CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. the mutated sequence of the PAH gene . DNA samples from 25 PKU Cystinosis (MIM #219800) is an autosomal recessive disorder charac- Polish patients were analyzed, in whom only one or no PKU-causing terized by intra-lysosomal accumulation of cystine due to an impaired mutations (a single case) were identified despite extensive analysis transport of free cystine out of lysosomes . performed with classical methods (in the remaining 245 patients, in Three phenotypical forms have been described according to the age whom DNA samples were tested, both mutations were found) . of onset and severity of the clinical symptoms: infantile, juvenile and Results: PCR protocols for amplification of mutated alleles were ocular nonnephropathic cystinosis . successfully established . Following PCR primers were used: Exon- The gene for cystinosis, CTNS, has 12 exons and encodes a 367 ami- 5del955for-gcacattggaatccacagcaagg, no-acid lysosomal membrane protein called cystinosin . Up to now 84 Exon5del955rev-gtctctagactctaggagtccccag, Exon5del4232for- different mutations have been described . gttcccattctgtcagttgcctg, Exon5del4232rev-ggaggatctgtctccgctctc, Ex- We have analyzed the CTNS exons and intron boundaries, as well on3del4765nestedfor-gcattgtccaagtacctagcctgg (nested PCR), Exon- as the promoter region in 21 unrelated Spanish cystinosis patients, in 3del4765for-acaggcacacaccaccatgc and Exon3del4765rev-gccactat- order to find possible genotype-phenotype correlations and to enable gggattgggtgacc . In the tested samples, six cases of Ex5del4232ins268 identification of carriers and prenatal diagnosis.In this study, 11 differ- deletion were found as well as one case of each of the other deletions, ent mutations were identified, 5 of which are novel. The 57-kb deletion which were interestingly detected in the same patient’s sample . is the most prevalent mutation in our country (33,3% of the alleles), as conclusion: Ex5del955, Ex5del4232ins268 and EX3del4765 dele- seen in other studied populations . This deletion together with other 4 tions in the PAH gene can be detected with use of simple PCR-based mutations (previously described p .T7fsX6, p .T216fsX11, p .G308R and methods and are present in around 2%-3% of Polish PKU-patients . p .M1T which is novel) accounted for 80% of the alleles, which facili- Supported by government grant for scientific research tates molecular diagnosis and genetic counselling in this disease . (N40708032/3085) P01.053 P01.055 characteritzation of cystinuria double knockout for b0,+At and Detection of mutations in two families with Ethylmalonic rBAt encephalopathy using real-time PcR M. Espino Guarch1, M. Font-Llitjós1,2, R. Sillué1,2, S. Mañas1, J. Visa3, M. V. Tiranti1, R. Mineri1, T. Georgiou2, G. Stylianidou3, A. Drousiotou2; Palacín4,5, V. Nunes1,5; 1Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani Center for the 1Centro de Genética Médica y Molecular IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Study of Children’s Mitochondrial Disorders, National Neurological Institute Spain, 2CIBERER-U730, Barcelona, Spain, 3Animal Facility Service IDIBELL, “Carlo Besta”, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Biochemical Genetics, The Cyprus L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 4Parc Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Paediatric Spain, 5Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Neurology, Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. Cystinuria is a common recessive disorder of renal reabsorption of cys- Ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE, OMIM # 602473) was diagnosed tine and dibasic amino acids that results in urolithiasis of cystine . Cys- in three children from two unrelated Cypriot families . They presented tinuria is caused by defects in the amino acid transporter rBAT/b0,+AT . with neurodevelopmental delay, prominent pyramidal and extrapyrimi- Mutantions in SLC3A1 (rBAT) cause cystinuria type A, characterized dal signs, recurrent petechiae, orthostatic acrocyanosis and abnormal by a silent phenotype in heterozygotes (phenotype I) . Mutations in in MRI images . They had persistent lactic acidemia, markedly elevated SLC7A9 (b0,+AT) cause cystinuria type B, which heterozygotes in most urinary excretion of ethylmalonic acid, 2-methylsuccinate, isobutyryl- cases hyperexcrete cystine and dibasic amino acids (phenotype non- glycine and isovalerylglycine, and moderately raised butyrylcarnitine I) . The Slc7a9 null knockout mouse model (Stones) and the Slc3a1 in blood . In one patient muscle cytochrome C oxidase activity was knockin (Pebbles) develop cystinuria B and A respectively . All homozy- greatly reduced. The diagnosis was confirmed by westernblot analysis gous mutants hyperexcrete cystine and the three dibasic amino acids, in fibroblasts which showed the absence of the ETHE1 protein. Mo- and ~40% of them present cystine calculi in the urinary system . To lecular analysis of the ETHE1 gene was carried out using both PCR facilitate in vivo investigation of cystinuria we have generated double and sequencing. The proband of the first family was a compound het- knockout mice by crossing the two cystinuria mice models (Stone and erozygote for a deletion in exon 4 and a missense mutation in exon Pebbles) and we have characterized the nine genotype combinations 5, L185R . In order to establish the presence of the deletion in a het- of the F2 in mixed background C57BL/6J-C3H . erozygous state, we carried out quantitative real-time PCR on DNA Mices were X-ray analyzed at 2 .5 and 8 months to appraise calculi extracted from both the patient and his healthy parents . The proband formation . Histopatology studies and metabolic cage experiments to from the second family was homozygous for the deletion in exon 4 and collect urine to quantify amino acids excretation were also performed . in this case quantitative real-time PCR demonstrated that the parents Preliminary results indicate that double knockout mice has more se- were both heterozygotes for the deletion . The exon 4 deletion and theClinical genetics 0 L185R missense mutation, previously reported in EE patients, were mutations in the GLA gene. DNA sequencing also allowed the identifica- shown to be associated with the absence of the ETHE1 protein . tion of two additional hemizygotes (half-brothers of the proband) in one family . P01.056 Discussion . Screening for Fabry disease should be considered in all mutation analysis of Fabry disease in Argentina cases of unexplained hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . Its recognition is im- G. P. Serebrinsky1, F. M. Masllorens2, H. Amartino3, R. Valdez4, A. Fainboim5, portant since specific enzyme replacement therapy is now available. The G. Cabrera6, J. M. Politei7; proposed novel filter paper method favours the collection, storage and 1Laboratorio de Biología y Patología Molecular, Buenos Aires, Argentina, shipment of samples. It is simple and efficient for screening programs. 2Hospital Nacional Profesor A. Posadas, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Hospital Universitario Austral, Servicio de Neurología Infantil, Pilar, Provincia de Buenos P01.058 Aires, Argentina, 4Hospital Alemán, Servicio de Genética Médica, Buenos Aires, An update in the molecular analysis of classical galactosaemia Argentina, 5Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutierrez, Centro de enfermedades in spain and Portugal: Eight new mutations in seventeen new lisosomales, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 6Clínica Adventista, Buenos Aires, Ar- patients gentina, 7Sección Neurología, Instituto de Neurociencias, Fundación Favaloro, L. Gort1, E. Quintana1, S. Moliner1, L. González-Quereda1, T. López-Hernán- Buenos Aires, Argentina. dez1, P. Briones1,2; Fabry disease is an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid me- 1Institut de Bioquímica Clínica - CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2CSIC, Barce- tabolism, resulting from mutations in the alpha-galactosidase A gene lona, Spain. (GLA) . Very few reports on mutation analysis for Fabry disease in Classical galactosaemia is an autosomal recessive inherited metabolic the Argentinean population are available in literature . Here we report disorder due to mutations in the galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransfer- mutation analysis in 16 unrelated Argentinean families with Fabry dis- ase gene (GALT) . ease . Methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from affected males and We previously reported molecular analysis of 83 Spanish and Portu- female relatives, and the entire alpha-Gal A coding as well as flanking guese galactosaemic patients . Here we present the molecular results intronic sequences were amplified by PCR and analyzed by automat- of another seventeen unreported affected individuals . ed sequencing . Thirteen patients of Spanish origin were analysed . We detected six Results: Thirteen different mutations were identified, including eight alleles carrying p .Q188R, accounting for 23% . Other six alleles (23%) missense mutations (D155H, C174G, C202Y, N215S, Y216C, D264Y, were identified with the mutation p.K285N. Remarkably, the two pa- A292T, L415P); two nonsense (R227X, E398X); one splice site muta- tients that were homozygous for this change were of North African tion IVS4-1G→A and two small deletions: one complex G144fsX15 origin. We also identified seven novel mutations: p.Q9X, c.328+2T>C, (del c .431-442, del c .448-459) and K374fsX15 (del c .1122-1125 del c .328+33G>A, p .I170N, p .C180F, p .V233L, p .P257L . Taking into ac- AGGA) . Six were novel mutations (underlined) and seven were previ- count all the Spanish galactosaemic diagnosed patients, mutation ously described. Mutation analysis provided precise identification of p.Q188R is still the most frequent mutation identified (43.7%). The sec- 33 heterozygotes among female relatives and detected a de novo mu- ond most frequent mutation is p .L195P (13 .3%) followed by p .K285N tation (IVS4-1G→A). Discussion: It is generally assumed that Fabry (12 .5%) . mutations are private; however this does not seem to be the case of Four new Portuguese patients were analysed . In four alleles p .Q188R our sample . Mutation L415P was found in four different families pre- was detected, representing 50%. One novel mutation was identified, sumably unrelated by pedigree analysis . Haplotype analyses with mic- p .F171C . Mutations p .L195P and p .K285N still remain undetected in rosatellite markers tightly linked to the GLA gene are being performed Portuguese patients . In the whole group of 36 Portuguese patients we in order to define whether this mutation is recurrent in Argentina or the have analysed until now, mutation p .Q188R remains the most frequent result of a founder effect. These studies further define the heteroge- identified (57%). It is worth mentioning that this is the only frequent neity of mutations causing Fabry disease and permit precise carrier mutation as the rest of changes identified were found only in one or identification, which has consequences for genetic counselling and for two alleles each . treatment . Our results confirm the already published observation that p.Q188R is the most frequent mutation in Iberian Peninsula galactosaemic pa- P01.057 tients (48,5%) . screening for Fabry disease using alpha-galactosidase assay on Moreover, our molecular analyses on these seventeen new galacto- dried blood discs : a prospective nationwide multicentric study saemic patients provide eight novel mutations to the database with D. P. Germain1, N. Miri2, T. Damy3, K. Ly4, A. Millaire5, P. Charron6, A. Martin- more than 200 disease-causing mutations already reported . Mista2, K. Benistan2, T. Tran2, E. Caudron7, P. Prognon7, L. Gouya8, C. Boileau8, A. Bouzamondo9, C. Boucly2, A. Hagège10; P01.059 1Université de Versailles - St Quentin en Yvelines, Garches, France, 2Hôpital Normal HPRt coding region in complete and partial HPRt Raymond Poincaré, Garches, France, 3Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, deficiency. 4CHU, Limoges, France, 5CHRU, Lille, France, 6Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, M. G. García, R. J. Torres, C. Prior, J. G. Puig; France, 7Faculté de Pharmacie, Chatenay-Malabry, France, 8Hôpital Ambroise Hopital La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Paré, Boulogne, France, 9Société Française de Cardiologie, Paris, France, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is an X-linked recessive inborn error of me- 10Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. tabolism due to a virtually complete lack of hypoxanthine-guanine Background . Fabry disease (FD, OMIM 301500) is a multisystemic and phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) activity (OMIM 300322) . Partial clinically heterogeneous disease resulting from a deficiency of the ly- deficiency of HPRT (OMIM 300323) is characterized by the effects of sosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A . Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy excess uric acid synthesis and a continuum spectrum of neurologi- is a frequent symptom of the classic form of the disease and a cardiac cal manifestations, without the manifestations of full-blown Lesch-Ny- variant, characterized by residual alpha-galactosidase A activity and a han syndrome . Both diseases have been associated with mutations milder phenotype, has also been reported . In a prospective nationwide in the HPRT gene . These mutations are heterogeneous and disperse multicentric study, we have studied the prevalence of Fabry disease in a throughout the entire HPRT gene . In 2005 Dawson et al described, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy referral population . for the first time, an individual with gout in whom HPRT deficiency ap- Methods. We have developed and validated an assay of alpha-galacto- peared to be due to a defect in gene regulation . sidase A activity on dried blood paper discs . Using this method, we have Patients and methods: Four patients with partial HPRT deficiency and assayed alpha-galactosidase A activity in 330 adult patients affected with one patient with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome were studied . The RNA and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who had never been diagnosed with FD . RNA-free genomic DNA samples were isolated from whole blood . Results . Three patients (0 .9%) were found to exhibit low alpha-galacto- Analysis of HPRT coding region was performed by Reverse transcrip- sidase A activity in dried blood spots. This was confirmed by a second tion of patients RNA, amplification of HPRT cDNA by PCR and auto- determination of alpha-galactosidase activity in leukocytes . The three mated sequencing . HPRT mRNA expression was determined by Real- patients presented neither the typical clinical signs of classic FD, such as Time PCR technology . All nine exons of the human HPRT gene, its acroparesthesias or hypohidrosis, nor kidney insufficiency, suggesting a intronic flanking sequences, and gene regulatory sequences were am- variant form of FD . All patients with low alpha-galactosidase activity had plified and automated sequenced. Results: All patients showed a nor-Clinical genetics  mal HPRT coding sequence . Determined by mean of Real-Time PCR P01.062 technology, these patients showed markedly decreased HPRT mRNA mutational spectrum and phenotype-genotype correlation in expression . Finally, we have analysed genomic regulatory sequences spanish methylmalonic Acidemia with Homocystinuria, cblc from HPRT gene in these patients but no mutation was found . type Conclusions: This is the first report of a patient with Lesch-Nyhan syn- B. Pérez, A. Jorge-Finnigan, B. Merinero, L. R Desviat, F. Leal, E. Richard, M. drome due to a defect in HPRT gene expression regulation . Ugarte; Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa. CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. P01.060 Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria, cblC type is the most clinical, biochemical, and molecular diagnosis of L-2- frequent genetic disorder of vitamin B metabolism . We present the 12 hydroxyglutaric aciduria; Report of three iranian families with mutational spectrum of 22 patients, classified belonging to the cblC six affected cases complementation group by biochemical and cellular approaches, to Y. Shafeghati1,2, G. Vakili3, M. Noruzinia4, R. Colombo PhD.5; provide insight on the phenotype-genotype correlations and on the 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical genetics search for new therapeutical targets . The mutational spectrum includ- department, Sarem women’s hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3private ed five previously described mutations (M1L, R91fs, R132X, R153X, general practitioner, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 42- Medical Genetics R161X) and one new splicing change (IVS1nt2T>G) . The most fre- Department, Sarem Women’s Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 53- quent change was the known mutation R91fs caused by a single Laboratory of Human Molecular Biology and Genetics Catholic University of the nucleotide duplication in position 271 which accounted for 82% of Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy. the mutant alleles characterized and 77% of the cblC in homozygous Background: L-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a novel autosomal reces- fashion . Up to date only some family studies have been performed to sive neurometabolic disorder . First described by “Duran” in 1980 about rule out the presence of a big deletion . The frequency of c .271dupA 100 cases have been reported . It is characterized by slowly progres- is higher than described in other studied populations such as the Ital- sive neurological dysfunction with cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal sign, ian and the Portuguese cases. These results allow the confirmation intellectual decline, seizure etc . . MRI scanning is highly characteristic of the disease in our population by specific mutational analysis. The and screening for organic acid(L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid) in the urine, other changes were rare mutations identified in one or two alleles (2 serum, and CSF is diagnostic . to 4%) . All the mutations found produce a premature truncation codon . Materials & Methods: We have investigated three Iranian families with The majority of the patients exhibited a neonatal severe presentation . six affected children aged (4 to 16 years) who were suspected for this Although most patients responded biochemically to B12 they exhibited rare disorder, by urine organic acid assay and MRI scanning . In two a fatal outcome . Further studies of the physiopathology of the disease families we analyzed the Duranin gene which is responsible for hy- to provide insight about the severity of the symptoms despite of B12 droxy-glutarate dehydrogenase . responsiveness as well as the in vitro use of drugs to read-through the Results: Affected cases were evaluated because of clinical findings. PTC mutations will be discussed . Urine levels of L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid were strongly increased . MRI scanning of the brain showed hyper intense signal on T2 weighted P01.063 images of the sub-cortical white matter, and basal ganglia in all of the Identification of 4 novel mutations in the NPC gene in spanish patients. We have identified the mutation in one of the families. It was patients with Niemann-Pick type c disease a large deletion encompassing at least exons 7 and 8, the process is L. Rodríguez Pascau1,2,3, G. Sánchez Ollé1,2,3, J. Macias4,3, M. Coll4,3, L. Vilage- ongoing yet . In this family, because the mother became pregnant we liu1,2,3, D. Grinberg1,2,3; did PND, unfortunately the fetus was affected in homozygote state . 1Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3CI- Conclusions: Because of its inheritance pattern(autosomal recessive), BERER, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, and high rate of consanguineous marriages in Iran, the prevalence of Barcelona, Spain. this disorder might be higher, between mentally handicapped patients, Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) is a rare autosomal-recessive lysosomal especially those with macrocephaly . So we should consider this rare storage disorder characterised by severe progressive neurological de- entity in our differential diagnosis . terioration . The disease is caused by mutations in the NPC1 or NPC2 genes . Approximately 95% of patients bear mutations in the NPC1 P01.061 gene, which encodes a late endosomal integral membrane glycopro- Lysosomal membrane permeabilization triggers cathepsin D tein, and about 5% of the patients show mutations in the NPC2 gene, secretion and cell death in lysosomal storage diseases encoding a small soluble lysosomal protein with cholesterol-binding D. L. Medina, R. de Pablo, V. Bouché, A. Ballabio; properties . Both genes are involved in cholesterol and glycolipid traf- Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy. ficking and transport, so NPC patients show accumulation of unesteri- Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are a group of inherited meta- fied cholesterol and glycosphingolipids in the lysosomal/late endo- bolic disorders due to the defective activity of lysosomal hydrolases somal system . and characterized by accumulation of undegraded substrates in the A mutational analysis was carried out in 5 non-related individuals af- lysosomes, leading to peripheral organ cell damage, neurodegenera- fected by this disorder . Genomic and cDNA from the patients were am- tion, and premature death in most cases (Saftig et al, 2005) . Here we plified and sequenced. All the NPC1 mutant alleles were identified; 4 of have used our mouse model for Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) them have not been described before and were not found in 100 con- (Settembre et al, 2007), to study the intracellular signals triggered by trol alleles . The new changes were: one missense mutation: p .F1079S intralysosomal storage. Using fluorescent weak bases to examine the (c .3236T>C); one nonsense mutation: p .E1089X (c .3265G>T) and two acidic lysosomal compartment from isolated splenocytes and mouse intronic changes that affect the splicing process: c .2604+5G>A in the embryonic fibroblasts, we have found an increased lysosomal mem- donnor splice site of intron 17 which promotes skipping of exon 17 and brane permeabilization (LMP) in MSD cells compared with their wild- c .1554-1009G>A that is located in intron 9 and results in the incorpo- type counterparts . These results suggest a loss of the intralysosomal ration of 194 pb of intron 9 in the cDNA as a new exon . Some of the acidic pH that can be mimicked in wild-type cells by the addition of the mutant alleles caused degradation of the mRNA by the nonsense-me- specific inhibitor of vesicular proton pump, Bafilomycin A1. Lysosomal diate RNA decay mechanism . To identify these mutations, cyclohexi- destabilization in MSD cells correlates with several hallmarks of apop- mide treatment of cultured fibroblast was required. tosis such as lysosomal secretion of the aspartate protease cathepsin The financial support from Fundación Niemann-Pick España and from D, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, release of cytochrome CIBERER (INTRA/07/720 .1) is acknowledged . C, activation of caspase-3, and annexin V staining . Interestingly, LMP seems to be a common sign of other LSDs as suggested by the in- creased LMP observed in splenocytes from a mouse model of Hunter disease . Together, these evidences support the role of LMP and the release of lysosomal proteases in the initiation and execution of apop- tosis in pathological situations such as LSDs .Clinical genetics  P01.064 the PAH gene are main determinant of PKU severity . In the study on isolation and characterization of a novel cHO cell mutant 34 unrelated patients with phenylketonuria from Serbia, we identified defective in peroxisome biogenesis factor, PEX, containing 19 disease-causing mutations: L48S, R408W, P281L, E390G, R261Q, aberrant huge peroxisomes R158Q, I306V, IVS12+1G>A, Q20X, R111X, V177L, P225T, R261X, K. Ghaedi1,2,3, Y. Fujiki4,5; L15/S16fsCTdel, S231F, R252Q, R297H, IVS10-11G>A and R413P . 1Biology Dept., Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Royan Institute,Isfahan Re- According to pretreatment serum phenylalanine level, patients were search campus, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biology Dept, Faculty of sci- assigned to classic PKU (65%), mild PKU (35%) and MHP (0%) . The ences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 4Biology Dept., Faculty of Sciences, most frequent mutation in Serbia is L48S . Since genotype-phenotype Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 5JST, SORST, Tokyo, Japan. correlation inconsistency for L48S mutation has been previously re- Peroxsiomal Biogenesis Disorders (PBDs) are characterized as the ported, we investigated genotypes involving L48S and their correla- congenital cerebro-hepato-renal disorders which are mostly due to the tion with phenotypes . The homozygous patient for L48S had classic defects in the biogenesis of peroxisomes . In order to study molecu- PKU . Also, in combination with null mutations, L48S was associated lar mechanisms of peroxisome biogenesis, CHO-K1 cells have been with severe phenotype. Our findings on the effect of other mutations widely used by our group as the best model cells . Using CHO-K1 cells were mainly in concordance with previous European studies . How- stably transformed dually with PEX2 (to prevent frequent isolation of ever, functional and structural effect of the S231F mutation was not pex2 mutant cells) and EGFP fused downstream of N-terminally 40 previously analyzed . Therefore, we characterized S231F PAH protein amino acid residues of Pex3p, termed TkaEG3-40 cells, we have start- in prokaryotic and eukaryotic expression systems . In both systems the ed a procedure of mutagenizing with MNNG as a chemical mutagenic mutant enzyme was unstable . Its residual enzyme activity was lower component and following culture in the presence of P9OH with subse- than 10% showing that S231F is a severe mutation . We have found no quently an exposure to UV . By the above approach, we have isolated GroESL chaperone effect and slightly positive effect of the BH4 on the several CHO cell mutant cell lines defective in peroxisome biogenesis stabilization of the protein structure. These findings elucidated severe which were resemble to the patients’ firoblasts of the PBDs. One of phenotype of the patient with L48S/S231F genotype . In conclusion, CHO cell mutant colonies which, showed to have morphologic aber- we showed that L48S is consistently severe PAH gene mutation in rant huge peroxisomes but very few in numbers, termed ZPEG301 Serbian population . cells . ZPEG301 cells belonged to the PEX16 complementation group as numerous punctuate structures of peroxisomes were restored after P01.067 its cDNA transfection in to those cells . Moreover temperature shift as- Distribution of Xmn i alleles at the phenylalanine hydroxylase say to permissive temperature at 30 degrees of centigrade showed a gene in Republic of moldova moderate increase in peroxisomal structures in ZPEG301 cells which A. P. Gavriliuc1, S. A. Groppa2; is presumably due to the stabilization of peroxisomal membrane pro- 1National Center of Reproductive Health & Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Re- teins such as PMP70 . Biochemical pattern of peroxisomal proteins public of Moldova, 2State University of Medicine & Pharmacology, Chisinau, have documented our hypothesis . Taken together these results dem- Republic of Moldova. onstrate that Pex16p is involved in morphological control and division Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a common autosomal recessive disease of of peroxisome in mammals besides of its main role in peroxisomal amino acid metabolism caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) biogenesis . deficiency. The human PAH gene has been localized to 12q22-24, comprises 13 exons spread over 90 kb of genomic DNA (Lidsky, 1984) . P01.065 The complete 2,4 kb cDNA (Kwok, 1985) can be used to detect ten dif- molecular diagnostics of phenylketonuria ferent RFLPs located within the PAH locus . E. Polák1, A. Ficek1, L. Kádaši2; Genomic DNA was extracted and examined by standard procedures 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular from 68 families with classical PKU, i .e . 272 parental chromosomes . Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, PCR amplification of a 205 bp fragment containing the Xmn I RFLP site Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia. was performed as described previously by Goltsov (1992) . A total 136 Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder mutant and 140 normal chromosomes were analyzed for Xmn I poly- arising from the deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which morphic restriction site (GAANN/NNTTC) at the PAH gene region . catalyses the essential convertion of phenylalanine (Phe) to tyrosine Frequencies of normal alleles in population Republic of Moldova (Tyr) . In the majority of cases, PKU is caused by mutations in the PAH (0,593; 0,407) are not significantly different from European populations gene, and it presents with different phenotypes which are classified (0,618; 0,382) (χ2 = 0,2; p>0,7) . The level of observed heterozygosity in according to Phe tolerance . More than 500 mutations have been de- population of Moldova (0,48) is similar with European countries (0,47) . scribed world-wide and the PAH enzyme has been fully characterized . The distribution of mutant PKU alleles (0,772; 0,228) in our study is The incidence of the disease in the Slovak population had been esti- differs significantly from those observed in European (0,654; 0,346) (χ2 mated to be 1:10 000 newborn . Seven causative mutations which have = 4,9; p<0,05). The Xmn I alleles in our populations had a significant been so far identified make up 70 % of all PKU alleles. Thus the aim of difference in the distribution among normal and mutant chromosomes our work was to carry out a complete mutation analysis in a sample of (χ2 = 9,25; p<0,01) . Frequency of informative cases by RFLP-analysis 48 unrelated PKU patients with 1 or with no known mutation . The DH- of Xmn I alleles from PKU families is 32,6% that provide a tool for PLC (Denaturating High Performance Liquid Chromatography) method molecular diagnosis of these disease and carrier status in Republic was applied for screening all 13 coding exons of the PAH gene . Identi- of Moldova . fied heterozygous fragments were subsequently sequenced to charac- terize the DNA variants . Sequencing revealed 16 mutations (of which P01.068 1 is new) not previously found in the Slovak population, and 2 frequent mutational analysis of 11 spanish Gangliosidosis Gm2 (sandhoff polymorphisms in the coding region of the PAH gene . Corresponding disease) patients frequencies for all mutations were estimated, and the classification ac- N. de Olano, A. Chabas, M. J. Coll; cording to phenotypic categories of PKU was identified. Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic. CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. Sandhoff disease (OMIM #268800) is a recessively inherited neurode- P01.066 generative disorder in which the catabolism of ganglioside GM2 is im- Assessment of the severity of the PAH gene mutations detected paired, leading to its intralysosomal accumulation primarily in neurons . in serbian population: genotype-phenotype correlation and The underlying genetic defect resides in the HEXB gene encoding the functional studies in vitro β subunit of β-hexosaminidase. We analyzed the HEXB exons and M. Stojiljkovic1, B. Perez2, L. R. Desviat2, C. Aguado2, M. Ugarte2, S. Pavlovic1; intron boundaries in 11 unrelated affected Spanish patients . 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, We found 11 different mutations, five of which were new. The novel 2Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain. changes detected, all corresponding to acute phenotypes, include a Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by deficiency of hepatic enzyme, one-base deletion (c .171delG), two nonsense changes (p .R170X and phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) . Although numerous factors contrib- p .W514X), a missense substitution (p .R533C), and an in-frame dele- ute to the PKU phenotype, several studies showed that mutations in tion of 6 amino acids (c.800_817del). In six patients, we identified sixClinical genetics  mutations, all of them previously described in the literature: two juve- sample we performed genetic analysis of HEXA gene by direct se- nile patients, one of which was homozygous for p .R505Q and the other quence analysis . It was found heterozygote delG mutation in exon 14 compound heterozygous for c .1509-26G>A; ,and four infantile patients of HEXA (β subunit). homozygous for p .P417L, p .Y266D, c .782_785delCTTT and c .1305_ 1306delAG, respectively. Overall our findings point out to 3 particularly P01.071 interesting aspects of the mutational spectrum of the Spanish popula- mutations in the urocanase gene UROC cause urocanic tion: Null frequency of the common 16 Kb deletion at 5’ of the gene, an aciduria outstanding degree of homozygosity ( 72% of patients) and a remark- C. Espinós1, M. Pineda2, D. Martínez-Rubio1, A. Ormazabal2, M. A. Vilaseca2, able prevalence of an allele carrying a deletion of a single nucleotide L. J. M. Spaapen3, F. Palau1, R. Artuch2; (c .171delG) which accounts for 27% of total mutant alleles . 1Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC and Centro de Investigación Bio- médica En Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 2Hospi- P01.069 tal Sant Joan de Déu and Centro de Investigación Biomédica En Red de Enfer- mutation analysis in spanish and moroccan Patients with medades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 3University Hospital Maastricht, Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC (Sanfilippo C Syndrome) Maastricht, The Netherlands. I. Canals1,2,3, M. J. Coll4,3, A. Chabás4,3, D. Grinberg1,2,3, L. Vilageliu1,2,3; The urocanase deficiency (MIM 276880) is a rare disease with only 1Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3CI- two reported cases, due to the abnormal activity of the urocanase en- BERER, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, zyme (histidine pathway) that catalyzes the transformation from uro- Barcelona, Spain. canic acid to formininoglutamate (FIGLU) . The biochemical hallmark Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) describes any inherited lysosomal stor- is the urocanic aciduria . We have investigated the urocanase gene age disorder resulting from inability to catabolize glycosaminoglycans . UROC1 gene in a girl presenting ataxia with mental retardation (IQ MPS III, or Sanfilippo Syndrome, is the type of MPS that results from = 54) and extremely high levels of urocanic acid in urine, ranging be- a deficient heparan sulfate degradation and presents an autosomal tween 158-202 mmol/mol creatinine (normal values below 10 mmol/ recessive inheritance . Clinical symptoms are similar for all types of mol creatinine) . The genetic analysis of the UROC1 gene revealed that MPS III and they are due to the lysosomal storage of heparan sulfate . the propositus is a compound heterozygote for the mutations p .L70P The most important feature is the progressive and severe deterioration (c .209T>C) and p .R450C (c .1348C>T) . Her healthy father was hetero- of the central nervous system during childhood . zygous carrier of the p .R450C mutation . In silico analysis showed that HGSNAT is the gene responsible for MPS IIIC that has been recently the L70 residue could form part of an α-helix, and then the change to identified. It encodes the acetyl CoA:α-glucosaminide N-acetyltrans- proline may disrupt the α-helix, possibly resulting in an alteration of ferase, which is a lysosomal membrane protein required to N-acetylate the structure of the N-terminal region . The R450 residue forms a salt- the terminal glucosamine residues of heparan sulfate . To date, about bridge with the urocanate, substrate of the urocanase . Presence of an fourty mutations have been described in MPS IIIC patients . arginine residue as the consequence of the mutation would interrupt In this study we have identified the mutant alleles in five Spanish and the urocanase interaction with urocanate . Consequently, the in silico one Moroccan patients . A total of six different alleles have been found predictions suggest that both mutations in the UROC1 gene, p .L70P in this mutational analysis, five of which are novel. One of these al- and p.R450C, are pathologic. We suggest that urocanase deficiency leles contains a double mutation (c .318+1G>A, p .P265Q) previously or urocanic aciduria is a Mendelian disorder of the histidine metabo- described, three alleles bear splice-site mutations (c .456-2A>G, lism caused by mutations in the UROC1 gene . The toxic effect of the c .717+1G>A and c .1462-1G>A) and the other two contain missense urocanic acid and also, the possible folate deficiency would play a no- mutations (p .G452V and p .L473P) . Furthermore, two new possible table role in the physiopathology of this rare condition . single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) have been identified in intron 1 and intron 5, respectively . Samples from three new patients, one P01.072 Spanish and two Moroccan, have recently arrived and are currently mutation screening in genes coding for AtP7A, AtP7B and being analyzed . AtOX1 in czech patients with menkes disease and Wilson This work is being carried out in collaboration with the MPS España. disease The financial support from this association is acknowledged. L. Pospisilova1, L. Kralik1, R. Bruha2, Z. Marecek2, E. Flachsova1, P. Fruhauf3, A. Kral1, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1; P01.070 1Department of Pediatrics,1st School of Medicine, Charles University Prague, Novel mutation in tay-sachs (HEXA gene) Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of Internal Medicine 4,1st School of M. Rostami1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, T. majidizadeh1, M. Nateghi2, M. Housh- Medicine, Charles University Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Gen- mand1; eral Hospital Prague, Department of Pediatrics, Prague 2, Czech Republic. 1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islam- Copper plays an essential role as a cofactor for many enzymes . There ic Republic of Iran, 2Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. are two intracellular copper transferring P-ATPases in human: ATP7A Tay-Sachs disease is a fatal genetic autosomal recessive disorder, and ATP7B, and a chaperone ATOX1 which delivers copper to them . most commonly occurring in children, those results in progressive Deficiency of ATP7A causes X-linked Menkes disease (MD). A defect in destruction of the nervous system . Tay-Sachs is caused by the ab- ATP7B causes autosomally recessive inherited Wilson disease (WD) . sence of a vital enzyme called hexosaminidase-A (Hex-A) . Tay-Sachs Here we report the mutational analysis of the ATP7A and ATP7B genes disease, the prototype hexosaminidase A deficiency, is characterized of 4 patients with MD and 130 patients with WD from the Czech Re- by progressive weakness, loss of motor skills, decreased attentive- public . ness, and increased startle response beginning between three and Genomic DNA was used to amplify 23 exons of the ATP7A gene and six months of age with progressive evidence of neurodegeneration, 21 exons of the ATP7B gene . PCR products were examined by RFLP including seizures, blindness, spasticity, eventual total incapacitation, and sequenced . We introduced fast mutation screening based on and death, usually before age four years . The infant gradually regress- differences in melting temperature of DNA fragments with sequence es, and is eventually unable to crawl, turn over, sit or reach out . variations . We performed mutation analysis of the ATOX1 gene in pa- The HEXA gene provides instructions for making one part of enzyme tients whose clinical and biochemical phenotypes suggest impaired called (beta-hexosaminidase A). Specifically, the HEXA gene carries copper transport, but no mutations were found within the ATP7A and instructions for the alpha subunit of this enzyme . One alpha subunit ATP7B genes . joins with one beta subunit (produced from the HEXB gene) to form Molecular analysis revealed 4 mutations in the ATP7A gene, two of a functioning enzyme. Mutations in the gene coding for the β subunit which have not been previously published (Q724X and E1249X) . 14 lead to a deficiency of both the HEX A and HEX B form of the enzyme mutations were found in the ATP7B gene (including prevalent H1069Q .More than 100 mutations that cause Tay-Sachs disease have been mutation, and the newly found A1135T mutation), and no mutations in identified in the HEXA gene. The HexA gene is located on the human ATOX1 gene . 15q23-q24 chromosome . Molecular analysis of the ATP7A gene allows for genetic counselling in In present study DNA was received from a consanguineous couple families affected by MD . Screening for the prevalent H1069Q mutation who had 1 affected child from who no sample was available . For each in the ATP7B gene shows that the frequency- 38 .8% of analysed al-Clinical genetics  leles- is in accordance with its occurrence in Central Europe . P01.075 Supported by Grants IGA MZ NR9406, NR9215, MSMT 1M0520 and ABcD2 peroxisomal transporter in the metabolism of long-chain GAUK 109/06 . saturated and w9 monounsaturated fatty acids M. Girós1,2, M. Ruiz3,2, S. Fourcade3,2, T. Pampols1,2, C. Camps1, A. Pujol3,2; P01.073 1IBC Servei de Bioquímica i Genética Molecular, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, the molecular-genetic analysis of AtP7B gene at the Russian Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en red de enfermedades raras (CI- patients with Wilson disease BERER) ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut de Investigació Biomédica Bellvitge T. Matveeva1, E. Zaklyazminskaya2, A. Polyakov1; (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Centre ABCD2 peroxisomal transporter in the metabolism of long-chain satu- of Molecular Genetics, Odintsovo, Moscow Region, Russian Federation. rated and w9 monounsaturated fatty acids Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) is severe hereditary Peroxisomes are essential organelles exerting key functions in fatty autosomal recessive disorder, representing combined injury of inter- acid metabolism, such as the degradation of very long-chain fatty nal, first of all a liver, and a brain (the basal ganglia), that is caused acids (VLCFAs) . VLCFAs accumulate in X-adrenoleukodystrophy (X- by accumulation in their cells of copper . Defect of copper-transporting ALD), a disease caused by a deficiency of the ABCD1 peroxisomal ATPase P-type, being a product of gene ATP7B responsible for devel- transporter . Its closest homologue, ABCD2, exhibits a high degree of opment of Wilson disease, leads to abnormalities of inclusion copper functional redundancy on the catabolism of VLCFAs, being able to into ceruloplasmin, responsible for its export . prevent X-ALD-related neurodegeneration (Pujol A . et al . 2004, Hum The purpose of our investigation is search and determination of fre- Mol Genet 13:2997-3006). In search for specific roles of ABCD2, we quencies of mutations in ATP7B gene on materials of the Russian pa- screened fatty acid profiles of mutant mice lacking Abcd2 in adrenal tients with the diagnosis «Wilson disease» . In research the method glands, spinal cord and sciatic nerve, the target tissues of these mice of the SSCP-analysis with the following direct sequencing was used . (Ferrer et al .(2005) Hum Mol Genet 14(23):3565-3577), and in liver af- Search and identification of mutations was spent at 104 unrelated pro- ter different conditions such as fasting and feeding with a VLCFA-rich bands (208 chromosomes) . The frequency of the most frequent for diet, by gas-liquid chromatography . Our results indicate that ABCD2 the Russian population mutations in exon 14 (H1069Q) and exon 15 plays a role in the degradation of long-chain saturated and ω9-mono- (c.3400delC) amounted at 40,4 % and 2,4 %, respectively . unsaturated fatty acids, enlarging the spectrum of functions attributed Eight rare mutations were found in exon 5 c.1744_1745delAT at one to date to peroxisomes . patient, and c.1770insT at three patients; in exon 7 - IVS7DS+3a>g at one patient; in exon 8 - c.2304_2305insC at one patient; in exon P01.076 14 - E1064K at one patient and c.3083_3085delAGA>G also at mitochondria depletion underlying neurodegeneration in X-ALD? one patient; in exon 15 - Gly1111Asp at one patient; and in exon 18 S. Fourcade1,2, J. Galino1,2, A. Schlüter1,2, J. Martínez-García1,2, F. Villarroya3,4, - c.3888delC also at one patient . All the rare mutations listed above E. García-Arumi5,2, T. Andreu5,2, P. Aubourg6, A. Pujol7,2; have been detected in a heterozygous state . Mutations c.1770insT, 1Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de Llo- c.2304_2305insC and c.3888delC have been identified for the first bregat-Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Bioquimica i time. Also six polymorphisms were identified: c.1-75C>A, c.1-122ins- Biologia Molecular, and Institut de Biomedicina IBUB, Universitat de Barcelona, GCCGC, c.1366G>C, K832R, Arg952Lis, A1140V. Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y Nutrición, ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department Patologia Mitocondrial i Neuromuscular, Centre P01.074 d’Investigacions en Bioquímica i Biología Molecular (CIBBIM), Institut de Re- Preliminary results of Neonatal screening program for Wilson cerca Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 6INSERM U745, disease in Greece and reporting of novel variants in ATPB gene Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hôpital Saint-Vincent de Paul, University M. Tzetis1, M. Poulou1, N. Manolaki2, T. Karpathios3, K. Lama4, E. Kanavakis1; René Descartes, Paris, France, 7Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 21st De- Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. partment of Paediatrics, University of Athens, St Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is the most frequent inher- Athens, Greece, 32nd Department of Paediatrics, University of Athens, P. and ited monogenic demyelinating disease (minimal incidence 1:17,000) . A. Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Department of Paediatrics, X-ALD leads to death in boys or to motor disability in adults (adreno- Kalymnos General Hospital, Kalymnos, Greece. myeloneuropathy or AMN) . The disease is caused by loss of function Wilson disease (WND) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder and of the ABCD1 gene, a peroxisomal ATP-binding cassette transporter, heterozygous carriers do not show symptoms of the disease . WND is which function is related to defective β-oxidation of very long-chain caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene and exhibits substantial allelic fatty acids (VLCFA) in peroxisomes . Therefore, a hallmark of the dis- heterogeneity . WND is observed with a prevalence of approximately ease is the accumulation of VLCFA in plasma and tissues . The mouse 1:30000, a carrier frequency of 1 in 90 and is similar among many model for X-ALD (Ald knock-out) exhibit a late-onset phenotype close- ethnic groups . ly related to adrenomyeloneuropathy, with neurodegenerative features However the gene frequency is increased in the Sardinian population beginning at 15 months of age (1,2) . Using microarrays, Q-PCR and and the Island of Grand Canaries. In these populations specific muta- Western Blots of mouse spinal cords, we have identified a mitochon- tions reach high frequencies due to inbreeding and founder effects . dria depletion as very early event in the pathogenesis (3 .5 months Preliminary neonatal screening results have also shown increased of age) . RIP140 (Receptor interacting protein 140), a nuclear co-re- carrier frequencies in certain parts of Greece . In order to estimate the pressor of mitochondria biogenesis, is upregulated in spinal cord from exact carrier frequencies in areas with increased incidence of disease Aldko mice . VLCFA are able to induce RIP140 in ex vivo organotypic a neonatal screening program was established . Out of a 100 newborns spinal cord slice culture . We have also observed a mitochondria deple- tested, for the two commonest mutations (H1069Q and R969Q), from tion in the affected white matter of CCALD (Cerebral Childhood ALD) the Island of Kalymnos we identified 89 normal, 11 carriers and 2 as- and cerebral AMN compared to control individuals . This depletion is ymptomatic patients . Taking into account the carrier frequency for the correlated to a higher level of RIP140 in the non-affected white mat- general population there is a statistically significant increase in this ter of X-ALD patients . This could be disease causative, or at least, area with a p value of 0 .07 (Pearson’s Chi Square) . The method used contribute significantly to the neurodegenerative cascade in X-ALD for the neonatal screening is a capture down protocol designed on physiopathogenesis . Nanochip® 400 System . (1) Pujol et al, Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Mar 1;11(5):499-505; (2) Pujol et We also report the identification of 6 novel variants in the ATP7B gene al, Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Dec1;13(23):2997-3006 [p .I930M and p .V1036I (ex .12), p .Y1464S (ex .21), p .N1128Y (ex .15), c.4125-23A>G (IVS21), and c.1544-12C>T (IVS3)], identified by P01.077 DGGE analysis and direct sequencing . The effects of these mutations molecular analysis of renal hypouricemia in Japan: evidence of were assessed in combination with the clinical phenotype and using in a single origin for a common mutation G774A in SLCA silico analysis (“PolyPhen” and “SIFT”) . K. Ichida1,2, N. Kamatani3, M. Hosoyamada4, S. Kamitsuji5, I. Hisatome6, T. Hosoya2; 1Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 2Jikei Univer-Clinical genetics  sity School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 3Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Tokyo, Japan, 4Keio University, Tokyo, Japan, 5StaGen Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS, MIM#303600) is an X-linked semidomi- 6Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. nant disorder . Cardinal features in males include mental retardation, Renal hypouricemia is an inherited and heterogeneous disorder char- facial dysmorphism, digital tapering, and progressive spinal deformity . acterized by impaired tubular uric acid transport . Impairment of URAT1, In females the intensity of symptoms is variable . The estimated fre- the main transporter for uric acid reabsorption at the apical membrane quency is 1:50000 - 1:100000 births . CLS is caused in the majority of the renal tubules, causes renal hypouricemia . G774A mutation in of cases by mutations of the RSK2 gene (RPS6KA3), which maps to SLC22A12 encoding URAT1 predominates in Japanese renal hypou- Xp22 .2 and is split into 22 exons . The gene encodes for a serine/threo- ricemia . We investigated whether the uncertain predominance of hyp- nine kinase, RSK2, acting at the distal end of the MAPK/ERK signal- ouricemia on survival or some effects such as founder effect leads to ling pathway . the expansion of G774A mutation in SLC22A12 in Japanese despite We present two Polish patients with the clinical diagnosis of Coffin- of the complications, nephrolithiasis and exercise-induced acute renal Lowry syndrome confirmed on the molecular level. Patient 1 is a boy failure . Molecular analysis have been undertaken in sixty-nine Japa- aged 4 years . He has moderate mental retardation, hypotonia, facial nese renal hypouricemic patients and haplotypic analysis in 31 pa- dysmorphism, digital tapering, dental anomalies, spinal deformities, tients with homozygous G774A mutation using flanking 13 markers (12 seizure and cataplexia . Molecular analysis of the RSK2 gene revealed single nucleotide polymorphisms and a dinucleotide insertion/deletion the presence of a substitution G to A in the first position of intron 10 locus) around G774A locus . The sharing of the ancestral haplotype (c .845+1G>A) . The mutation appeared de novo . Besides, a polymor- clearly implied a common origin of the mutation, the age of that be- phism in exon 10 (c.798C>A) was identified. Patient 2 is a girl aged 9 ing estimated to be approximately 6,820 years (95%CI 1,860 - 11,760 years . She presents moderate intellectual disability, hypotonia, a char- years, median 2,460 years) . The age indicates that the origin of G774A acteristic facial appearance, hands typical of CLS, dental anomalies . mutation dates back from the time when Jomon people predominated The rather severe symptoms of the female may be due to the presence in Japan to the time when Yayoi people started to migrate to Japan of de novo one-nucleotide deletion (c .896delT) in exon 11 resulting in from the Korean peninsula . These data are consistent with a recent loss of important RSK2 domains, as well as observed non-random X- finding that G774A mutation was also predominant in Korean hypou- chromosome inactivation . ricemia subjects and indicate that the Asian continent was the origin The study was supported by Polish Ministry of Science Project 0624/ of G774A mutation . The G774A mutation in Japanese hypouricemia P01/2006/31 (N40103131/0624) . subjects had been brought by immigrant(s) from the continent and ex- panded in Japanese population either by founder effect or genetic drift P01.080 (or both) . MECP gene R167W mutation in a girl with autism/Rett-like syndrome and her mildly mentally retarded mother P01.078 E. Popowska1, A. Tylki-Szymanska1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, microarray Resequencing Analysis of Fumarylacetoacetate K. Czornak1, E. Ciara1, A. Kloska2, P. Kowalski1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Hydrolase (FAH) Gene in tyrosinemia Patients M. Olszaniecka1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; R. K. Özgül1, L. Mesci2, A. Dursun3; 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2University of 1Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health&Department of Pediatrics, Me- Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland. tabolism and Nutrition Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Department Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting al- of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, most exclusively females . The disease is caused by mutations in the Metabolism and Nutrition Unit, Ankara, Turkey. X-linked MECP2 gene, encoding methyl CpG binding protein . Most Hereditary tyrosinemia type I (OMIM; 276700) is an autosomal re- cases of RTT are sporadic with the majority (99 .5%) being caused cessive disease caused by defects in fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase by de novo mutation on the paternal copy of MECP2 . Familial cases (FAH) gene involved in the last step in tyrosine catabolic pathway . and clinically atypical cases (RTT variants, like preserved speech vari- To date, over forty pathogenic mutations were described in the FAH ant, congenital RTT) show a lower incidence of MECP2 mutations . gene . Recently MECP2 mutations in males with severe encephalopathy or In this study, a total of 22 Turkish tyrosinemia patients were genotyped mental retardation have been described . to detect disease causing mutations in FAH by our design of a re- We report identification of MECP2 gene R167W mutation in a 3 year sequencing microarray . Our microarray was designed to sequence old girl and her mother . all exonic and their flanking intronic sequences of the FAH gene to The girl presents unusual behavioral features: anxiety, emotional and detect sequence variations. In brief, FAH gene has been amplified eye contact disturbances, stereotypes (jigging, running, head shak- from genomic DNA by short or long range PCR. After purification, all ing), sleep and awake breathing rhythm and peripheral circulation dis- PCR products were quantitated and equimolar amount of them were turbances, stretching and paroxysmal cry or clamor . Besides, normal pooled . After the fragmentation step, fragmented PCR products were somatic and mental development with preserved speech and voluntary end labeled using a biotin-labeling reagent and hybridised with DNA hand use is observed . Mother of the girl, obese woman with develop- arrays . Then, arrays were processed by steps of washing and stain- ment on the edge of normal, presented in her infancy mild psychomo- ing on fluidics station. Scanned arrays were analyzed using Affymetrix tor retardation, hypoactivity, somnolence and lack of criticism . Current- GeneChip Resequencing Analysis Software . ly she presents essential tremor and she is still clumsy and talk active . Mutation screening results showed that 12 different type of mutations The identified R167W mutation results in substitution of tryptophan in were responsible of disease development in our cohort of Turkish tyro- place of arginine-167, situated in the region between MBD and TRD . sinemia patients . Four different polymorphisms were also described in The mutation occurred on the grandmothernal allele and was de novo our patients . Detected mutations by DNA resequencing chip technol- in the mother . MECP2 R167W mutation has been previously found ogy were also reevaluated and confirmed by direct DNA sequencing. in three-generation family with four non-specific X-linked mentally re- To our knowledge, this work is the first report showing the application tarded males and unaffected mothers . of DNA resequencing chip as rapid and reproducible mutation screen- The study was supported by MNiSW Project 2P05A12129 . ing tool for genetic analysis of patients with hereditary tyrosinemia . (Supported by State Planning Organisation DPT2006K1206400603) . P01.081 cerebral anomalies in a case of Xq12q13.1 duplication P01.079 encompassing the Oligophrenin 1 Gene Molecular and clinical findings in two Coffin-Lowry syndrome V. Bianchi1, M. F. Bedeschi1, A. Novelli2,3, L. Bernardini2,3, C. Parazzini4, G. patients Uziel5, B. Torres2,3,6, F. Natacci1, M. G. Giuffrida2,3,6, B. Dallapiccola2,3, F. Lalatta1; D. Jurkiewicz, E. Popowska, K. Czornak, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Ci- 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, ara, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrza- Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 2CSS-Mendel Institute, Roma, Italy, nowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; 3CSS-Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Department of Radiology and Neuroradiology, Children’s Hospital “V.Buzzi”, Milano, Italy, 5Neurophsychiatric Unit, Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Milano, Italy, 6Department of Pathology, “LaClinical genetics  Sapienza” University, Roma, Italy. Correlations between MECP2 mutation type, position and phenotype OPHN1 gene (MIM 300127) mutations are a well established cause of severity were found in 54 RTT patients. There were significant differ- a distinctive phenotype characterized by mental retardation of variable ences with more severe phenotypic manifestations in patients with degree, epilepsy, rostral ventricular enlargement and cerebellar hypo- truncating mutations compared with those with missense mutations in plasia . Duplication of this region has never been reported . the phenotype severity scores (P<0 .001, Mann-Whitney test) and phe- We describe the first familial case of a Xq12q13.1 duplication of 800 notypic manifestations scores including hand dyspraxia, impairment kb encompassing the OPHN1 gene, detected by array-CGH . The pro- of oro-motor functions (P<0 .01), emotional communication, expressive band phenotype is characterized by facial dysmorphisms and severe speech, static functions, walking, head growth and foot size (P<0 .05) . mental retardation associated to specific cerebral anomalies. Analysis of phenotype severity dependence on mutation position Our proband’s phenotype never prompted the hypothesis of oligo- showed that the most severe phenotypes were observed in patients phrenin mutation. This might be due to the specific facial and NMR with R168X, R255X, R270X mutations . appearance of OPHN1 mutated patients (deletions and point muta- The FXS clinical scale has applied to demonstrate positive correlation tions) . These patients are characterized by long face, wide forehead, (R2=0,7662) between the total phenotype severity scores in 22 patents deeply set eyes, hypothelorism, long tubular nose, short philtrum and with FXS and percent of cells containing fragile chromosome X by an prominent chin . The most striking hallmark shared by OPHN-1 patients approach previously described (Vorsanova et al, 1998) . on NMR is posterior vermis dysplasia, including lobules VI and VII (de- These results support genotype-phenotype correlations in RTT and clive, folium, and tuber) partial agenesis associated with a supplemen- FXS and illustrate both scales applicable for estimation of phenotype tary right vermian parasagittal cleft and a mild cerebellar hemispheris severity . dysgenesis . Instead our patient showed an altered signal in the so- Supported by RGSF 060600639a and IEP of Moscow University of pratentorial white matter that was more pronounced at the inferior and Psychology and Education posterior cerebral hemispheres . Lesions were also described in the pontine tegmentum, corpus callosum, posterior arms of inner capsules P01.084 and central portions of pallidi nuclei . X-linked mental retardation with pachygyria, marfanoid habitus To our knowledge this is the first report of a clinical phenotype associ- and behavioral problems: a new syndrome? ated with duplication of Xp12 . C. du Souich, Y. Jingyi, T. Y. Oh, C. F. Boerkoel, M. I. Van Allen; University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. P01.082 X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a common cause of inherited syndromic X-linked mental retardation mental retardation in males . To date, a total of 215 XLMR conditions A. Cueto González1,2, T. Vendrell Bayona1,2, M. Raspall3, I. Madrigal4,5, M. have been reported in the literature . We report a 5 generation fam- Milà6,5, L. Pérez Jurado1,2; ily segregating an X-linked disorder in which 7 affected males pres- 1Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, 08035 barcelona, Spain, 2Hos- ent with distinctive physical features, seizures, mental retardation and pital Vall d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de neuropediatria. Hospital Vall behavioral problems . The proband is a 17-year-old man with severe d’Hebrón, 08035 barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER. Servei de Bioquímica i Genèti- mental retardation, microcephaly, short stature, a marfanoid habitus, ca Molecular, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, seizures, congenital heart defect, pachygyria, irritability, and aggres- 6Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular., Barcelona, Spain. sion . Carrier females are physically unremarkable but have aggressive We report a new family with familiar mental retardation and seizures behavior and poor interpersonal skills . Results of laboratory investi- with few dysmorphic facial features . gations include a normal karyotype, FMR1 triplet repeat size, serum The proband was born at term after an uncomplicated pregnancy . The electrolytes, thyroid function, MED12 sequencing and biochemical in- boy was the first child from healthy non-consanguineous parents. At vestigations . Linkage analysis localized the disease locus in this family the age of 3 years he was referred to medical geneticists for diagnostic to Xq28 . Phenotypically, our proband does not resemble any of the advice . The facial appearance was slightly dysmorphic with deeply set reported XLMR syndromes mapped to this region . Candidate genes in eyes, strabismus, a large philtrum, retrognathia and prominent inci- this region are presently being screened by direct sequencing . To our sors . He had generalised hypotonia, delayed psychomotor develop- knowledge, the combination of phenotypic features seen in our pro- ment (walking at 3 years), he had no language (he only say few words band has not been previously reported in any of the XLMR syndromes at 3 years) and significantly mentally retarded. He developed a first already mapped to our candidate region . epileptic insult during the second year . The metabolic screening and the electroencephalogram were normal . His karyotype was normal, P01.085 46,XY . Xq duplication in a male with mental retardation, facial On examination with 11 years old he had a brain magnetic resonance dysmorphisms, broad thorax, genital anomalies and short imaging, it showed large ventricles without hydrocephalus, a large cis- stature terna magna with cerebellar hypoplasia . D. Lugtenberg, A. P. M. de Brouwer, A. R. Oudakker, R. Pfundt, B. C. J. Hamel, He had a maternal uncle and maternal great-uncle with mental retard H. van Bokhoven, E. M. H. F. Bongers; and facial appearance similar . His maternal uncle had a test for fragile Dept of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijme- X negative . gen, The Netherlands. There was a syndromic X-linked mental retardation with cerebellar hy- In a male patient with severe mental retardation (MR), a typical facial poplasia . We revaluated the case with 11 years old and analyzed by appearance, a broad thorax, genital anomalies and a disproportion- Multiple Ligation PCR Amplification (MLPA) in the probandus and his ate short stature, a de novo Xq13.2q21.1 duplication was identified mother, but it was not possible in the maternal uncle, with deletion in by array CGH . This 7 Mb duplication encompasses 23 known genes, the exons 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the oligophrenin-1 gene (OPHN1 gene) . including the XLMR genes ATRX and SLC16A2 . The phenotype of this patient is similar to the phenotype described in more than ten previ- P01.083 ously reported cases with overlapping Xq duplications, encompassing New Rett syndrome and Fragile X syndrome clinical scales for MR, short stature, and genital abnormalities comprising cryptorchidism genotype-phenotype correlation studies and/or small penis . By re-evaluation of the facial phenotype of these V. Y. Voinova1, I. Y. Iourov1, S. A. Tushkevich2, P. V. Novikov3, Y. B. Yurov1, S. patients and the present patient we observed a similar facial appear- G. Vorsanova3; ance, comprising ptosis, midface hypoplasia with down-slanting pal- 1Mental Health Research Centre RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Mos- pebral fissures, small mouth, down-turned corners of the mouth and cow University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, hypotonic facies . The minimal overlapping duplication interval includes 3Institute of Pediatrics and Children’s Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. the ATRX gene, which is known to carry inactivating mutations in pa- To investigate genotype-phenotype correlations new clinical scales tients with alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome (ATR-X) . were developed for providing quantitative measurements of 23 Rett Detailed comparison of the clinical characteristics and the function of syndrome (RTT) and 24 Fragile X syndrome (FXS) phenotypic signs . the genes located in the commonly duplicated regions of these pa- Scores for separate symptoms summarized to get a total phenotypic tients and the phenotype of animal models with ATRX overexpression severity score . previously described in literature led us to the hypothesis that an in-Clinical genetics  creased dosage of ATRX and perhaps other genes are involved in the P01.088 pathogenic mechanism of this XLMR phenotype . molecular characterization by acGH of a 3,8 mb duplication at In conclusion, the association of MR, facial dysmorphisms, broad tho- Xq26.3 in a male with mental retardation rax, genital anomalies, and short stature might contribute to the recog- I. Madrigal1, M. Fernández-Burriel2, L. Rodríguez-Revenga1, L. Armengol3, X. nition of male patients with a microduplication encompassing the entire Estivill3, M. Milà4; ATRX gene . We suggest that male patients with a similar phenotype 1Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, should be screened for duplications of the ATRX gene . Spain, 2Unidad de Investigación. Hospital de Mérida., Badajoz, Spain, 3Genes and Disease Programme. CRG. Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Biochemistry P01.086 and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic and IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Functional disomy Xqter du to duplication mecp2 gene Spain. A. A. Aboura1, M. Mathieu2, S. Drunat1, A. Tabet1, C. Dupont1, B. Benzacken1, Males with duplications in the distal long arm of the X chromosome are F. Guimont1, A. Verloes1; rare and in most cases are inherited from a carrier phenotypically nor- 1Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France, 2Département de Génétique C.H.U nord, mal . We report the clinical and molecular characterization of a Xq26 .3 Amiens, France. duplication in a male and his brother affected by MR . Chromosome We report on three patients : 2 boys and a girl, with an additional Xq28 analysis was normal and Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification (MLPA) chromosome segment translocated onto 5pter, Ypter, and 13p . The ka- analysis detected a duplication of the ARHGEF6 gene inherited from ryotypes were 46,XY,der(5)t(X;5)(q28;pter) 46,X,der(Y)t(X;Y)(q28;pter a carrier mother . Both affected brothers presented moderate mental ) and 46,XX,der(13)t(X;13)(q28;p10) . In all cases, the de novo cryptic retardation and displayed dysmorphic features . Further characteriza- unbalanced X-autosome translocation and Xq-Yp translocation resul- tion of the duplication by array CGH and FISH experiments with spe- ted in a Xq28 chromosome functional disomy by duplication of Mecp2 cific BAC probes, revealed a deletion of 28 contiguous BAC clones, (methyl-CpG binding protein 2) gene . In all, 20 patients carrying a Xq28 spanning a region of 3,8 Mb in Xq26 .3 . X-inactivation studies in the functional disomy could be selected from the literature . Common cra- mother showed a complete skewed X-inactivation (100/0) inactivat- niofacial findings include microcephaly, a small mouth. Most patients ing the X-chromosome inherited by the patient . Among the 20 genes have prenatal onset growth retardation . Postnatal growth retardation included within the duplicated region we discuss the implication of AR- was present in all cases . Major axial hypotonia is constant and usually HGEF6, PHF6 and HPRT1 in the phenotype of the patient . Mutations present at birth . Severe constipation frequently reported . Severe dev- or deletions in these three genes are responsible for syndromic and lopmental delay is observed in most patients . Functional disomy for the non-syndromic forms of mental retardation . Nowadays high-resolution Xq28 chromosome region yields a recognizable phenotype including technologies such as array CGH allow the detection of copy number distinctive facial features, major axial hypotonia, severe feeding diffi- aberrations in patients with MR . The characterization of these cryptic culties, abnormal genitalia and proneness to infection (pneumonia) . rearrangements is of clinical importance in order to provide a genetic Severe developmental delay is almost constant . A clinically oriented counselling in carrier women for future pregnancies . FISH study using subtelomeric probes Aknowledgements: This work has been supported by the Instituto Car- los III (PI04-1126) and Fundación Areces (U-2006-FAERECES-O) P01.087 Functional characterization of the X-linked mental retardation P01.089 gene ACSL Fragile X syndrome and Xp deletion in a girl with autism and I. Meloni1, V. Parri1, R. De Filippis1, F. Ariani1, M. Bruttini1, I. Longo1, F. Mari1, C. mental retardation G. Dotti2,3, A. Renieri1; A. Vazna, Z. Musova, D. Novotna, M. Vlckova, M. Havlovicova, Z. Sedlacek; 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Department of Human Genetics, University Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Medical of Leuven Medical School, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Molecular and School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Developmental Genetics, Flanders Institute of Biotechnology (VIB 11), Leuven, Autism is a complex behavioural disorder characterised by social and Belgium. communication impairments, and restricted repetitive and stereotyped ACSL4 is a gene involved in non-syndromic X-linked mental retar- behaviour . It is often associated with mental retardation . Genetic dation . It encodes for a ubiquitous protein that adds Coenzyme-A to factors play an important role in the aetiology of autism - heritability long-chain fatty acids, especially arachidonic acid; it presents a brain- reaches 90 %, one of the highest among psychiatric disorders . The specific isoform resulting from alternative splicing and containing 41 inheritance is most likely multifactorial with genetic heterogeneity and additional N-terminal aminoacids. In order to define how ACSL4 ab- complex interactions . Despite of all efforts, until now the success in sence causes mental retardation, we have characterized the protein finding of autism susceptibility genes has been limited. Cytogenetic and analyzed the consequences of its absence in neurons . Our data abnormalities and single-gene defects often associated with autism suggest that ACSL4 is located in endoplasmic reticulum . Quantitative (e .g . the fragile X syndrome) together account for about 10% of cases . mRNA expression analyses indicate that ACSL4 is expressed at high- However, these are the only cases where diagnostics and exact risk er levels in fetal than in adult brain . Moreover, differential expression assessment are possible . We present a 7-year-old girl with atypical of the alternative transcripts in different adult brain regions has been autism, mental retardation, hyperactivity, developmental delay, facial observed. Protein analysis has confirmed this variability and revealed dysmorphism and overweight . Her family showed no history of mental a lack of linear correlation between mRNA and protein levels, suggest- retardation or autism, but tremor was apparent from sixty years of age ing the presence of post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms . To in her maternal grandfather . DNA testing of the patient revealed full characterize ACSL4 function in neurons we have silenced the gene by mutation (460 CGG repeats) in the FMR1 gene, consistent with the siRNA technology in rat primary hippocampal neurons . Our data sug- diagnosis of fragile X syndrome . In addition, cytogenetic analysis de- gest that ACSL4 might be important for dendritic spine formation and/ tected a large deletion on chromosome Xp. We attempted to define in or maintenance. In fact, ACSL4 absence seems to cause a significant more detail the breakpoints of the deletion and the inheritance of both reduction in dendritic spine density and alteration in spine distribution genetic defects in the family . Microarray CGH mapped the 17 .5 Mb de- among different morphological categories . Moreover, abnormal actin letion to Xp22 .11-p22 .31 . The deleted segment harboured almost 100 accumulation has been observed in a significant percentage of cells. protein-coding genes . The distal breakpoint of the deletion was located This last finding suggests that ACSL4 might directly or indirectly influ- close to NLGN4, a gene implicated in autism and mental retardation . ence actin cytoskeleton organization; it could be thus hypothesized Supported by grants NR/9457-3 and MZO00064203 that the observed spine anomalies are a secondary effect of an abnor- mal actin organization due to ACSL4 absence . Additional experiments will be necessary in order to confirm these hypotheses.Clinical genetics  P01.090 whereas the amounts of FMRP are slightly reduced compared with Fragile X mosaic male detected by PCR/MS-MLPA the control population, suggesting that posttranscriptional regulation of T. Todorov1, A. Todorova1, A. Kirov2, R. Carvalho3, I. Boneva4, V. Mitev1; FMR1 could be involved in these disorders . MicroRNAs act as regu- 1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, lators of gene expression binding to their target sites located at the 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3MRC-Holland 3’UTR in a high number of protein-coding genes inducing cleavage bv, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Paediatric Hospital, Medical University, So- or repression of translation . We have screened the 3’UTR of FMR1 fia, Bulgaria. in 40 Mediterranean premutation carriers and 14 control subjects with We report on a fragile X syndrome (FXS) mosaic male full mutation/ no expansion in the FMR1 gene . Overall, the FMR1 3’UTR region ap- normal allele, detected by a combination of PCR and methylation-spe- pears as a high conserved region, not only in humans, but also in other cific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA). This species . Our study excludes changes in the FMR1 3’UTR in the pre- analysis provides a powerful, fast, cheap and easy to perform diagnos- mutated patients , ruling out a possible role of microRNA target sites tic approach for FXS. This is the first report on successful application in FMR1 regulation in permutated phenotypes . Acknowledgements of MS-MLPA for FXS diagnostic purposes . The combination of PCR (SAF2004-03083, Marató TV06-0810) and MS-MLPA gives the possibility in a few steps to detect normal FMR1 alleles, to prognose the expanded ones, to assess the CpG P01.093 islands methylation, as well as to determine copy number changes like molecular and epigenetic characterization of FMR large deletions/duplications, not only along the FMR1, but also along unmethylated full mutation cell lines the FMR2 gene . E. Tabolacci1, M. Accadia1, L. Borrelli1, M. Moscarda1, F. Zalfa2, C. Bagni2, U. Our PCR results showed one allele of 29±1 repeats in the mother and Moscato3, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1; one allele in the affected boy, but three repeats larger - 32±1 repeats . 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Biology, “Tor Ver- The MS-MLPA results in the patient showed hypermethylated full mu- gata” University, Rome, Italy, 3Institute of Hygiene, Catholic University, Rome, tation pattern in comparison to the normal control . The MS-MLPA data Italy. calculations were performed in Excel . Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is mostly caused by expansion and subse- In our opinion, the mosaic pattern of normal size/full mutation alleles quent methylation of the CGG repeat at the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene was a result from inheritance of a maternal unstable premutated allele . (methylated full mutation) . Individuals of normal intelligence, carriers Most logical mechanism for normal size allele generation in our mosaic of a FMR1 unmethylated full mutation, represent rare exceptions . We case is a deletion of a portion of the full mutation, restricted to the CGG previously performed a molecular and epigenetic analysis of a lym- repeat itself, as the primers for PCR were designed in the repeat flank- phoblastoid cell line (code 5106), derived from one of these individu- ing regions . The reported patient demonstrates atypical mild clinical als . Recently, two apparently normal individuals with an unmethylated manifestation of the disease, which might be due to the presence of a full mutation, belonging to distinct FXS families, were identified. From normal size allele in a large percentage of the patient’s cells . each subject (named DPM and MA) three independent lymphoblastoid cell lines and a fibroblast colture (from MA) were established. In ac- P01.091 cordance with our previous findings, these cell lines showed normal No evidence for skewed X-inactivation in fragile X syndrome transcription and reduced translation of the FMR1 gene, compared to premutation carriers normal controls . Epigenetic analysis of the FMR1 locus demonstrated C. Berenguer1,2, L. Rodriguez-Revenga3, I. Madrigal3, C. Badenas1, M. Milà1; lack of DNA methylation and the methylation pattern of lysines 4 and 1Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, 27 on histone H3 was also similar to that of a normal control, in ac- Spain, 2Fundació Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Centre for Biomedical Research on cordance with the normal transcription and consistent with an euchro- Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain. matic configuration. On the other hand, the H3 and H4 acetylation and X-Chromosome inactivation (XCI) is the mechanism by which gene the methylation of lysine 9 on histone H3 was similar to that of a typical dosage equivalence is achieved between female (XX) and male (XY) FXS cell line . Comparative analysis of these rare unmethylated full mammals . In the general female population, the X-inactivation process mutation cell lines demostrates remarkable structural, functional and is random, and therefore XCI ratios have a normal distribution (with epigenetic consistency, suggesting a common mechanism of origin, average of 50:50) with only a small percentage of females (5-8%) genetically determined . The discovery of such mechanism may be im- showing a skewed X-inactivation ratio (>90:10) . Fragile X syndrome portant in view of therapeutic attempts to convert a methylated to un- (FXS) premutation carriers (55-200 CGG repeats) do not present FXS methylated full mutation, restoring the expression of the FMR1 gene . symptoms but it has been shown that they have a higher risk of de- veloping premature ovarian failure (POF) and/or fragile X associated P01.094 tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) . About 20% of the FXS female pre- Analysis of fragile-X premutation and grey zone in paediatric mutation carriers present POF and around 15% FXTAS . In order to patients evaluate if these pathologies are associated with skewed XCI patterns, L. Martorell1, P. Poo2, M. Ferrando2, M. Naudo1, J. Genovés1, A. Sans2; we have studied the X-inactivation pattern in 270 FXS females carriers 1Molecular Genetics Section. Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, (41 POF, 2 FXTAS, 3 POF and FXTAS, and 224 no POF no FXTAS) . 2Department of Neurology. Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain. Results showed that FXS permutation female carriers have a normal INTRODUCTION: The number of CGG repeats defines the state of distribution and that there is no correlation with the CGG repeat num- premutation or full mutation in fragile-X syndrome (FXS) . In childhood, ber . On the basis of these observations we conclude that FXS female full mutation has a characteristic behaviour and physical phenotype . premutation carriers with or without POF and/or FXTAS do not present The adult carriers of the premutation can develop a progressive neuro- skewed X-inactivation and therefore, other molecular or environmental degenerative syndrome (FXTAS) . Although the clinical characteristics factors may predispose to these conditions . of the premutation and grey-zone in the childhood are less well-known, Acknowledgments: Marató TV3 (TV06-0810) and SAF- 2004-03083 clinical experience and case reports suggest that child with premuta- tion and grey-zone alleles may have similar clinical features than those P01.092 with the full mutation . High conservation of the 3’UtR of FMR at potential microRNA PATIENTS AND METHODS: Determination of the number of CGG re- target sites in patients with fragile X syndrome premutation peats in samples received in our unit since 2005 for the FXS screen- L. Rodriguez-Revenga1, M. Santos2,3, I. Madrigal1, C. Berenguer2,3, X. Estiv- ing . ill4,5,6, M. Mila3; Detailed Clinical and cognitive evaluation in a series of 13 children (9 1CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital boys and 4 girls), born between 1989 and 2000, with clinical suspect Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 4Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, of FXS . 5National Genotyping Center, Barcelona, Spain, 6Pompeu Fabra University, RESULTS: From the 1092 samples analyzed, 7% (77 cases) we de- Barcelona, Spain. tected alleles with 35 to 160 CGG repeats . We haven’t detected any Fragile X syndrome premutation condition consists of an intermediate alleles in the permutated or grey-zone in the 91 control chromosomes CGG repeat expansion (55-200 repeats) at the 5’UTR of the FMR1 analyzed . The 13 children evaluated clinically have a cognitive-behav- gene . In the premutation range, FMR1 mRNA levels are increased ioural phenotype suggestive of full mutation and we detected allelesClinical genetics  between 35 to 53 repeats. Clinical findings in this group of patients will validate this hypothesis . be commented . In conclusion, our data suggest that homozygous FTO null mutations CONCLUSIONS: We have detected a big number of alleles in the pre- are responsible for a hitherto undescribed multiple congenital anomaly mutation and grey zone in the population analyzed . Large independent syndrome . samples are required to confirm our impression that the grey-zone and premutation in FXS may be associated with important developmental P01.097 disabilities and to establish the genotype-phenotype relation in chil- studies on FMR gene premutations, causing Fragile X tremor dren with this range of repeats . ataxia syndrome (FXtAs) in Polish ataxia patients of unknown etiology and in controls P01.095 M. Rajkiewicz, A. Sulek-Piatkowska, E. Zdzienicka, W. Krysa, W. Szirkowiec, is FRAXE over-represented among Newfoundland children with E. Fidzianska, J. Zaremba; cognitive impairment? Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. A. Dohey1, M. Crowley2, R. Green1, B. Younghusband1, B. Fernandez1; Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a late onset (≥ 50) syn- 1Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada, 2Provincial drome, observed generally in male patients, caused by premutation Medical Genetics Program, St. John’s, NL, Canada. (range 55 - 200 CGG) in FMR1 gene (Hagerman 2001) . The main Fragile X syndrome due to mutations in the FMR1 gene is the com- symptoms are: intention tremor, ataxia, parkinsonism, and cognitive monest cause of inherited mental retardation . In contrast, mutations in decline . Moreover the MRI shows the presence of white matter lesions FMR2 (FRAXE) are a much rarer cause of MR . In Newfoundland, only of the middle cerebellar penducles . one family segregating an FMR1 expansion has been identified, but 3 The aim of our study was to look for FXTAS in a large group of Polish males from 2 families with FRAXE disease have been identified. In this patients affected with ataxia of unknown origin and in controls . study, I reviewed the charts of all boys seen from 1994-2004 who had The studied group comprised 176 male patients with sporadic cerebel- negative FMR1 testing . Participants were recruited using the follow- lar ataxia, with/without other neurological symptoms (age of onset ≥ ing criteria - males with developmental delay, between the ages of 2 50 years), in whom molecular tests carried out previously, excluded and19 and without a specific diagnosis. 139 of 378 individuals met the SCA1,2,3,6,7,8,12,17 and DRPLA . inclusion criteria, 95 (68%) consented . DNA was collected and ampli- The group of controls was composed of 516 healthy subjects . The fied using previous published primers. 93 samples were in the normal number of CGG repeats was determined by comparison of PCR prod- FRAXE range, 2 failed to amplify . These 2 samples are being further uct size with size standard after electrophoresis on ABI PRISM377 in studied as possible FRAXE mutations . FRAXE alleles ranged from 4 4% denaturing gel . to 23 repeats with the most common allele size being 13 . A second In the ataxia group we found no premutation alleles, and the largest part of the study describes the previously identified FRAXE families: allele found contained 52 CGG repeats . One proband has an FMR2 expansion of 620 repeats . He has a FSIQ The FMR1 normal allele obtained for the control group ranged from 14 of 54 and is dysmorphic with facial features reminiscent of FRAXA to 56 CGG repeats, with the most frequent 29 CGG alleles . syndrome. He has a non-dysmorphic first cousin with a learning dis- These results indicate that Polish control group is characterized by ability and an expansion of 200 repeats . His mother and maternal aunt similar FMR1 gene polymorphism as other populations . And since pre- carry premutations of 120 and 87 repeats respectively . The second mutation in the patients group was not found, we think that FXTAS proband is a non-dysmorphic 11-year-old with attention deficit disorder among patients with sporadic ataxia is less frequent than we expected; and a FSIQ in the 80’s . He has a mosaic FMR2 expansion of 120-820 we plan to enlarge the studied group by including patients with other repeats . neurological symptoms, such as parkinsonism . P01.096 P01.098 Homozygous R316Q mutation in obesity-associated FtO gene Frequency of fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome in fragile X causes a novel polymalformative syndrome syndrome families S. Boissel*1, O. Reish*2, F. Molinari1, H. Etchevers1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1; M. Milà1,2, C. Berenguer3,1, I. Madrigal4, J. Kulisevsky5, J. Pagonabarraga5, B. 1INSERM U781 and département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, Gomez5, L. Rodriguez-Revenga4; Paris, France, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Assaf Harofeh * Equally con- 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundació tributors, Israel. Cínic, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Sant Pau, We report on the analysis of a large inbred family including 8 affected Barcelona, Spain. children presenting a newly described syndrome characterized by in- Fragile X syndrome (FXS), which is caused by a CGG triplet expansion tra-uterine growth retardation, characteristic facies, cleft palate, car- in the first exon of FMR1 gene, is the leading cause of familial men- diac and genital abnormalities, central nervous defects with delayed tal retardation . Premutated individuals (55-200 CGG) do not present myelinization, severe hypertonicity and premature death . Extensive FXS symptoms, but approximately one third on them can present other workup was normal . manifestations such as a late onset ataxia /tremor syndrome (called Since the pedigree suggested an autosomal recessive mode of in- FXTAS) or premature ovarian failure (POF) . In order to determine the heritance, autozygosity mapping was performed identifying a unique presence of FXTAS among FXS grandparents, we have contacted by region of shared homozygosity of 6,5 Mb on 16q12 between D16S411 telephone with 92 families. We have identified 24 premutated carri- and D16S3140 markers. We identified a homozygous missense muta- ers (belonging to 18 FXS families) showing FXTAS symptoms . These tion within FTO gene (c .947G>A, p .R316Q), which altered a highly results evidence that FXTAS frequency among FXS families is around conserved residue, co-segregated with the disease and was not found 20% . The youngest individual is 66 and the oldest 82 y .o . We are now in 400 control alleles . evaluating these patients psychologically, neurological and with mag- While recent studies have revealed a strong association between netic resonance imaging. Molecular studies confirm a slight reduction intronic variants in FTO gene and childhood and adult obesity, the of FMRP protein and increased levels of mRNA in these patients (x2- pathophysiological mechanism underlying the phenotype observed in x5 folds) . The description of associated pathologies (FXTAS and POF) our family remains questionable . Noticeably, in-situ hybridization ex- to premutation carriers has modified genetic counseling for FXS, these periments on human embryos showed predominant FTO expression two disorders and their consequences have to be taken into account in tissues affected in patients (central nervous system, heart and fron- by genetic counselor . tonasal prominence) . Acknowledgements (SAF2004-03083, Marató TV06-0810) Interestingly, a recent study showed that FTO encodes a 2-oxogluta- rate-dependent nucleic acid demethylase likely involved in toxic DNA and/or RNA lesions repair . Moreover, a R316A substitution completely abolishes Fto activity in-vitro . We consequently propose that the pa- tients’ mutation is a null mutation and that their phenotype is the con- sequence of defective DNA repair . Mass spectrometry assays and cel- lular sensitivity to methylating agents measurements are underway toClinical genetics 0 P01.099 P01.101 Deletion of MAOA and MAOB only in a male patient causes Duplications of the mEcP2 gene region and severe mental severe developmental delay, intermittent hypotonia and retardation in males stereotyped hand movements. R. I. Lewis, L. P. Lazarou, S. Morgan, H. L. Archer, S. J. Davies, A. J. Clarke, A. Whibley1, L. Willatt1, J. Dore2, L. Gaunt2, P. Tarpey3, M. Stratton3, D. Don- R. Butler; nai2, F. Raymond1, I. GOLD1; Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Re- Mutations in the MECP2 gene are associated with Rett syndrome in gional Genetics Service, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, females and a spectrum of neurological disorders in males, from mild 3Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. mental retardation to severe neonatal encephalopathy . More recently, The monoamine oxidases MAOA and MAOB are isoenzymes which duplications of the MECP2 gene have been described in males with catalyse the oxidative deamination of biogenic amines, with substrates severe mental retardation and a range of other progressive neurologi- including the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, serotonin and dopa- cal symptoms. Using the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplifi- mine . A number of behavioural traits, such as aggressive and antiso- cation (MLPA) assay, we have screened 20 male patients who have cial behaviour, and psychiatric conditions, such as schizophrenia and been specifically referred for MECP2 gene duplication analysis, with bipolar disorder, have been associated with MAOA/B dysfunction and symptoms including severe mental retardation, epilepsy and an “An- genetic variation at these loci . gelman like” phenotype . Duplications involving the MECP2 gene were The MAOA and MAOB genes occur in tandem but in opposite orien- detected in five cases (25%), four of these being in unrelated males tations on Xp11 .23 . The two genes share 70% identity at the amino and one in a similarly affected brother . Two of the unrelated cases acid level and exhibit identical organisation of their 15 exons . Previ- show complex rearrangements of the MECP2 gene . These results and ous reports of MAOA and MAOB deletions have encompassed the others that have been published recently, show rearrangement of the adjacent NDP gene . Mutations in NDP cause Norrie disease, a disor- MECP2 gene to be a relatively common mutation mechanism in males . der characterised by blindness, progressive sensorineural deafness This redefines the testing criteria for referral for MECP2 analysis. We and, frequently, mental retardation . Genotype-phenotype correlations will attempt to further determine the clinical phenotype for males with in Norrie disease suggest that deletions of NDP which also extend MECP2 gene duplications, to help improve service provision . to the MAOA/B genes result in a more severe neurological pheno- type . However, the phenotypic contribution of MAOA/B gene disrup- P01.102 tion is difficult to dissect in this context. Here we report an individual A study on the most common Genes involvement among iranian with a submicroscopic deletion which encompasses only the MAOA Families Who Have REtt syndrome and MAOB genes . The 246kb deletion, which includes exons 2-15 of M. Dehghan Manshadi, M. Rostami, T. Majidizadeh, M. SeydHasani, M. MAOA and the entire coding region of MAOB, was detected by high- Houshmand; resolution long oligonucleotide X chromosome array comparative ge- Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. nomic hybridisation, and confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridisa- MECP2-related disorders include classic Rett syndrome, variant or tion . The phenotype of the affected boy was severe mental retardation atypical Rett syndrome, and mild learning disabilities in females and with unusual hand posturing . The obligate mother of the affected boy neonatal encephalopathy and mental retardation syndromes in males . was clinically normal . Classic Rett syndrome is a progressive neurologic disorder in girls characterized by normal birth and apparently normal psychomotor de- P01.100 velopment during the first six to 18 months of life. The girls then enter a Raised t3 levels and mutations in MCT(SLCA) cause X- short period of developmental stagnation followed by rapid regression linked cerebral palsy and mental retardation in language and motor skills . Seizures occur in up to 90% of affected L. Raymond1, A. Whibley1, S. Price2, E. Rosser3, N. Rahman4, S. Holder5, F. females; generalized tonic-clonic seizures and partial complex sei- Stewart6, P. Tarpey7, A. Futreal7, M. Stratton7, I. GOLD1; zures are the most common . Females with classic Rett syndrome typi- 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Ox- cally survive into adulthood, but the incidence of sudden, unexplained ford Regional Genetics Service,, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Child death is significantly higher than in controls of similar age. Atypical Rett Health, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 4Institute for Cancer syndrome is increasingly observed as MECP2 mutations have been Research, London, United Kingdom, 5Northwick Park Hospital, London, United identified in individuals previously diagnosed with autism, mild learning Kingdom, 6Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast, United King- disability, clinically suspected but molecularly unconfirmed Angelman dom, 7Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. syndrome, or mental retardation with spasticity or tremor . Mutations or whole gene deletions of MCT8 (SLC16A2) were identi- Rett syndrome is inherited in an X-linked dominant manner . Approxi- fied in males with raised serum T3 concentrations and severe psycho- mately 99 .5% of cases are single occurences in a family, resulting ei- motor retardation . The associated phenotype prompted us to screen ther from a de novo mutation in the child with Rett syndrome or from MCT8(SLC16A2) in males with X-linked mental retardation with spas- inheritance of the disease-causing mutation from one parent who has tic quadriplegia and those with XLMR alone. We have identified 3 mu- somatic or germ line mosaicism . tations ( 1018delC, A224T,R271H) and 2 single exon deletions (exon PCR amplification and Sequencing of the three axons of MECP2 gene 1 and exon 6) in families with X-linked spastic quadriplegia and se- coding region showed that R 407 Stop codon, R 224C and A 72 R were vere mental retardation but did not find any mutations in >300 families heterozygote mutations in all Iranian female patients . where mental retardation alone was the presenting feature . Prior to identification of the mutation all cases were all described as P01.103 severe cerebral palsy . Males present with severe hypotonia at birth X-linked mental retardation(XLmR) and the MECP gene and develop a severe spastic quadraplegia in all cases within the first R. G. Goliath, L. Adonis, G. Carvill, M. Urban, K. Fieggen; year of life that remained static once it had evolved . Brain MRI in one Division of Human Genetics, Cape Town, South Africa. affected individual was normal . None of the affected individuals were MECP2 is an X-linked gene encoding a nuclear protein that binds spe- able to walk independently or had intelligible speech and all needed cifically to methylated DNA. Until recently the gene was predicted to full-time care either in institutions or at home. Difficulties with weight function as a general transcriptional repressor . An alternative function gain and difficulty feeding are consistent features. Thyroid hormone however has been recently reported indicating the primary function of profiles were performed in all families once sequence variants in the MeCP2 not being the silencing of methylated promoters . MCT8(SLC16A2) gene were identified. Carrier females were found to Mutations in MECP2 have been reported to be the molecular basis of have free T3 levels at the upper limit of normal between 7 .0 and 7 .5 a broad spectrum of neurological disorders including : Rett syndrome (3 .0-7 .5) pmol/l whereas the affected males were found to have raised (RTT), unexplained progressive encephalopathy and an Angelman-like T3 levels 9 .6 - 13 .7 (3 .0-7 .5) pmol/l . Free T4 and TSH levels were phenotype . Also, duplications of MECP2 region are associated with within the normal range in all affected males and carrier females . 10% of familial X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) . The XLMR phe- notypic spectrum often includes hypotonia, spasticity, absent speech and recurrent infections . To date the Division of Human genetics, University of Cape Town hasClinical genetics  DNA banked from 80 XLMR families and 30 male sib-ships that are Results: Our findings revealed a statistically significant difference be- negative for mutations in the most common XLMR associated genes tween patients and controls for allele and/or genotype distribution of (FMR1 CGG expansion and ARX mutations) . This group of patients APOE, 5-HTT, and HSP70-1 (-110A>C), but not for associations be- was stratified into a smaller cohort of subjects according to the clinical tween Rett syndrome and polymorphisms (GT)n in the HMOX-1 pro- criteria indicated above. Preliminary findings involving qPCR analy- moter or +190C>G in HSP70-1 . ses, suggests significant MECP2 involvement in XLMR patient phe- Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the first such study in Rett syn- notypes . drome patients and further confirmation in experimental and epidemio- This study further assesses the degree of MECP2 involvement in an logical studies is necessary . Understanding the inherited factors that XLMR cohort of South African patients using MLPA analysis of the influence patients’ susceptibility for developing various Rett pheno- MECP2 chromosomal region in a larger group of XLMR patients . types may lead to the development of better and more comprehensive Determining the proportion of XLMR patients in the Human Genetics therapies . bank, due to MECP2 mutations will assist in the genetic management The study was supported by grants GA UK 257927 92707, IGA MZ of XLMR families through definitive diagnostic systems, carrier ascer- NR9215, and MSM0021620849 . tainment and prenatal diagnoses to carrier females . P01.106 P01.104 CDKL5 gene mutations in patients with a RTT-like phenotype mEcP2 gene mutation analysis in patients with Rett-like features N. Puente-Unzueta1, C. Martínez-Bouzas1, E. Beristain1, N. Viguera1, J. Prats1, in Latvia A. García-Rives1, M. T. Calvo2, M. Salido3, M. I. Tejada1; N. Pronina1,2, O. Sterna1,2, D. Bauze1, Z. Krumina1, B. Lace1,2, D. Locmele1, Z. 1Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Miguel Daneberga1,2, R. Lugovska1,2; Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 3Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. 1Children’s University Hospital; Medical Genetics Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Rett Syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. showing several phenotypic manifestations . The majority of clinically Rett syndrome (RTT), an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental diagnosed cases have been found to show a mutation in the MECP2 disorder mostly in females, with an incidence of 1 in 10 000-15 000 X-linked gene, a gene that encodes for a transcription suppressor female births . Gene MECP2 (methyl-CpG-binding protein) gene has Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein . The cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 gene been identified as the disease-causing. RTT is one of the most com- (CDKL5) is another X-linked gene that belongs to the same molecular mon causes of mental retardation in females . After a period of normal pathway of MECP2 and encodes a phosphorylated protein with protein development usually until 6-18 months of age, affected girls enter a kinase activity . Mutations in the CDKL5 gene cause severe mental re- period of regression, losing speech and motor skills, coincident with tardation, early onset epilepsy and drug resistance . the onset of hand stereotypies, leading to loss of purposeful hand use, We have screened the 21 exons of the CDKL5 for mutations in 18 fe- which is the hallmark of the disorder . male patients with a RTT-like phenotype and epilepsy who had tested MECP2 gene is located on chromosome Xq28 and is subject to X-in- negative for MECP2 mutations . The aim of this study was to deter- activation. Gene mutations are identifiable in 80% of classic Rett syn- mine whether the condition of these patients is due to mutations in the drome, but less frequently in atypical RTT . CDKL5 gene . Genomic DNA was extracted using standard procedures First 10 unrelated patients (including 2 boys) with developmental delay from the peripheral blood leukocytes of patients . Mutation analyses and autistic features were referred for molecular diagnostic . Genomic were performed using CSGE in 24 fragments of the CDKL5 gene and DNA was extracted from blood leukocytes . MECP2 coding exons 2, 3, sequenced in case of anomalous bands . and partly exon 4, were amplified in 7 overlapping PCR fragments and We have only found 2 cases with variations: three nucleotide exchang- analyzed by direct sequencing on ABI 310 genetic analyzer . No previ- es that form a rare conserved haplotype - IVS4+17A>G, c .3003C>T ously reported mutations were found in analyzed fragments . Studies (H1001H) and c .3084G>A (T1028T) (J Tao et al . 2004) - in one patient of remaining part of MECP2 gene exon 4 for most common mutations and a new missense change in the 17th exon - c .2389G>A (D797N) in TRD domain are in progress . Additional mutation analysis of exon 1 - in another patient without pathologic effect because the father was will be performed after exons 2, 3 and 4 complete investigation . Novel the carrier . changes found in MECP2 gene exon 4 should be confirmed by restric- These results indicate that mutations in the CDKL5 gene are not an tion analysis . important contribution in the ethiology of RTT with epilepsy in our population . P01.105 Analysis of polymorphisms in 5-Htt, HsP 70-1, APOE, and P01.107 HmOX-1 genes as potential modulation factors of Rett syndrome Searching for Copy Number Polymorphisms as modifiers in RTT phenotype syndrome D. Zahorakova1, A. Puchmajerova1, L. Kralik1, M. Jachymova2, A. Baxova3, J. R. Artuso1, F. Ariani1, A. Spanhol Rosseto1, D. Rondinella1, F. T. Papa1, E. Zeman1, P. Martasek1; Katzaki1, M. A. Mencarelli1, I. Meloni1, F. Mari1, M. Pollazzon1, M. Zappella2, G. 1Department of Pediatrics and Center for Applied Genomics, General University Hayek2, A. Renieri1; Hospital and First School of Medicine Charles University, Prague, Czech Re- 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Child Neuropsychiatry, University hospital, public, 2Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, General Siena, Italy. University Hospital and First School of Medicine Charles University, Prague, MECP2 mutations are associated with a broad spectrum of clinical Czech Republic, 3Institute of Biology and Clinical Genetics, General University phenotypes in girls, including the preserved speech variant (PSV) of Hospital and First School of Medicine Charles University, Prague, Czech Re- RTT . In this variant, girls improve language and motor abilities . Previ- public. ous studies demonstrated that mutation type and/or X chromosome Background: Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked neurodevelopmental inactivation are not sufficient to explain such variability, suggesting disorder caused primarily by de novo mutations in the MECP2 gene . that additional factors are involved . We hypothesized that Copy Num- It is one of the leading causes of mental retardation in females with ber Polymorphisms (CNPs) contribute to RTT clinical variability . We prevalence 1:10,000 female births worldwide . The phenotypic spec- started to search such variations in three familial cases with the same trum of Rett syndrome is very variable even in females with random MECP2 mutation and different phenotype (http://www .biobank .unisi . X chromosome inactivation . Therefore we hypothesize there might be it): two pairs of sisters (one classic and the other PSV) and a mother/ other genetic factors which modulate the Rett phenotype . In a large daughter pair (mother with mental retardation and daughter with clas- case-control study, we performed molecular genetic analysis of func- sic RTT) . In these cases, we performed whole genome array-CGH tional polymorphisms in several genes involved in neuronal develop- and we found a total of 18 CNPs . Three of them (6p21 .33, 8p11 .23, ment and metabolism (5-HTT, HSP70-1, APOE, and HMOX-1) . 14q11) are in common between two familial cases . Interestingly, the Methods: All patients carried confirmed pathogenic mutation in the 8p11 .23 region includes ADAM5 . ADAMs are transmembrane proteins MECP2 gene . Molecular genetic analysis of six polymorphisms was that play an important role in the development of the nervous system . performed using PCR-based methods (PAGE, PCR/RFLP) . Results They regulate proliferation, migration, differentiation and survival of were statistically evaluated by the test of binomical distribution . various cells, as well as axonal growth and myelination . Among theClinical genetics  other CNPs, the 1q42 .12 region contains the ENAH gene that rep- P01.110 resents a good candidate as RTT modifier since it . is involved in the molecular diagnostic of XLmR in mentally retarded males from pathways that control cortical neuronal positioning . Real-time qPCR Latvia with specific probes for selected candidate genes in 100 classic and Z. Daneberga1,2, Z. Krumina1, B. Lace1,2, D. Bauze1, N. Pronina1, R. Lugovska1; 20 PSV patients is ongoing. The identification of modifier genes will 1Medical Genetic Clinic, University Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Rigas allow to better characterize the pathogenic mechanisms of RTT, giving Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. additional handles for therapy design . Mental retardation (MR) is one of the main reasons for referral in paediatric, child neurological and clinical genetic practice . The prevalence of mental P01.108 retardation is thought to be on the order of 2-3% . Rett syndrome in two years old girl with Xp deletion - case X-linked gene defects have long been considered to be important causes of report mental retardation, on the basis of the observation that mental retardation A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, R. Tincheva2, D. Avdjieva2, I. Boneva2, V. Mitev1; is significantly more common in males than in females. Clinical observa- 1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, tions and linkage studies in families revealed that X-linked mental retarda- Bulgaria, 2Paediatric Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. tion (XLMR) is a highly heterogeneous condition . The most common form Rett syndrome (RTT; OMIM#312750) is an early childhood neurode- of XLMR is the Fragile X mental-retardation syndrome (FXS) . Mutations at velopmental disorder . A girl at age of 2 years was referred to our labo- FRAXA locus on distal Xq may cause mental impairment . Most common ratory for DNA analysis of Rett syndrome . She demonstrated some mutation at FRAXA locus is expansion of CGG triplet repeats located in the of the symptoms, characteristic for Rett syndrome - arrested mental 5’-untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation-1 (FMR1) gene . development, loss of communication skills, speech delay and purpose- The group of 341 unrelated males with MR referred from clinical geneticists ful hand movements, appearance of autistic features . Under some cir- was screened for FXS . CGG repeats number was detected by Applied Bio- cumstances the child demonstrates aggressive behavior . systems protocol on ABI Prism 310 . The prevalence of 29, 30 and 31 CGG The performed cytogenetic analysis showed pathological karyotype - repeats for normal alleles were found . Six affected patients were detected 46,XX,del(X)(p1 .22) . (1.76%). The final diagnosis of FXS was confirmed by Southern blotting. About 85% of the cases with Rett syndrome were caused by mutations DNA sequencing for the estimation of AGG inserts structure for gray zone in the gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 1 (MECP2) . In about (34-50 repeats) alleles was used . 10% of the cases the disease causing mutation affects the gene for To analyse undiagnosed XLMR patients we recently introduced the multi- cyclin dependent kinase like 5 (CDKL5) . However, the causative muta- plex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) method to identify de- tion is still unknown in the remaining 5% of the cases . letions and duplications of MRX genes . We use MLPA P106 MRX commer- The complete sequencing of MECP2 and CDKL5 genes revealed no cial kit (MRC-Holland) to analyse one or more exons of 14 MRX genes . mutations in the affected girl . In addition we sequenced the Aristaless related homeobox (ARX) gene, mutations in which have been shown P01.111 to cause mental retardation either isolated or associated with a broad Novel PcR-based protocol for a rapid molecular testing of spectrum of neurological problems . This gene has been mainly affect- Fragile X syndrome ed in boys . As this gene is localized on the short arm of the X-chromo- B. López-Posadas1, E. Velasco2, J. A. Garrote3,4, M. Alonso1, J. J. Telleria1, A. some (Xp22 .13), one of its copies was missing in our Xp deleted girl . Blanco1, I. Fernández-Carvajal5; For that reason this gene seemed to be a good candidate for screening 1Laboratorio de Genética Humana, Unidad de Diagnóstico Genético y Perina- in our mentally retarded girl . The DNA analysis of ARX showed no tal, Valladolid, Spain, 2Laboratorio de Genética del Cáncer, Unidad de Diag- pathological changes . nóstico Genético y Perinatal, Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (IBGM), We will appreciate any further comments and suggestions on the re- Universidad de Valladolid-CSIC, Valladolid, Spain, 3Unidad de Investigación, ported case . Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 4Laboratorio de Inmunología, Unidad de Diagnóstico Genético y Perinatal, Instituto de Biología P01.109 y Genética Molecular (IBGM), Universidad de Valladolid-CSIC, Valladolid, ARX mutations in south African patients with X-Linked mental Spain, 5Laboratorio de Genética Humana, Unidad de Diagnóstico Genético y retardation (XLmR): Research to diagnostics Perinatal, Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (IBGM), Universidad de G. L. Carvill, R. G. Goliath; Valladolid-CSIC, Valladolid, Spain. Division of Human Genetics, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Fragile-X syndrome (FXS) is the most common cause of inherited Medicine, Cape Town, South Africa. mental retardation . It is caused by an anomalous expansion of CGG Objectives: Mental retardation (MR) is associated with decreased repeats in the 5’UTR of the FMR1 gene, which are hypermethylated, cognitive function and impaired development of adaptive skills . The causing the absence of FMR1 expression . genetic heterogeneity of the disorder is exemplified by the number of Clinical diagnosis of typical FXS is usually difficult to establish before genes implicated in the pathogenesis of MR . Of these genes, a sub- puberty and molecular testing is therefore needed to confirm it. stantial proportion are located on the X chromosome, giving rise to the Several PCR protocols have already been developed to amplify these term X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) . Mutations in the ARX gene repeats, but neither of them is able to amplify full-mutated alleles . are the second largest contributor to XLMR, preceded only by CGG With a view to improving the molecular analysis of FXS, we have es- expansion mutation in FMR1, responsible for Fragile X syndrome . tablished a new PCR-based strategy . methods: DNA sequence alterations in the ARX gene were inves- We analyzed 68 retrospective samples of known repeat sizes to as- tigated in 119 XLMR patients, 32 patients that form part of a male sess protocol efficiency and 252 prospective samples. sib-ship and 183 isolated cases (all individuals are FMR1 expansion Two PCRs were performed followed by electrophoresis in a DNA se- mutation negative) . These analyses were conducted using denaturing quencer. Finally, a methylation-specific PCR was carried out to test the high-performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC), or PCR amplifica- promoter methylation status . tion and gel electrophoresis of the common c .428_451dup (Dup24) Results from retrospective samples were reproduced with the new pro- mutation alone . tocol, supporting its capability to test the whole range of FMR1 alleles . Results: To date the proportion of ARX disease-causing mutations in Additionally, its sizing accuracy made allele frequency distribution and the XLMR cohort is 2 .4% and 3,4% in the sib-ships . While in the iso- transmission studies possible . lated group the Dup24 mutation has not been detected . Analysis of prospective samples revealed 13 full mutations, two pre- conclusion: These findings suggest that c.428_451dup testing is fea- mutation-full mutation mosaicisms, 6 premutations and 10 grey-zone sible and justified in determining the cause of XLMR in males negative patients . for Fragile X syndrome, in the Western Cape region of South Africa . In- Moreover, we have amplified and accurately sized a full-mutated allele corporating this test into the diagnostic protocol stands to improve the of 817 repeats, the longest allele amplified by PCR until now. diagnostic yield of patients, which in turn will afford improved genetic In conclusion, this PCR approach has improved and speeded up the management of families . Furthermore, better genetic management will FXS diagnosis making it less labor-intensive than standard procedures have a valuable impact on the burden of disease in a developing coun- that include Southern blot analysis . try such as South Africa .Clinical genetics  P01.112 Siena, Italy, 6Neurochirurgia, Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. Evaluation of a PcR-based method that allows the analysis The study of transcription using genomic tiling arrays has lead to of fragile X mutations in the complete range of expansions: a the identification of numerous additional exons. One example is the multicentric italian experience MECP2 gene on the X-chromosome; using 5’RACE and RT-PCR in M. Grasso1, I. Giotti2, F. Torricelli2, M. Melis3, A. Loi3, A. Ravani4, A. Ferlini4, E. human tissues and cell lines, we have found more than 15 novel ex- Bettella5, R. Polli5, A. Murgia5; ons (RACEfrags) connecting to at least one exon of MECP2 gene and 1SC Laboratorio Genetica Ospedale Galliera, Genova, Italy, 2SOD Diagnostica map up to 1 Mb telomeric to it . We subsequently asked if variation Genetica AO Universitaria, Firenze, Italy, 3Laboratorio Genetica Umana, ASL in the novel exons is causatively associated with Rett syndrome . We 8, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Laboratorio Genetica Molecolare AO sequenced all MECP2-connected exons and flanking sequences in Universitaria, Ferrara, Italy, 5University of Padua Department of Pediatrics, 3 groups: 48 Rett patients without mutations in MECP2 and CDKL5 Padua, Italy. genes (group_1); 30 Rett patients with mutations in the MECP2 gene We present the results of a collaborative study aimed at evaluating (group_2); 100 control individuals from the same geoethnic group the performances of the Fragile X PCR Assay (Abbot Molecular, Inc), (group_3) . Approximately 14kb was sequenced per sample, (2 .6Mb designed to provide robust amplification and precise sizing of FMR1 of DNA resequencing). 75 individuals had new, not yet identified rare dynamic mutations within the entire range of expansions . The goal of variants, but no statistically significant difference was found among the the study was to test the following features: 1) accuracy in measuring 3 groups . These results suggest that variants in the newly discovered the number of CGG repeats; 2) capacity to resolve normal FMR1 al- exons studied do not contribute to Rett syndrome, furthermore if some leles differing by one triplet unit, 3) capacity to assure efficient co-am- of these variants are related to a phenotype, this must be different from plification of different-size fragments; 4) amplification of full mutations. Rett . Interestingly however, the variants in the novel exons are twice The population studied comprised a total of 378 individuals, 241 fe- as frequent as those found in flanking sequences (50 vs 24 for ap- males and 137 males, all previously ascertained by Southern blot and proximately 1 .3 Mb sequenced for each class of sequences) . The sig- other types of PCR-based analysis which found 226 individuals with wt nificance of this result remains to be elucidated; one hypothesis is that FMR1 alleles, 80 with premutations, 48 with full mutations and 24 with novel exons accumulate variants faster than the rest of the genome complex mosaicism . A few representative samples were analyzed by (positive selection?) that could underscore the functional importance all the laboratories involved . The study pointed out the importance of of these sequences . evaluating the whole set of data generated through the analysis for a correct interpretation of the final results. The work confirmed the sen- P01.115 sitivity and reliability of the method that allowed to correctly size FMR1 Rett syndrome cases with more than one causative mutation in alleles in the different categories of expansions and obtained a robust the mEcP2 gene amplification of full mutations with up to 600 repeats. The Fragile X D. O. Robinson1,2, D. J. Bunyan1; PCR Assay is a molecular tool that can fill the existing gap between 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, Wilts, United Kingdom, currently used PCR-based methods that do not amplify large CGG 2Human Genetics Division, Southampton University School of Medicine, South- expansions and Southern blot analysis which does not allow a precise ampton, United Kingdom. sizing of FMR1 alleles . Rett syndrome is an X-linked dominant disease affecting females . It is a progressive neurological disorder characterized by normal birth P01.113 and psychomotor development for the first six to 18 months of life fol- tissue mosaicism of unmethylated expanded FmR1 allele lowed by severe regression in motor and language ability . In 80% of derived from normal number of cGG repeats cases mutations in the Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene C. Catalli1, I. Bagni2, A. M. Nardone2, G. Fusco1, M. Frontali2, A. Morgante1, A. are identified, usually de novo point mutations, however up to 16% Botta1, G. Novelli1,2; are caused by deletions of one or more exons of the gene . Almost all 1Department of biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Roma, Italy, 2Medical are single cases in a family resulting from de novo mutations or the genetics, Policlinico Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy. inheritance of a mutation from an unaffected parent with somatic or Fragile-X syndrome (FRAXA, OMIM #300624) is caused by expansion germ line mosaicism . of a [CGG] trinucleotide in the FMR1 gene over 200-230 repeats . This Point mutation testing and gene dosage analysis of a cohort of 455 leads to methylation of CpG islands of its promoter region, which in cases referred to our laboratory for MECP2 gene analysis identified turn causes silencing of FMR1 gene . Length and methylation mosa- mutations in 118 cases . However there were four females who each icisms are described, arisen from premutated or mutated maternal al- had two different de novo causative mutations, presumed to be on the leles, with different and often unpredictable clinical outcome . Here we same chromosome because compound heterozygosity for two caus- present the molecular characterization of a clinically normal 33 years ative mutations is likely to be lethal . Two of these cases had a point old man referred to us for genetic counseling after the identification mutation and a small intraexonic deletion, a third had a whole exon of a carrier status (61 [CGG]) of her daughter detected during amnio- deletion and a separate small intraexonic deletion and a fourth had a centesis and confirmed at birth. Familial study revealed a maternal small intraexonic deletion and a large duplication. These findings high- transmission of the premutated allele . Surprisingly, a mosaic pattern light the necessity to perform both point mutation and exon dosage ranging from normal to 330 unmethylated FMR1 alleles was detected analysis in such cases, particularly because of the possibility of unde- in the father . On clinical re-evaluation, no sign associated with FRAXA tected parental mosaicism and the implications for prenatal diagnosis were detected, except relative macroorchidia and slightly extroverted in future pregnancies . These cases also suggest that the MECP2 gene ears. Intelligence were above-average. Samples of fibroblasts, sperm may be particularly prone to mutation . and saliva were additionally analyzed and all resulted normal . QF-PCR and chromosome analysis excluded additional chromosome X mosa- P01.116 icism . Blood sample of his mother showed the same normal allele, as FRAXA molecular Genetic Diagnosis of the oocyte´donor resulted from linkage analysis . To our knowledge, even if tissue-con- population during 2007 for Assisted Reproduction treatments. fined, this is the first report of expanded FMR1 allele originating from A. L. Garda-Salas1, I. Pérez1, K. Aurrekoetxea2, C. Méndez1, M. C. Martínez1, normal allele . P. Albero1, L. Fernández1, M. Nicolás1, J. Landeras1; 1IVI-Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 2Abbot Científica, Madrid, Spain. P01.114 The Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (IVI) has implemented for the Variation in novel exons (RAcEfrags) and human genetic oocyte donation program in our clinics, the routine study for molecu- disorders; the case of Rett syndrome lar analysis of X-FRAGILE Syndrome (FRAXA) . FRAXA is one of the P. Makrythanasis1, P. Kapranov2, L. Bartoloni1, A. Raymond3, S. Deutsch1, R. greatest genetic prevalence illnesses in general population . In this Guigo4, F. Denoeud4, C. Rossier1, F. Ariani5, V. Capra6, A. Renieri5, T. Gingeras2, communication, we present our analysis, using the protocol recently S. E. Antonarakis1; developed by Abbott Molecular, called Fragile X PCR Test, . We stud- 1Medical Genetics and Dev, Medical School, University of Geneva, Geneva, ied 2278 women from different cities in Spain . All these women as Switzerland, 2Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 3University of Laus- susceptible oocyte’donors for processing of assisted reproductive anne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 5University of Siena, treatments (TRA) .Clinical genetics  FRAXA is the most common cause associated to mental family inher- mutations of EP300 gene in 22q13, observed in 56% and 3% of the ited and represents among 15 to 20% of the total mental delay related tested patients respectively . to X cr. This illness has its origin in the deficiency of FMR1 protein Here we report the identification by a-CGH of duplications/deletions in synthesis . The expansion of the “dynamic” and repetitive region CGG, 6 of 25 RSTS patients found negative to point mutations of CREBBP 5´ to Fmr-1, causes it´s methylation and repression of expression . Ac- and to chromosomal rearrangements affecting CREBBP and EP300 cording repetitions number of the CGG tri-nucleotide, this region is regions . The imbalances are: i) a de novo 9Mb deletion in 2q24 .3q31 .1 considered normal (<50 CGGn), premutated (55-200 CGGn) or full involving the HOXD genes, ii) a 5,5 Mb duplication in 2q34q35 inhe- mutated (>200 CGGn) . rited by the healthy father, probably representing a private CNV, iii) In this poster we present the results of this extense study . In conclu- a 500Kb duplication in 17q11 .2 upstream the NF1 gene in a region sion, we found 21 (0,92 % ) premutation carriers; 49 (2,15%) “inter- delimited by NF1 REP-P1/P2 iv) a 1,2Mb deletion in 18q21 .33q22 .1 mediate” carriers and 1/33 women were excluded from the donation harbouring one gene, v) a 4,3Mb deletion in 2q22 .3q23 .1 involving program . five genes among which ZFHX1B, the gene mutated in Mowat-Wil- The knowledge of the fragile X premutation carrier condition or full son, vi) a 466Kb deletion in 7p21 .1 containing TWIST1, a proposed mutation carrier will permit the donor to receive the appropriate genetic candidate for RSTS . The parental origin, gene content and genomic counsel for reproductive end . On the other hand, the exclusion from characterization of the last four imbalances is in progress . Although the oocyte donation program of possibly “expanded” trinucleotids of the pathogenetic role is yet unproven in a few cases, this study shows this region, provides greater security to the receptor patients in our a high fraction of chromosomal rearrangements in regions other than processing of Assisted Reproduction . those of CREBBP/EP300 genes. In addition a-CGH is confirmed to be a suitable approach for diagnostic purposes and to highlight novel P01.117 positional RSTS candidate genes . Supported by A .S .M . (Associazione Genotype-phenotype correlation in Rubinstein-taybi syndrome Italiana Studio Malformazioni) . S. Naudion; Service de genetique, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. P01.119 The Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease . two cases of Rubinstein taybi syndrome caused by two new It is characterised by typical facial dysmorphism, abnormalities of the mutations that create premature stop codons and truncated extremities, growth retardation and psychomotor development delay . cREBBP protein Mutations have been identified in two genes, CREBBP and EP300 . V. I. Guerci1, A. Fabretto1, F. Faletra1, C. C. G. Gervasini2, L. Larizza2, P. Ga- We report a series comprising 93 patients with CREBBP mutations, sparini3,1; and 2 patients with EP300 mutations . Point mutations were searched 1Genetica Medica Dipartimento di Scienze della Riproduzione e Sviluppo, for by DHPLC followed by sequencing, and microrearrangements Trieste, Italy, 2Genetica Medica. Università degli Studi di Milano, Ospedale San were identified by array-CGH and/or Quantitative Multiplex Fluores- Paolo, Milano, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. cent PCR (QMF-PCR) . Among the CREBBP mutations, 24% were Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; MIM 180849) is a congenital disor- nonsense, 24% led to a translation reading frame shift, 26% were mi- der characterized by growth retardation and psychomotor delay, broad crorearrangements (24% deletions, 2% duplications), 18% affected a thumbs and halluces and a wide range of dysmorphic features . RSTS splice site, and 8% were missense . It is noteworthy that no mutation was shown to be associated with microdeletions and point mutations in was ever found in exons 7, 9, 11, 18, 22, 23 and 29 . Whatever the the gene encoding the CREB-binding protein, located in 16p13 .3 . mutation type and localisation along the gene, the dysmorphic and The first case was born from a twin pregnancy. While the sister was nor- osseous phenotypes were comparable to the typical RTS phenotype . mal during pregnancy and postnatal period, the patient had IUGR and However, patients carrying a nonsense mutation presented associated typical dysmorphic features since the first weeks of life. Cardiac valvu- anomalies such as cardiopathy (33% vs 26%) or neurological anoma- lar anomalies were found as well as a bilateral conductive hypoacusia . lies (hypotonia in 81% vs 60%, hyperreflexia in 37% vs 29%) more RSTS was then suspected and was confirmed by molecular analysis. frequently than patients with any other type of mutation . Conversely, A new mutation was found: c .5838_5857dup20, with the formation of patients carrying missense mutations presented with less severe phe- a premature stop codon (p .Pro1953HisfsX30) resulting in a truncated notypes, since none of them presented any associated malformation protein of 1982 aminoacids . Second case was an Haitian girl . Preg- or anomaly . nancy was terminated at 32 weeks for preeclampsia and IUGR . She Concerning the 2 patients with an EP300 mutation, our data were in was hospitalized because of respiratory distress, feeding difficulties accordance with those of the literature, since they presented with a and severe growth retardation . A recurrent infection condition second- typical dysmorphic phenotype with a less severe osseous phenotype . ary to gastroesophageal reflux was suspected. However, encephalic Only one of the two patients had broad thumbs and halluces, without NMR demonstrated corpus callosum agenesis; oculistic examination any associated osseous anomaly . revealed severe strabismus and nasolacrimal duct obstruction and bone age was marked delayed . Furthermore, physical examination P01.118 demonstrated typical RSTS dysmorphisms . Molecular analysis of the chromosomal imbalances in Rubinstein-taybi patients negative CREBBP gene revealed a 7 nucleotide deletion: c .3608_3609+5del, to cREBBP mutational test eliminating the donator splicing site of exon 18 with the formation of C. Gervasini1, R. Ciccone2, F. Mottadelli1, P. Castronovo1, D. Milani3, F. Bede- a premature stop codon . This mutation produces a truncated protein schi4, M. Uzielli5, A. Bentivegna6, A. Pilotta7, G. Cocchi8, G. Scarano9, A. Seli- (1204 aminoacids). The identification of these two new alleles may in- corni3, O. Zuffardi2, L. Larizza1; crease the knowledge of CREBBP function and the prediction of geno- 1Genetica Medica Dip. Med., Chir. e Odont., Università Milano Polo Osp. San type-phenotype correlation . Paolo, Milano, Italy, 2Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3I Clinica Pediatrica, Fondazione Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina P01.120 Elena, Milano, Milano, Italy, 4Ambulatorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione A predominantly sensorial case of cHARGE: towards a Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina Elena, Milano, Milano, Italy, 5Unità di Genetica, refinement of CHD disease spectrum Dip Pediatria, Osp. Meyer Università di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 6Dipartimento B. Brasseur1, N. Revencu1, P. Clapuyt2, M. Maes3, Y. Gillerot1; di Neuroscienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Milano, Italy, 7Auxoendocrinologia, 1Center for Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2Pediatric Radiology, Brussels, Ospedale Pediatrico Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 8Centro per lo Studio delle Mal- Belgium, 3Pediatric Endocrinology, Brussels, Belgium. formazioni Congenite, Istituto Clinico di Pediatria preventiva e Neonatologia, Introduction: We present here a novel CHD7 mutation in a mildly af- Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 9Unità Operativa complessa di Genetica fected boy . The implications for further delineation of CHD7 disease Medica, Az. Osp. Rummo, Benevento, Benevento, Italy. spectrum are underlined . Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS, OMIM #180849) is a rare autoso- Clinical case: BM was born from unrelated Caucasian parents, with mal dominant congenital disorder characterized by postnatal growth microphallus and bilateral cryptorchidism . Hypogonadotropic hypogo- retardation and psychomotor developmental delay, skeletal anomalies nadism was diagnosed in neonatal period . Ophtalmologic examina- and specific facial dysmorphisms. RSTS is associated with chromoso- tion revealed relative microphtalmy with right chorioretinal coloboma mal microdeletion or point mutations of CREBBP gene in 16p13 .3 and and left retroretinal cysts . Psychomotor development and cardiac ul-Clinical genetics  trasound were normal . A small isolated notch was noted on the right at ~23 weeks of pregnancy . Amniocentesis, performed in another hos- pinna . pital, revealed a normal female karyotype . A control of the ultrasound At age 4, right sensorineural deafness was found and cranial imag- examination at 29 weeks’ gestation showed, in addition, the presence ing revealed bilateral middle and internal ear abnormalities (Mondini of dysplastic cup-shaped ears, especially at the right side, evoking the defect, bilateral semicircular canal agenesis, large sacculus, ossicular diagnosis of CHARGE syndrome . Fetal brain magnetic resonance was chain ankylosis), and hypoplastic olfactive tractus, without median line suggestive for the presence of hypoplastic semi-circular canals, a find- defect . ing that was confirmed by a fetal CT scan of the inner ear. At age 10, anosmia was diagnosed . Growth was conserved, except for The parents were young, healthy and non-consanguineous . Family delay due to absence of puberty, and he performed well at school . history was unremarkable, except for the presence of miscarriages . At age 13, screening of CHD7 by heteroduplex and sequence analysis The parents were informed about CHARGE syndrome and decided detected a c .6290A>G (p .Asp2097Gly) heterozygous mutation . Par- to continue the pregnancy . The child, born at 37 5/7 weeks, had a ents have not yet been tested but different models predict a probable left-sided cleft lip and palate, a heart murmur 3/6, a facial asymmetry pathogenic effect of this substitution . (with right eye being smaller than the left eye) and typical CHARGE Conclusions: This presentation suggests that CHARGE syndrome ears . She had major cardio-respiratory problems and died soon after (MIM 214800) has to be evoked in children with apparently isolated birth . The parents refused post-mortem examination, but a cerebral sensorial deficiencies, and certainly in those with unilateral deafness brain MRI could be performed post-mortem and showed a coloboma and inner ear radiological abnormalities, in agreement with recent clini- of the left retina and absent olfactory bulbs . Blood analyses for CHD7 cal criteria (Verloes) . CHD7 mutation screening would be helpful for mutational screening are ongoing . better characterization of these “predominantly sensorial” forms, and This case illustrates the use of both fetal brain MRI and CT scan of the if confirmed, could allow a more specific work-up and management, inner ear in establishing a prenatal diagnosis of CHARGE syndrome . with regards to the expanding knowledge on CHD7 disease spectrum (neurological, mainly rhombencephalic, endocrinological and immuno- P01.123 logical deficiencies). A novel sOX9 mutation in a case with camptomelic dysplasia L. Grozdanova1, M. Krasteva2, G. Scherer3, R. Stoeva4, E. Bausch3, I. Stoev4, P01.121 T. Krastev4, A. Linev4, M. Stefanova4,5; clinical and molecular characterisation of a cohort of 1Departmant of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, Portuguese cHARGE patients 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University, Plovdiv, Bul- A. B. Sousa1, A. Medeira1, D. Johnson2, A. B. Salgueiro3, H. G. Santos4, I. garia, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, University of Freiburg, Cordeiro1; Freiburg, Germany, 4Departmant of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical 1Serviço de Genética do Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Duncan University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 5Center for Human Genetics, Free Flamish Univer- Guthrie Institute, Yorkhill, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Serviço de Pediatria do sity Hospital, Brussels, Belgium. Hospital Fernando da Fonseca, Lisboa, Portugal, 4GenoMed, Lisboa, Portugal. Camptomelic dysplasia (CD, MIM 114290)) is a rare, often lethal, dom- CHARGE is an acronym standing for Coloboma, Heart malformation, inantly inherited, congenital osteochondrodysplasia, associated with choanal Atresia, Retardation of growth and/or development, Genital male-to-female autosomal sex reversal in two-thirds of the affected anomalies and Ear anomalies . Since the original description, other karyotypic males . Prominent features are bowing and angulations of clinical features have been added to the CHARGE spectrum of anom- long bones, Robin sequence, pelvis, chest and rib abnormalities . De alies, namely rhombencephalic dysfunction, hypoplasia of the semi- novo mutations of the SOX9 gene, a tissue-specific transcription factor circular canals and arhinencephaly . The diagnostic criteria now stress gene involved both in skeletogenesis and male sexual differentiation, the importance of the 3C triad (Coloboma, Choanal atresia, abnormal are known to be responsible for both CD and XY sex reversal . Here we semicircular Canals). Additionally, patients are classified as typical (3 present a 4-month-old infant of young non-consanguineous parents major or 2 major and 2 minor criteria), partial or incomplete (2 major out of the Turkish minority group in Bulgaria . Femoral malformations and 1 minor criteria), or atypical (2 major or 1 major and 2 minor crite- and macrocephaly were detected prenatally . The newborn was deliv- ria) . CHARGE was considered an association until recent years, when ered at term and presented with an extremely short birth length, be- CHD7 mutations were identified in approximately 2/3 of patients. low -7 SD, dysmorphic facial features, median cleft palate, remarkably We reviewed the patients with a clinical diagnosis of CHARGE syn- bowed and short limbs, narrow asymmetric thorax, club feet, short de- drome who visited our Genetics Clinic . 10 patients met the most recent formed toes, and radiographic features characteristic for camptomelic diagnostic criteria. 5 cases could be classified as typical CHARGE and dysplasia . Male pseudohermaphroditism with female external genita- 5 cases were atypical . However, 3/5 of the latter were not checked lia, enlarged clitoris, and male karyotype was found . DNA analyses for hypoplasia of the semicircular canals, which could well alter their revealed a novel de novo mutation of the SOX9 gene, Q401X . A similar status . nonsense mutation, Y400X, has been described previously (Hum Mol CHD7 mutation detection studies were undertaken in all these pa- Genet 6:91, 1997) . In both cases, a truncated SOX9 protein results tients, except for one of the typical CHARGE cases who died in the that completely lacks the C-terminal transactivation domain (residues neonatal period. Highly likely causative mutations were identified in 402-509) . The Q401X mutant SOX9 protein will still be able to bind to 7 patients overall, 3/4 typical and 4/5 atypical cases . In the remain- DNA, as it still retains the DNA-binding domain, but will be unable to ing atypical CHARGE patient a sequence change of unknown clinical activate transcription of the genes that are regulated by this transcrip- significance was found. This variant was also present in the patient’s tion factor . mother, who has subtle facial asymmetry and anisocoria, complicating result interpretation . P01.124 Opsismodysplasia with renal agenesia: A case report P01.122 M. Mihaescu1,2, G. Olaru2, I. Sas2, D. Navolan1,2, D. Chiriac1,2, E. Taurescu1,2, A prenatal diagnosis of cHARGE syndrome D. Citu1,2; W. Courtens1, P. Clapuyt2, C. Barrea3, N. Revencu1, Y. Gillerot1, T. Detaille4, P. 1University of Medicine, Timisoara, Romania, 2Hospital “dr. Dumitru Popescu”, Bernard5, J. Biard6; Timisoara, Romania. 1Center of Human Genetics UCL, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, 1200 Brus- Opsismodysplasia is a rare chondrodysplasia clinically characterised sels, Belgium, 2Dept of Pediatric Radiology, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, by micromelia, respiratory distress, and major delay in skeletal ossifi- 1200 Brussels, Belgium, 3Dept of Cardiology, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, cation . 1200 Brussels, Belgium, 4Dept of Pediatrics, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, We present a novel case of opsismodysplasia in a foetus after termina- 1200 Brussels, Belgium, 5Dept of Obstetrics,Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, tion of pregnancy at 30 weeks of gestation . Prenatal was diagnosed 1200 Brussels, Belgium, 6Dept of Obstetrics, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, during ultrasound in our clinic with shortness of the long bones and 1200 Brussels, Belgium. short extremities, depressed nasal bridge, narrow thorax . The parent’s We report on a female foetus in whom a CHARGE syndrome was rroms ethnic, delivered no information about the family consanguinity . diagnosed at 31 weeks of gestation . A Fallot tetralogy and a cleft lip After termination of pregnancy the female new born lived only 30 min- and palate were observed at a fetal ultrasound examination performed utes . She was at birth: the weight 840g, the length 29 cm, PC 25 cmClinical genetics  and PT 19 cm. Necropsy confirmed dysmorphic features, coarse face, were screened by dHPLC, followed by sequencing of amplicons with and showed bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia, bilateral renal agenesia an abnormal profile. Overall, eight distinct mutations were detected. (not previously reported in opsismodysplasia) rhizomelic micromelia Five of these had been previously described in the literature, and three (handwriting appearance of hands fingers). have never been reported to our knowledge . Previously described She presented: high forehead, horizontals and short palpebral fissures, genotype-phenotype correlations for the already reported mutations posterior rotated and low placed proeminent ears, small anteverted were confirmed in this series. nose with long philtrum, depressed bridge of nose, micrognatia, thin Among the newly reported mutations, the IVS7+1G>A variant was upper lip), muscle hypotonia , short feet and hands, abnormalities of found in a female proband with typical type 1 Stickler syndrome with fingers, dorsolumbar scoliosis. Radiographic findings were hypoplastic a positive family history and wide intrafamilial phenotypic variability . vertebral bodies, marked shortness of the long bones of the hands and A nonsense mutation, K1447X, in the C-terminal region of the pro- feet with concave metaphyses . tein was found in a family, mother and child, studied for a suspicion Karyotype from the peripheral blood lymphocytes and G banding were of Kniest Dysplasia . Finally, a G891C missense variant, affecting the performed according to standard protocols . The karyotype was 46,XX triple helical domain of the protein, was associated with a clinical pic- In our knowledge were reported only ten cases with termination of ture of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Strudwick type . pregnancies after the antenatal diagnoses and this is the first case of Further cases will need to be examined in order to obtain a better opsismodysplasia associated with bilateral renal agenesia . definition of genotype-phenotype correlations for COL2A1 mutations in the Italian population . P01.125 New ocular findings among two sisters with Yunis-Varón P01.127 syndrome Genetic diagnosis of the craniosynostosis in spain J. R. Corona-Rivera1, C. O. Romo-Huerta2, S. A. Estrada-Padilla1, E. López- D. Arroyo, D. Corella, M. Edo; Marure2, M. A. Villafuerte-Bautista2; Progenie molecular, Valencia, Spain. 1Instituto de Genética Humana Dr. Enrique Corona-Rivera, Guadalajara, Mexi- The craniosynostosis consist in an anomalous fusion of cranial bones co, 2Hospital Civil de Guadalajara Dr. Juan I. Menchaca, Guadalajara, Mexico. that originates problems in the normal growth of the cranium and in- introduction. The Yunis-Varón syndrome (YVS) represents a rare au- volves dramatic alterations in the shape of the head and the face, and tosomal recessive syndrome characterized by cleidocranial dysplasia, in some cases severe mental delay. The craniosynostosis is classified absence of thumbs and halluces, distal aphalangia, ectodermal anom- under several syndromes: Apert, Crouzon, Pfeiffer, Beare-Stevenson, alies, and poor outcome . This report is among two sisters with YVS, Saethre-Chotzen, Muenke and Jackson-Weiss . Each one has a par- which adds ocular findings to the known features of this syndrome. ticular pattern of inheritance and a few clinical specific characteris- clinical reports. The first patient, a 11-month-old female infant was tics, but in some cases they are difficult to distinguish by the external the third child of a healthy consanguineous parents of Mexican de- aspect, specially when prenatal diagnosis is done by means of the scent . She has pre- and post-natal growth retardation, wide sutures ultrasound scans . The genetic diagnosis allows to detect the cranio- and fontanels, sparse hair, telecanthus, short upper lip, high arched synostosis in the first stages of the pregnancy and to confirm the clini- palate, abnormal ears, micrognathia, loose skin in neck, sloping shoul- cal observations . ders, hypoplastic thumbs, distal aphalangia, nail hypoplasia, aplasia The most important genes associated to these disorders are FGFR1, of great toes, and short pointed toes . Besides, skull dystostosis, hypo- FGFR 2, FGFR3 and TWIST . The genetic study of the craniosynosto- plastic clavicles, hypoplasia of proximal phalanges, agenesis of distal sis is complex, and may includes the four genes involved in the pathol- phalanges, congenital cardiopathy, central nervous system anomalies, ogy . In this communication we show the results obtained in the study hearing loss and visual impairment were also observed . Ophthalmo- of these syndromes in Spain . We analysed 38 genes from 19 people, logic evaluation and fluorescein angiography showed papillo-macular including affected people and their families . We found 5 mutations that atrophic chorioretinopaty with “salt-and-pepper” appearance . Results have been reported as the genetic basis of the disease . We also done of TORCH titers, metabolic screening test, karyotype, and muscle bi- a prenatal genetic diagnosis that confirms a Pfeiffer syndrome, previ- opsy were normal or negative . The second patient was a female new- ously diagnosed by ultrasound scan . Our results suggest that most of born with physical, ophthalmologic, and radiological findings similar to mutation associated to craniosynostosis are located in a few regions her sister. Absence of thumbs and first toes were observed on ultra- of these genes, in opposition to what happens with other genetic dis- sound examination at 22 weeks . eases, in which the mutations could be found along the entire gene . conclusions. This appears to be the first cases of YVS associated with chorioretinopaty that could not be attributed to environmental P01.128 causes . Other anomalies such as sclerocornea, cataracts, corneal czech dysplasia: clinical and molecular delineation of a novel opacity and microphthalmos make mandatory the ophthalmologic cOL2A1 disorder evaluation for patients with YVS . A. Tzschach1, S. Tinschert2, E. Kaminsky3, E. Lusga3, S. Mundlos4, L. M. Graul-Neumann4; P01.126 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of cOL2A1 mutations and related phenotypes in italian patients Clinical Genetics, Technical University, Dresden, Germany, 3Practice of Human with presumptive type ii collagenopathy Genetics, Schomburgstrasse 120, Hamburg, Germany, 4Institute of Medical E. Andreucci1, I. Carboni2, E. Lapi3, M. F. Bedeschi4, F. Lalatta4, M. Di Rocco5, Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. M. G. Patricelli6, C. Auriti7, G. Seganti7, F. Papadia8, L. Giunti3, M. Genuardi1, S. Czech dysplasia (OMIM 609162) is a novel type II collagen disorder Giglio1; which is phenotypically distinct from other COL2A1-related diseases . 1Dept. of Clinical Pathophysiology, University of Florence and Medical Genet- Czech dysplasia is characterized by early-onset progressive pseudo- ics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Dept. of Clinical rheumatoid arthritis, short third and fourth metatarsals, mild platyspon- Pathophysiology, University of Florence and Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer dyly, normal height, and the absence of ophthalmological problems or Chidren’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer cleft palate. The disorder is caused by a specific missense mutation Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Poli- (R275C, c .823C>T) in the triple helical domain of the COL2A1 gene . clinico Mangiagalli Hospital, Milan, Italy, 5Rare Disease Unit, Department of We report a large German family consisting of 11 patients who not Paediatrics, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 6Laboraf, “San Raffaele” Hospital, only suffered from the typical features mentioned above, but who also Milan, Italy, 7Neonatal Pathology Unit, Children’s Hospital “Bambino Gesù”, had sensorineural hearing loss, a problem that has hitherto not been Rome, Italy, 8Metabolic Disease-Medical Genetics Division, Children’s Hospital considered as a major feature of Czech dysplasia . Mutation analysis “Giovanni XXIII”, Bari, Italy. revealed the COL2A1 c .823C>T (R275C) mutation in all patients . This COL2A1 mutations are associated with a wide spectrum of pheno- finding provides further evidence that Czech dysplasia is caused ex- typic manifestations . At present little is known about the distribution of clusively by the R275C mutation, which is a unique situation among COL2A1 defects and related phenotypes in Italian patients . We inves- the COL2A1 disorders, and indicates that this amino acid exchange tigated a series of 13 unrelated Italian probands with a presumptive leads to specific structural changes of type II collagen. The clinical and diagnosis of type II collagenopathy . The 54 exons of the COL2A1 gene radiological data of this family and previously reported patients withClinical genetics  the R275C mutation demonstrate a remarkably uniform manifestation of GDF5 where the precursor protein is cleaved and probably results in of the pathological features and add hearing loss to the list of major at least a partial loss of protein function. Metacarpophalangeal profile problems of Czech dysplasia . (MCPP) analysis on radiographs of the parents disclosed unremark- able results for the P436T mutation, transmitted from the mother, while P01.129 the father’s R378Q mutation was associated with a MCPP showing clinical and molecular characterization of Diastrophic Dysplasia overlap with BDA1, including brachymesophalangy of all digits and in the Portuguese population mild shortening of the entire first digit. This observation connects DPC M. Barbosa1, E. Almeida2, A. Oliveira3, N. Alegrete4, C. Alves5, A. Sousa6, A. with the BDA1 phenotype and further expands the clinical variability of Medeira6, J. Saraiva7, J. Pinto-Basto8, G. Soares1, A. Fortuna1, A. Superti- GDF5 associated phenotypes . Furga9, L. Mittaz10, L. Bonafé10, M. Reis-Lima1; 1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Oporto, Portugal, 2Serviço P01.131 de Ortopedia, Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Oporto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Early recognition of Ellis van creveld syndrome: report of a new Ortopedia, Hospital Geral de Santo António, Oporto, Portugal, 4Serviço de case Ortopedia, Hospital de São João, Oporto, Portugal, 5Serviço de Ortopedia, V. Plaiasu, G. Motei, F. Nedelea, E. Neagu, M. Iordachescu; Centro Hospitalar do Funchal, Funchal, Portugal, 6Serviço de Genética Médica, IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania. Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Serviço de Genética Médica, Hos- Ellis van Creveld is a rare chondro-ectodermal dysplasia characterized pital Pediátrico, Coimbra, Portugal, 8Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva, by short ribs, polydactyly, growth retardation and ectodermal defects . Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Oporto, Portugal, 9Department of Significant findings in the general survey of our male case were nar- Pediatrics, Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg University row thorax, postaxial polydactyly of the hands, bones deformities with Hospital,, Freiburg, Germany, 10Division of Molecular Pediatrics, Centre Hospit- extremities markedly shortened, dysplastic fingernails, neonatal teeth, alier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. respiratory distress due to narrow chest . Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD; MIM #222600) is an autosomal reces- Aspects of the ribs and dystrophic nails are the major criteria in estab- sive chondrodysplasia, characterized by limb shortening, hitchicker lishing the diagnosis . It may be differentiated from other chondrodys- thumbs, spinal deformities and contractures. Diagnosis is confirmed trophies or syndromes associated with polydactyly . by molecular testing of the sulphate transporter SLC26A2 gene . SL- Early recognition is important in order to identify the real diagnosis, to C26A2- related dysplasias encompasses a range of disease: from know evolution and prognosis and to offer proper genetic counselling . lethal achondrogenesis type 1B and atelosteogenesis type 2 (AO2) Prognosis of our case is linked to the respiratory difficulties. to classical DTD and mild recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia Acknowledgements: CEEX National Program 2008, Module I (rMED) . Genotype-phenotype correlations have been described . This study aimed at characterizing clinically, radiologically and molecularly, P01.132 14 patients and 3 foetuses affected by SLC26A2- related dysplasias New molecular findings in Hypochondroplasia: clinical, and to evaluate genotype-phenotype correlation . The main Portuguese radiological and molecular review of a cohort of 15 Portuguese Departments of Genetics and Orthopaedics were contacted in order to patients recruit patients from all the country . M. Gonçalves-Rocha1, G. Soares1, J. Pinto-Basto1, M. Martins1, F. Macedo2, Phenotypically, 8 patients were classified as classical DTD, 3 patients M. Almeida3, B. Campos-Xavier3,4, H. G. Santos3, M. Reis-Lima1; as rMED, and 3 patients had an intermediate phenotype (mild DTD) . 1Centro de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2SMIC - Serviço Médico de Ima- Foetuses had a homogenous presentation of severe DTD/AO2 . Mo- gem Computorizada, Porto, Portugal, 3GenoMed, Diagnósticos de Medicina lecular analysis showed that the R279W mutation is present in all living Molecular SA, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Division of Molecular Pediatrics, Centre Hos- patients, in homozygosity in rMED and in compound heterozygosity pitalier Universitaire Vaudois (currently affiliation), Lausanne, Switzerland. with the known severe allele R178X in classical DTD . Short stature in childhood is a frequent clinical presentation, be- This report shows the clinical and molecular spectrum of SLC26A2- re- ing 1% of these cases due to bone dysplasias . Achondroplasia lated skeletal dysplasias in the Portuguese population . R279W muta- (Ach;MIM#100800)/ Hypochondroplasia (Hch;MIM#146000) are the tion in homozygosity causes rMED and the association of this mild al- two most common autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasias . FGFR3 lele with a null mutation causes classical DTD . The “Finnish mutation”, gene is the only currently known gene to be implicated . was not found and is probably very rare in the Portuguese population . In Hch, p .N540K mutation in tyrosine-kinase domain 1 accounts for up The data of this series indicate that screening for common SLC26A2 to 65% of cases . mutations allows to confirm the diagnosis in the majority of Portuguese These two conditions have overlapping phenotypes characterized by patients or at least to identify one pathogenic allele . disproportionate short stature with rhizomelic limb shortening, Ach be- ing more severe . P01.130 We reviewed 13 probands and their first relatives (16 patients) followed compound heterozygosity for GDF5 in Du Pan type at our Genetics Clinic with diagnosis of Hch . Clinical and radiologi- chondrodysplasia cal findings were assessed independently by two clinical geneticists. S. Douzgou1,2, K. Lehmann3, R. Mingarelli1, S. Mundlos3, B. Dallapiccola1,2; Differential diagnosis were considered and systematically excluded 1IRCCS-C.S.S. San Giovanni Rotondo and C.S.S. Mendel Institute, Rome, whenever indicated . Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, Molecular study of FGFR3 gene was performed in all cases . 3Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Universitätsmedizin Berlin Charité, Berlin, Seven mutations were identified in 16 patients: three N540K, one rare Germany. mutation R200C (described once) and a new mutation p .E360K in a Du Pan type Chondrodysplasia (DPC) represents the milder end of the pair of sibs and their mother . Growth Differentiation Factor 5 (GDF5) morphopathies which, accord- When there is a high (clinical/radiological) suspicion of hypochondro- ing to an increasing gradient of clinical severity, include also the Hunt- plasia, and after negative mutation scanning, full sequencing FGFR3 er-Thompson type and the Grebe type acromesomelic chondrodyspla- coding region is indicated . sias . DPC is characterised by mild short stature, complex brachydac- This allows a higher detection rate uncovering rare/new mutations . In tyly, and fibular aplasia. Affected individuals are homozygotes for loss- our series one new mutation and another rare one were identified by of-function mutations in the highly conserved mature domain of GDF5 this method . that result in an impaired GDF5 signaling through the Bone Morphoge- Sequencing of FGFR3 coding region was negative in 7 patients . These netic Protein Receptor 1B (BMPR1B) . We investigated a 20 month-old patients also have clinical and radiological features within the spec- child with complex brachydactyly and mild proximal fibular hypoplasia, trum of Hch . In these patients hypochondroplasia is most probably not consistent with DPC, in the absence of short stature and other long FGFR3 related, raising attention to the role of other unknown (at the bones’ and joints’ anomalies . Mutational analysis disclosed compound moment) genes may play in this condition . heterozygosity for two novel GDF5 mutations, the P436T mutation in the mature domain, that most likely results in reduced binding to BM- PR1B and the R378Q mutation at the end of the prodomain . The muta- tion R378Q is located within the recognition motif at the processing siteClinical genetics  P01.133 land kindred spanning 4 generations is believed to have this condition White matter abnormalities in siblings with Goldberg shprintzen where affected members manifest ulnar ray defects, oligodactyly and syndrome ankyloglossia with highly variable expressivity amongst the affected . J. Pilch1, J. D. H. Jongbloed2, E. Kluczewska3, P. M. Grootscholten2, E. Emich- Development, intelligence, stature and overall health are normal for Widera1, E. Marszał1; these individuals. To my knowledge, this is the first report of familial 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po- cases of this genetic condition. It’s presence confirms autosomal domi- land, 2Departments of Genetics, UMCG, University of Groningen, Groningen, nant inheritance as one underlying etiology . The Netherlands, 3Department of Radiology Zabrze, Medical University of Sile- sia, Katowice, Poland. P01.136 Goldberg Shprintzen syndrome (OMIM 609460, GOLDBERG- Holt-Oram syndrome - case report SHPRINTZEN MEGACOLON SYNDROME - GOSHS) is rare syn- M. C. Panzaru, C. Rusu, M. Volosciuc, M. Covic; drome of congenital malformations with autosomal recessive pat- Medical Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania. tern of inheritance . The most frequent manifestations are: mental Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant condition with retardation, microcephaly with accompanying dysmorphic features, variable expressivity characterized by the association of congenital and Hirschsprung disease . The syndrome is a result of mutations in heart defects and preaxial radial ray upper limb defects . We present a KIAA1279 gene, which function is still poorly understood . It is possible new case in order to illustrate this rare entity and to discuss the vari- that incorrect function of the gene product is a cause of abnormal mi- able expression and the management . Our proband is a 13,5 old male, gration of neurons, thus in addition to Hirschsprung disease, a brain the only child of an unrelated couple . Father presents absence of the developmental defects e .g . polymicrogyria, pachygyria or agenesis of left thumb, short left limb, cardiac failure . No fetal ultrasound scan was corpus callosum is observed . There is just few reports in the literature performed . The proband was born naturally at 37 weeks gestation (Wt- describing GOSHS, including one reporting an abnormal intensity of 2450g, Ht-46,5cm, HC-36 cm, Apgar score 7) . Postnatal development white matter signals . Her we report two brothers with GOSHS symp- was relatively normal . Physical examination (13y old) revealed: Wt - toms and mutation fund in KIAA1279 gene . The MRI revealed in one 2,52 SD, short limbs with absence of forearms, bilateral absence of patient evidence of cranio-facial dysmorphy, asymmetry and dilatation thumbs, absence of left forefinger. Radiological examination showed of the ventricular system, and partial agenesis of corpus callosum . Ad- bilateral absence of radius and ulna . Echocardiography: ASD ostium ditionally, in both patients discreet stranded regions of high intensity secundum; ECG: first-degree atrioventricular block. We have estab- signals along the Roland’s sulci, in the both internal capsules and lat- lished the diagnosis of HOS based on the characteristic association eral parts of the thalamus were found . Also, in both patients abnormal of congenital heart defects and upper limbs defects . Differential di- values of evoked potentials were observed . The clinical symptoms agnosis was done with other heart-hand syndrome . The plan for the were variable in GOSHS, similarly like in most such syndromes . In one management and the genetic counseling will be presented . In conclu- patient the features of Hirschsprung’s disease did not occur but in the sion, we present a case of HOS in order to illustrate this rare genetic other one they were of mild intensity . Changes in the MRI pattern of the disorder but also to discuss the variable expression, the management brain not seen in this syndrome until now and systematic description and the genetic counseling . of clinical features are valuable additions to clinical characterization of GOSHS . P01.137 Spinal abnormalities, Klippel-Feil syndrome and the Mayer- P01.134 Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome: four case reports two new cases of Hajdu-cheney syndrome and further T. Rebai, R. Badraoui, F. Kallebi, R. Louati, N. B. Abdelmoula; syndrome delineation Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia. R. Posmyk1, K. Kozłowski2, E. Hubert3, A. T. Midro1; The Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is character- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 2Royal ized by congenital aplasia of the uterus and the upper part (2/3) of the Alexandra Hospital for Children, Sydney, Australia, 3Maxillo-Facial Surgery vagina and is regarded as an inhibitory malformation of the Müllerian Clinic, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland. ducts . MRKH may be isolated but it is more frequently associated with Hajdu-Cheney syndrome (HCS) (102500#OMIM) is a rare disorder renal, vertebral, and, to a lesser extent, auditory and cardiac defects characterised clinically by small stature and distinctive face . Diagnos- (MURCS association) . The molecular basis for the MRKH syndrome tic radiographic features consist of acro-osteolysis and unique dys- is currently unknown . plastic skull changes . We report on two new HCS cases a 9 and 16- We describe four female patients in whom diagnosis of MRKH syn- year-old boys full filing inclusion criteria by Brennan and Pauli (2001). drome was confirmed. All complained of primary amenorrhea associ- A detailed phenotype description of each boy is given and evaluated ated with cyclic pelvic pain and presented normal sexual development, together with 23 other published case reports with the aim to delineate normal levels of FSH, LH and 17beta estradiol, 46,XX karyotype and the spectrum of clinical and anthropological features . A catalogue of congenital absence of the uterus and upper vagina . nearly 900 well-defined traits according to Stengel-Rutkowski et all The first patient presented short neck, low-set posterior hairline, limit- (1996) with own modification was used. Sixty dysmorphological, clini- ed neck motion and fusion of cervical vertebrae associated with unilat- cal and radiographic features were put into the quantitative phenotype eral elevated scapula .The second patient presented low-set posterior definition of HCS syndrome. Additionally, a variety of clinical (hearing hairline, short neck with very limited neck motion and fusion of cervical loss, vocal scale limited to lower tones, delayed fontanels closure, de- vertebrae associated with unilateral elevated scapula, cyphoscoliosis, layed dental eruption, open bite, depressed sternum) and radiological asymmetrical breast development, dental abnormalities and flat feet. findings (Wormian bones, acro-osteolysis, generalized osteoporosis) A familial history with a Sister complaining of secondary amenorrhea were taken into account . As molecular basis of this entity remains un- with low-set posterior hairline, minor scoliosis and flatfeet, was record- known, we believe that quantitative phenotype definition of HCS can ed . The described skeletal deformity in these 2 females, were consis- be helpful for early diagnosis, before acro-osteolysis, the decisive di- tent with Klippel-Feil syndrome . agnostic sign, develops . The third patient presented low-set posterior hairline, short neck, shield-like chest and scoliosis . She presented also dental deformities, P01.135 cafe-au-lait spots and many nevus spilus and vascularis . An history Familial Hanhart Syndrome in a Newfoundland Kindred of two azoospermic maternal uncles was recorded . The forth patient C. Li; presented a minor scoliosis and asymmetrical hips . McMaster University Medical Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada. Hanhart syndrome, also known as oligodactyly-hypoglossia, adactyly- aglossia or oromandibulo limb hypoplasia syndrome because of the cardinal signs of limb and tongue anomalies associated with abnormal mandibular development, is a rare genetic condition that usually hap- pens sporadically and is assumed to be the consequences of either a vascular disruption event or a new dominant mutation . A Newfound-Clinical genetics  P01.138 been identified. Several of these mutations change the number of cys- clinical and molecular diagnosis of ADULt syndrome in a teine amino acids in a critical region of the FGFR2 protein known as pregnant woman the IgIII domain . A. Wischmeijer1, C. Graziano1, M. Gnoli1, R. Bocciardi2, R. Ravazzolo2, M. Sporadic cases of Pfeiffer syndrome have previously been associated Seri1; with advanced paternal age . 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2U.O. Genetica Molecolare e Citogene- The patient in our study was a 2 years old male baby . His parents were tica, Genova, Italy. healthy both under 25 years and they were not consanguineous . Labor A 29 year old woman affected by ectodermal dysplasia came to our began spontaneously and the infant was delivery vaginally at term with attention during her 1st pregnancy, asking about the risk of recurrence a birth weight of 2,975 g with the Apgar score of 8-9 . The propositus in her children and the possibility of diagnostic prenatal testing . had a cloverleaf skull, severe exorbitism, choanal atresia, low-set and No relatives were reported to be affected and the patient’s parents posteriorly-rotated ears, broad and medially-deviated halluces and were not consanguineous . Ectodermal dysplasia was suspected in partial cutaneous syndactyly of the second and third toes . The ocu- childhood because of hypodontia, corneal dystrophy, sparse hair, thin lar globes and eyelids were intact with shallow orbits that would have skin and dystrophic nails, but a specific diagnosis had never been for- prevented the replacement of the eye . The ocular anterior structures mulated . were preserved, without iris or lens abnormalities . The baby developed Upon clinical examination we noticed, besides classical signs, mild respiratory distress . dysmorphic features: deep-set eyes with upward-slanted and short Molecular analysis of the patient revealed a heterozygous C342R mu- palpebral fissures, high forehead, low nasal bridge. Moreover, we tation in exon 10 and a missense T→ C in mRNA further studies on noticed bifid uvula, freckling and absence of nipples, which led us to such sporadic cases recommended enhancing the molecular informa- hypothesize involvement of the p63 gene . In fact, molecular analysis tion . of p63 identified the presence of a Gly134Val mutation, previously de- scribed in a patient with ADULT syndrome . p63 mutations can give P01.141 rise to a spectrum of partially overlapping phenotypes, from ADULT combination of saethre-chotzen and Greig syndromes in one syndrome to limb-mammary and EEC syndrome, all transmitted with family: the phenotype of a proband an autosomal dominant pattern . S. Holubeva1, N. Rumyantseva2; Absence of the mutation in the parents proved its de novo origin . Our 1Vitebsk Regional Diagnostic Center, Vitebsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical patient underwent CVS for fetal molecular analysis and, fortunately, Academy of Postgraduate Education, Minsk, Belarus. the mutation was not transmitted to the fetus . We present a female child (5-year-old), from a family with the features Due to limited time availability, it is seldom possible to successfully of cephalopolysyndactyly (Greig syndrome) in her mother (30-year- resolve a molecular diagnosis during pregnancy without preconcep- old), and acrocephalosyndactyly (Saethre-Chotzen syndrome) in her tional analysis . Thanks to careful clinical examination, the availability father (28-year-old) and paternal grandfather (61-year-old) . Both syn- of an efficient laboratory and prompt familial involvement, our proband dromes are autosomal dominant, minimal diagnostic criteria for the received the result of prenatal testing in less than one month from the first are syndactyly, polydactyly and cranial anomalies, for the second 1st counselling session . - cranial synostosis with skull asymmetry, 2-3 toes syndactyly . The mother’s phenotype consisted of cranial anomalies (protrudent fron- P01.139 tal tubers, hypertelorism, wide bridge of the nose), anomalies of ex- Variable expression in a familial case of Pfeiffer syndrome with tremities (postaxial polydactyly of the right hand; moderately wide nail FGFR1 P252R mutation bones of the first fingers of both hands; preaxial polydactyly and full 1- K. Ludwig1, C. Daolio1, L. Salviati1, M. Baldi2, I. Mura2, M. Clementi1, R. Ten- 2-3 toes syndactyly of the right foot; preaxial polydactyly with total toes coni1; hypoplasia and full 1-2-3 toes syndactyly of the left foot) . Clinical fea- 1Servizio di Genetica Clinica, Padova, Italy, 2Laboratorio di Genetica, E.O. tures of both the father and the grandfather included macrocephalia, Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy. facial asymmetry, nasal septum deviation, partial 2-3 toes syndactyly . A 4 year and six month old boy was diagnosed with Pfeiffer syndrome The child showed a combination of cranial anomalies (macrocephalia, on the basis of bilateral coronal craniosynostosis, skin syndactyly of facial asymmetry, nasal septum deviation, antimongoloid slant, wide toes, brachydactyly, broad thumbs and big toes and characteristic fa- bridge of the nose), epicanthus of both eyes, low-set ears, anoma- cial dysmorphisms . lies of extremities (postaxial polydactyly, preaxial polydactyly with full Close examination of the patient’s family revealed flattening, bilat- syndactyly and common nail plate of both hands; postaxial polydac- eral soft tissue hypertrophy, foreshortening and medial deviation of tyly, partial 2-3 and 4-5 toes syndactyly, full 3-4 toes syndactyly of the the great toes as well as mild bilateral proptosis in the mother and in right foot; postaxial polydactyly and full 2-3-4 toes syndactyly of the left the older brother . The brother also had partial skin syndactyly of toes, foot) . Thus, the proband has inherited the signs of both syndromes, broad thumbs and camptodactyly of the left fifth finger. Neither the this means realization of their 50% of probabilities. The fact signifi- mother, nor the brother showed any signs of craniosynostosis . cantly increases the risk for further generations, which should be taken Molecular analysis of the FGFR1 gene revealed the P252R mutation into account during genetic counseling . in all three family members . Several articles have documented the high clinical variability and ge- P01.142 netic heterogeneity in individuals affected by Pfeiffer syndrome . short rib-polydactyly syndrome on three consecutive As far as we know this is the first case of an affected family with the pregnancies common FGFR1 P252R mutation in which just the proband has the N. B. Abdelmoula1, M. Trifa2, H. Amouri1, H. Amouri3, R. Badraoui1, R. Louati1, full-blown syndrome, whereas the other two affected persons show F. Kallebi1, T. Rebai1; characteristic feet anomalies without skull involvement, underlining the 1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Urology of Private Sector, Sfax, Tunisia, broad intrafamilial variability of expression . 3Department of Gynecology, Sfax, Tunisia. Short rib polydactyly syndromes are lethal skeletal dysplasias with an P01.140 autosomal recessive inheritance pattern that can be distinguished on molecular analysis of a case of Pfeiffer syndrome radiological and histological grounds . We report on three consecutive M. Nateghi, M. Rostami, T. Majidizadeh, M. Dehghan Manshdi, M. Housh- pregnancies complicated by a short rib-polydactyly syndrome that was mand; difficult to categorize. Parents from North of Africa were consanguine- Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ous (second degree) . The third fetus aborted at 22 weeks’ gestation Pfeiffer syndrome is a rare autosomal dominantly inherited osteochon- because of abnormalities visualized on sonography, has been radio- drodysplasia with craniosynostosis conditions that is genetically het- logically and histologically explored . erogeneous that can be caused by mutations in the fibroblast growth He presented shortened ribs with thoracic hypoplasia, short limbs with factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene . The FGFR2 gene provides instruc- postaxial polydactyly of hands and feet, cystic hygroma and facial dys- tions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 2. morphism . More than 20 FGFR2 mutations that cause Pfeiffer syndrome have The skeletal changes observed included shortened ribs and shortenedClinical genetics 0 curved radii, ulnae, tibiae and fibulae tive of cerebral atrophy . No skeletal anomalies were observed at this In autopsy, multiple visceral abnormalities of major organs such as time . Karyotype was normal - 46,XY . Mental retardation was evident bilateral polycystic kidney and intestinal malrotations were detected . in the follow up . At age of 6 years old short stature was evident . Bone Based on radiological criteria and the pattern of associated abnormali- age was normal, but the skeletal findings showed findings of SD with ties, short rib-polydactyly syndrome type IV or Beemer-Langer type spondylo-epy-methaphyseal involvement and also some dyaphyseal was retained as diagnosis . The differential diagnosis of this entity is lesions . At this time the mother reported two maternal uncles with short discussed . stature . As the skeletal lesions were suggestive of spondyloenchondro- dysplasia, hydroxyglutaric aciduria investigation was performed, but P01.143 results were normal . In conclusion, the patient here reported seems to Ellis-Van creveld syndrome, with bilateral sensory-neural represent a new pattern of SD associated with mental retardation and hearing loss: report of a case and literature review other no related skeletal anomalies . B. Bozorgmehr, F. Afroozan, V. Hadavi, M. H. Kariminejad; Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic P01.146 of Iran. Further evidence for a recessive form of sEmD resembling Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome is a constellation of chondral, ectodermal pseudoachondroplasia in a consanguineous family of and cardiac defects . It is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome with maghrebian origin variable expression . This syndrome is also known as chondroectoder- D. R. Amrom1,2, N. Van Regemoorter3, Y. Sznajer4, G. Jackson5, M. Briggs5, G. mal dysplasia and mesoectodermal dysplasia . The main features are Mortier6; short stature, short ribs, polydactyly, dysplastic fingernails and teeth, 1Hôpital Français, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center La famille, Brussels, Belgium, accompanied by heart defects . We are reporting a 2-year-old girl re- 3Department of Medical Genetics, Hôpital Erasme – ULB, Brussels, Belgium, ferred to our genetics center with dwarfism, mesomelic short limbs, 4Clinical Genetics, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola – ULB, narrow thorax, funnel chest, short ribs, oligodontia, oral frenula, post- Brussels, Belgium, 5Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of axial polydactyly of fingers and deafness. Her clinical findings are com- Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Depart- patible with Ellis-Van Creveld Syndrome . We believe that this is the ment of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. first Ellis-Van Creveld Syndrome with sensory-neural hearing loss. Pseudoachondroplasia is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations of the COMP gene . In 2005, Spranger et al . described two P01.144 sibs with a spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) resembling skeletal dysplasia with amelogenesis imperfecta- report of a pseudoachondroplasia but without a COMP mutation . We have identi- third family fied a similar skeletal dysplasia in a dizygotic twin and maternal first O. Caluseriu1,2, M. Cholette1, M. A. Copete3, U. Amendy1,2, J. J. Howard1,2, R. cousin, born to consanguineous parents of Maghrebian origin . They D. McLeod1,2; presented around the age of 1 year with growth failure . 1Alberta Children’s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2University of Calgary, Cal- The proband is a 8-year-old girl with short-limb dwarfism (height at gary, AB, Canada, 3Royal University Hospital, Saskatoon, AB, Canada. -7sd) . She is of normal intelligence and has a normal head and face . Platyspondyly is a frequent feature in skeletal dysplasias, but an as- Clinical features include mild obesity, lumbar hyperlordosis, hyperlax- sociation with amelogenesis imperfecta has only been reported twice . ity of finger and knee joints, metatarsus adductus and waddling gait. Verloes and colleagues (1996) described two siblings of Moroccan Radiographic evaluation reveals mild anterior protrusion of the central origin with consanguineous parents, who had mild growth retardation, aspects of the vertebrae, abnormal pelvis with absent ossification of platyspondyly, dysplastic femoral necks, amelogenesis imperfecta and the femoral epiphyses, shortened tubular bones with small epiphyses oligodontia . They proposed their case to be a new subtype of brachyol- and marked metaphyseal changes, and delayed carpal ossification. mia with amelogenesis imperfecta . A third case was described in a sep- Similar radiographic changes are observed in her twin brother who arate paper (Houlston et al, 1994) . We present three additional cases in addition to short stature (height at -9sd) has microcephaly and tet- from a sibship of five. The affected children, two girls and a boy of 16, raspasticity of unknown origin. A maternal first cousin was referred 9, and 12 years of age are non-dysmorphic and of normal intelligence . at the age of 7 years because of short stature (height at -3 .5sd) and They have short trunk short stature (-5SD, 3-10 centile and respec- suspicion of pseudoachondroplasia . Sequence analysis of the COMP tively -3SD) with platyspondyly and oligodontia . The oldest girl has an gene did not reveal any mutation in this boy . S shape scoliosis mid-thoracic to lumbar spine that required surgery We believe that the three children in this consanguineous family have and bilateral coxa valga . The other two siblings have osteopenic bones the same skeletal dysplasia that resembles pseudoachondroplasia but and lower thoracic-lumbar scoliosis . Recurrent dental abscesses were shows autosomal recessive inheritance . No mutation in the COMP noted and a subsequent diagnosis of amelogenesis imperfecta was gene was identified suggesting a genetic defect in another gene im- confirmed by dental pathology. The parents first cousins of Pakistani portant in bone growth and development . origin are healthy and of normal stature . We provide further evidence for a new AR previously proposed condition . Known genes involved in P01.147 amelogenesis imperfecta (including AR forms) do not explain concur- Omani type spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with cardiac rent skeletal abnormalities . involvement caused by a new missense mutation in cHst3 B. Tüysüz1, S. Turkmen2, P. Nürnberg2, K. Sugahara2, A. Çelebi1, S. Mundlos2; P01.145 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty Department of Pediatric Ge- From a multimalformed baby to a new skeletal dysplasia netics, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Universitatsklinikum Berlin, Charite Virchow-Klinik, C. O. Barbosa1, D. P. Cavalcanti2; Berlin, Germany. 1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2UNICAMP, Campinas - SP, Brazil. We present three patients with a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, In a number of cases skeletal dysplasias (SD) can be associated with brachydactyly and cardiac involvement in a large inbred Turkish family . other malformations not related to the bone system, but usually the A genome wide scan using the 250K Affymetrix SNP chip revealed a diagnosis of SD is early after birth . In this presentation we report a locus for homozygosity on chromosome 10q23 . This interval includes case of a multimalformed boy, firstly thought representing a VACTER an obvious candidate, Chondroitin 6-O-sulfotransferase-1 (C6ST-1) association, which afterward revealed an unusual skeletal dysplasia . gene (CHST3), previously shown to be mutated in Spondyloepiphyse- The infant was born at term by caesarean section weighting 2 .130 g, al Dysplasia (SED) Omani type. Focusing on CHST3, we amplified the 46 cm height, and HC of 34 cm . Prenatal ultrasonography evaluation coding region of the CHST3 and identified a homozygous missense showed oligohydramnios and absence of right kidney . Soon after birth mutation (T141M) in the exon 3 of the CHST3 gene in all three of the additional minor dysmorphisms and major anomalies were detected: affected members of the family . Using recombinant C6ST-1, it could prominent metopic suture, up-slanting palpebral fissures, bilateral epi- be shown that the identified missense mutation reduced the activity of canthal folds, ulnar deviation of 4th-5th fingers, syndactyly of the 2nd-3rd C6ST-1 to 24-29% . This is the second description of SED Omani type toes, prominent calcaneus, esophageal atresia with distal fistula, mild further supporting this skeletal dysplasia as a distinct clinical entity . ventricular dilatation with tricuspid insufficiency and pulmonary hyper- Our patients shared the following features: short trunk stature, pro- tension, dilated bile ducts, and moderate ventricular dilatation sugges- gressive spinal involvement, brachydactyly, camptodactyly, irregular-Clinical genetics  ity of the endplates of the vertebral bodies, narrowed intervertebral studies including copy number analysis of the ZRS and SHH regions space and small and irregular epiphyses as described by Rajab et al . are done in additional families with Werner syndrome, triphalangeal (Am J Med Genet 2004;126:413) in Omani family . When compared thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome and polysyndactyly type Haas . phenotypicaly to Omani’s family, all our patients had also minor facial In summary, we identified the molecular cause of Werner syndrome changes and most importantly they all had a cardiac involvement like in our patient and confirmed the previously suggested hypothesis that mitral, tricuspid and aortal regurgitations, which were not described . Werner syndrome is allelic to PPD2 . The differences in clinical outcome are likely to be due to differences in the nature of the mutation . The original SED Omani mutation re- P01.150 sulted in a complete loss of function whereas T141M appears to have Fetal phenotype of three cases of campomelic dysplasia residual function . harbouring novel mutations of sOX9 gene B. Gentilin1, F. Forzano2, F. Faravelli2, M. Bedeschi1, M. Baffico2, M. Lituania3, P01.148 P. Ficarazzi4, T. Rizzuti5, P. Bianchi6, F. Lalatta1; tibial Developmental Field Defect is the most common Lower 1UOS Dipartimentale di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCSS Ospedale Mag- Limb malformation Pattern in VActERL Association giore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 2Medical Genetics M. Castori1, R. Rinaldi1, S. Cappellacci1, P. Grammatico1,2; Unit; E.O.Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy, 3Fetal Medicine Unit; E.O.Ospedali 1San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2La Sapienza University of Rome, Galliera, Genova, Italy, 4Obstetric and Gynaecologic Unit; Fondazione IRCSS Rome, Italy. Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 5Pa- VACTERL association is one of the most common recognizable pat- thological Unit, Fondazione IRCSS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli terns of human malformation and has been recently defined as a e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 6Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Ospedali Riuniti di multiple polytopic developmental field defect. Limb anomalies are Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy. a key component of this condition and characteristically reflect per- Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is a rare congenital skeletal disorder char- turbation of radial ray development . However, the pattern of appen- acterized by bowing of the long bones and a variable association of dicular malformations in VACTERL association is wider and includes other skeletal and extraskeletal defects, with or without XY sex rever- a broad spectrum of additional and apparently unspecific anomalies. sal . We report on the sporadic case of a 4-10/12-year-old boy presenting CD is caused by mutations in the SRY-box 9 gene (SOX9), a dos- with multiple costo-vertebral defects, dextrocardia, bilateral radial ray age-sensitive gene expressed in chondrocytes and other tissues and hypo/aplasia, unilateral kidney agenesis and anal atresia . Homolater- located at 17q24 . The correlation between the campomelic dysplasia ally to the more severe radial ray defect and kidney aplasia, he also genotype and phenotype is still unclear . has a complex lower limb malformation, consisting of distal tibial apla- In the prenatal period the most characteristic sign of campomelic dys- sia, clubfoot, hallucal deficiency and preaxial polydactyly. Literature plasia is the shortening and marked anterior bowing of long bones, review identifies 24 additional patients with VACTERL manifestations particularly of femur and tibia . Narrow chest, scoliosis, talipes equin- and lower limb malformations (excluding cases with isolated second- ovarus, and flat facial profile are other sonographic features commonly ary deformations) . Tibial hypo/aplasia with or without additional tibial present . Increased nuchal translucency, polyhydramnios, and anoma- field defects, reported in about 2/3 (68%) of the patients, represents lies of the central nervous, cardiac, and renal systems have also been the most common finding, while involvement of the fibular ray is rare described . (20%) and very often accompanies tibial anomalies . The relatively high We report three cases of campomelic dysplasia suspected in the first frequency of tibial ray anomalies in VACTERL patients could easily or second trimester of pregnancy by prenatal ultrasound . The preg- be explained by the principle of homology of the developmental field nancies were all terminated and the diagnosis of campomelic dyspla- theory . Careful search of lower limb anomalies of the “tibial type” is, sia has been confirmed on clinical and radiographic examination of therefore, indicated in all patients with multiple polytopic developmen- the fetuses . tal field defects. In the three cases molecular analysis detected three novel mutations in the SOX9 gene which occurred de novo . P01.149 The protocol which allowed the specific diagnosis of this rare condition Hypoplasia of tibia with polysyndactyly (Werner syndrome) is will be presented . allelic to preaxial polydactyly ii (PPD2) and caused by a point mutation in the distant sonic Hedgehog (sHH) cis-regulator P01.151 (ZRS) Prenatal diagnosis and management of a patient affected by D. Wieczorek1, B. Pawlik2, N. A. Akarsu3, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1,4, Y. Hellen- Kniest dysplasia. broich1,4, S. Lyonnet5, F. R. Vargas6, B. Wollnik2; M. F. Bedeschi1, V. Bianchi1, L. Colombo2, F. Natacci1, S. Giglio3, E. Andreucci3, 1Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Köln, L. Trespidi4, B. Acaia4, G. Canepa1, F. Lalatta1; Germany, 3Hacettepe University Pediatric Hematology Gene Mapping Labora- 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, tory, Ankara, Turkey, 4Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 5Départe- Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 2Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Fon- ment de Génétique et Unité INSERM, Paris, France, 6Centro de Genetica dazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Medica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Milano, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Pathophysiology and Medical Genetics Tibial hypoplasia, preaxial polydactyly of hands and feet and/or a five- Unit, AOU Meyer, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 4Obstetrics and Gyne- fingered hand with absence of thumbs was first described by Werner cology Clinic I, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, in 1915 (MIM 188770) . This autosomal dominant condition is variable Milano, Italy. and no causative mutations have been described so far . Patients affected by rare skeletal dysplasias may remain undiagnosed Here we describe an adult Turkish patient with short stature, short- for a long time, until adulthood . In these cases a pregnancy might dis- ening of forearms, and preaxial polydactyly of hands . His femora are close several unexpected problems and special needs . We present the mildly and his lower legs are severely shortened . He had preaxial poly- case of a 28 year old primigravida who was referred to our centre at 17 dactyly of feet, the supernumerary toe was surgically removed . The weeks of gestation with an undiagnosed skeletal dysplasia . Her clini- clinical diagnosis hypoplasia of tibia with polysyndactyly was estab- cal and radiological examination showed severe dwarfism character- lished . The patient’s father has a preaxial polydactyly of his right hand . ized by spinal curvature anomalies including dorsal scoliosis, lumbar We performed mutational analysis in the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) gene lordosis, platyspondyly, bell-shaped chest, pectus carinatum, drooping and SHH regulatory region (ZRS) located in intron 5 of the LMBR1 ribs, suggesting the diagnosis of Kniest dysplasia (MIM 156550) which gene . A transition (G>A) at position 404 of the ZRS, which was previ- is a rare, severe, chondrodysplasia characterized by short trunk and ously reported as the Cuban mutation of the preaxial polydactyly type limbs, kyphoscoliosis, midface hypoplasia, severe myopia and hearing II (PPD2)-phenotype (Zguricas et al ., 1999; Lettice et al ., 2003) was loss . The woman was then informed about the recurrence risk and identified in the patient and his father. Single nucleotide substitutions offered ultrasound prenatal diagnosis . Ultrasound examination at 17- in the ZRS regulatory region, also described in the Hemingway’s Cats, 18-20 weeks revealed fetal macrocephaly, narrow thorax, shortening operate as gain-of-function mutations that activate Shh expression at and bowing of long bones . Parents decided to continue the pregnancy an ectopic embryonic site (Lettice et al ., 2007) . Currently, molecular informed about the clinical features of the fetus . The baby was deliv-Clinical genetics  ered at the 33rd gestational week for maternal reasons He experienced sense-mediated decay, showing only 7% of normal expression, sug- severe respiratory distress for four weeks. Diagnosis was confirmed gesting haploinsufficiency for aggrecan as the pathogenetic basis for clinically and radiologically . Genomic DNA analysis revealed a new the carrier phenotype . Genotyping in Dexter cattle families worldwide missense mutation in exon 54 (c4339 A>T ) of the COL2A1 gene . has shown that these two mutations account for all cases and segre- This case demonstrates the relevance of correct diagnosis even in gate fully with the heterozygous or homozygous phenotype . the adult age, when people have the right to know: recurrence risk, We anticipate that these Dexter cattle will prove extremely useful as risk of pregnancy and delivery and possible neonatal problems of the a model for investigating and understanding corresponding human affected newborn . chondrodysplasias and arthritis phenotypes . P01.152 P01.154 more surprises in FGFR2: atypical mutations in Apert syndrome Analysis of the Q289P mutation in the FGFR2 gene: populational E. G. Bochukova1, T. Roscioli2, D. J. Hedges3, I. B. Taylor1, A. Colley4, G. Ela- and computational studies kis2, M. Buckley2, D. Johnson1, D. J. David5, P. L. Deininger3, A. O. M. Wilkie1; B. L. N. Passarinho, E. C. Freitas, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Sydney FCM, Campinas, Brazil. South West Integrated Genetics Service, Royal Prince Alfred hospital, Univer- The Q289P mutation in the FGFR2 gene was identified in some in- sity of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Tulane Cancer Center and Department of dividuals of a family with clinical features of a Saethre-Chotzen Syn- Epidemiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, drome (SCS) . Considering the variable expressivity of this condition United States, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Health Service, New and in this specific family as well, some hypotheses were suggested. South Wales, Australia, 5Australian Craniofacial Unit, Women’s and Children’s The aims of this study were to verify the prevalence of this mutation Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. in different populations and to simulate the effects of this mutation by Apert syndrome (AS) is one of the most severe craniosynostosis syn- computational analyses . Three different populations were investigat- dromes, characterized by premature fusion of multiple craniofacial ed: 40 individuals with syndromic craniosynostosis and 200 normal sutures and complex syndactyly of the hands and feet . Two hetero- controls and all members clinically evaluated from mentioned family . zygous gain-of-function mutations (Ser252Trp and Pro253Arg) in fi- This investigation also includes the search for mutations in hot spots broblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) are responsible for >98% for all individuals with craniosynostosis . Computational approaches of AS cases. Here, we have identified different novel mutations in the were applied to simulate the effects of the mutation in the protein and FGFR2 gene in the last two outstanding Apert patients with unidenti- predict its deleterious potential . Except by the patients in whom the fied mutation from a cohort of 227 patients. One is a 1.9 kb deletion, Q289P mutation was previously detected, no more cases were identi- removing the entire exon IIIc of the gene and substantial portions of fied. Simulated computational approaches indicated a deleterious po- the flanking introns. This is the first large FGFR2 deletion described tential . We suggested that the Q289P mutation is deleterious, rare and in any patient with craniosynostosis . The other mutation is a de novo associated to the craniosynostosis phenotype only and not strongly Alu insertion into the IIIc exon of FGFR2. This is the third identified related to the facial and neurological phenotype . AS-related Alu insertion within 105 bp of sequence, a remarkable en- Key words: Craniosynostosis; Saethre-Chotzen; FGFR2; Mutation; richment considering that only ~30 new Alu insertions have been de- SIFT; PolyPhen; Grantham scribed in all human diseases . Computational analysis revealed that the inserted Alu element belongs to a new subfamily, not previously P01.155 known to be mobile, which we characterize and term Alu Yk . Previous characterization of two translocation-associated ectrodactyly analysis of an AS patient with Alu insertion, and a mouse model with related loci in distal 2q14.1 and proximal 2q14.2 and the an engineered exon IIIc deletion, indicate that both types of mutation corresponding candidate genes are likely to cause AS by driving ectopic expression of an FGFR2 iso- D. David1, B. Marques1, C. Pires1, P. Vieira1, C. Reis1, S. Malveira1, A. Corona- form containing the alternatively spliced IIIb exon in mesenchymal tis- Rivera2, J. C. Ferreira3, H. van Bokhoven4; sues . We speculate that the Alu insertions, all of which have arisen on 1Centre of Human Genetics, National Institute of Health “Dr. Ricardo Jorge”, the paternal allele, are enriched because of positive selection during Lisboa, Portugal, 2Department of Physiology, University of Guadalajara, Guada- spermatogenesis . lajara, Mexico, 3Garcia de Orta Hospital, Almada, Portugal, 4Radboud Univer- sity Nijmegen Medical Centre,, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. P01.153 Split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM) or ectrodactyly, is a hetero- mutations in aggrecan (AGc1) cause Dexter cattle geneous congenital defect of digit formation . The aim of this study is chondrodysplasia the mapping of the breakpoints and detailed molecular characteriza- R. Savarirayan1, J. Cavanagh2, I. Tammen3, P. Windsor3, J. F. Bateman1, F. tion of the candidate genes for an isolated form of bilateral split foot Nicholas3, H. Raadsma3; malformation (SFM) and for a syndromic form (holoprosencephaly, 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of hypertelorism, and ectrodactyly syndrome (HHES)) both associated Sydney, Camden, Australia, 3Univeristy of Sydney, Camden, Australia. with de novo apparently balanced chromosome translocations involv- Lethal “bulldog” chondrodysplasia in Dexter cattle is one of the earliest ing the same chromosome 2q14 .2 subband, [t(2;11)(q14 .2;q14 .2)] and Mendelian traits described in animals . Affected (homozygous) fetuses [t(2;4)(q14.2;q35)], respectively. Breakpoints were mapped by fluo- display extreme disproportionate dwarfism, a short vertebral column, rescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) using BAC clones . Where pos- marked micromelia, short ribs, large head with a retruded muzzle, cleft sible, these breakpoints were further delimited using PCR fragments palate, protruding tongue, and abdominal hernia . Carriers (heterozy- as FISH probes. The identified candidate genes were screened for gotes) show a milder phenotype, having rhizomelic limb shortening in pathogenic mutations by direct sequencing . The SFM associated chro- addition to radiographic spinal abnormalities . mosome 2 breakpoint was localised at 120 .9 Mb, between the two Homozygosity mapping in an Australian Dexter cattle pedigree identi- main candidate genes, GLI-Kruppel family member GLI2 (GLI2) and fied the gene AGC1 as a positional candidate . Homozygous AGC1 inhibin beta B (INHBB). No clear pathogenic mutation was identified in mutations have been shown to cause the lethal chondrodysplasia, these . The second breakpoint associated with HHES was mapped 2 .5 cartilage matrix deficiency (cmd) in mice and nanomelia in chicks. Het- Mb proximal at 118.4 Mb and the candidate genes identified from this erozygous AGC1 mutations cause dwarfism and shortened skeletal region were the insulin induced protein 2 (INSG2) and the homeobox elements in mouse and chick, and a spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia protein engrailed-1 (EN1). In conclusion we have confirmed the pres- (Kimberley type) associated with severe premature joint and spinal ence of a new SHFM7 locus in the intergenic region between INHBB arthritis in humans . and GLI2 . Furthermore, a locus for HHES is proposed 2 .5 Mb proximal AGC1 mutation screening revealed a common 4bp insertion in exon 11 to the previous one . The molecular mechanism proposed for these (2266_2267insGGCA) (BD1) and a second, rarer transition in exon 1 congenital anomalies is a sequence of alterations induced by the posi- (-198C>T) (BD2) that co-segregated with the disorder . We performed tional effects introduced by the translocations leading to spatiotempo- allele-specific primer extension analysis of mRNA isolated from chon- ral misregulated expression of the candidate genes . drocytes of cattle heterozygous for the common insertion (BD1) mu- tation . This demonstrated that mutant mRNA was subjected to non-Clinical genetics  P01.156 P01.158 FGFR mutations in turkish patients with craniosynostosis Postnatal analysis of dwarfism due to mutations in FGFR3 gene syndrome by DHPLc in spanish population S. Pehlivanoglu1, E. Mihci2, H. Kayserili3, M. O. Caliskan1, S. Tacoy2, G. Lu- M. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, M. Fenollar-Cortés3, M. Martínez-García1,2, C. Ramos1,2, leci1, O. M. Alper1; J. Gallego-Merlo1,2, F. Infantes1,2, M. Rodríguez de Alba1,2, I. Lorda-Sánchez1,2, 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and C. Ayuso1,2; Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 1Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica 3Istanbul University, Institute of Children’s Health, Department of Medical Ge- en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital netics, Istanbul, Turkey. Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene mutations have Introduction: Achondroplasia (ACH), the most common form of human been associated with the craniosynostotic conditions of Apert, Crou- dwarfism (1/10.000-30.000 births), and hypochondroplasia (HCH), a zon, Pfeiffer, Jackson-Weiss, Saethre-Chotzen, Beare-Stevenson less severe and less frequent condition (1/50 .000 births), are inherited Cutis Gyrata, and Antley-Bixler syndromes in various ethnic groups . in an autosomal dominant manner as other lethal skeletal dysplasias Thirty seven unrelated Turkish patients with Apert syndrome (n=8), (Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) type I and II) . Mutations in the gene of Crouzon syndrome (n=10), Pfeiffer syndrome (n=3), Saethre/Chot- fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) are known responsible for zen syndrome (n=3), and unclassified craniosynostosis (n=13) were them . screened for mutations in exons IIIa and IIIc of the FGFR2 gene by We present the results about this disorders gather in eight years in our polymerase chain reaction, DHPLC and direct sequencing . We es- hospital from different geographical origins of Spain . tablished the optimal denaturing High Performance Liquid Chroma- Material and Methos: Patients were all postnatal (neonatal, child and tography (DHPLC) parameters of each exons using the WAVE Maker adult people) with a wide range of age . DNA was isolated from blood Software version 1 .6 .2 . Each anomalous elution peak was then sub- leucocytes or mouth epithelial cells . 5 different PCRs that comprise the jected to direct sequencing . Our DHPLC based protocol enabled us to more relevant codons (248, 249, 250, 370, 371, 373, 375, 380, 540, identify the causative mutations in most of the patients, as following, 650 and 807) were analysed by automated sequencing analyser . We seven of 8 patients with Apert syndrome (S252W,P253R) and six out also detected the most frequent mutation R380G in ACH phenotype by of 10 patients with Crouzon syndrome (C278F,Q289P,W290R,C342Y), SNAPSHOT technology . two out of 3 patients with Pfeiffer syndrome (P253R,C342R) . We did Results: From 77 cases, we obtained 26 ACH+ (33 .8%); 7 HCH+ not detect any FGFR2 gene mutations in patients with Saethre-Chot- (9 .1%) and 1 TD type I+ (1 .3%) . We found 5 cases with a polymorphic zen syndrome or unclassified craniosynostosis patients. The DHPLC allele (F384L) and 3 cases with a polymorphic allele (G549G) very based protocol can be used for an efficient, cost effective and reli- close to the splice site . able mutational analysis of the FGFR2 gene . In addition, the present Cconclusions: Our strategy for studying all samples is always the study provides a preliminary data in Turkish population, elucidation of same independently the clinical suspicion . Sequencing FGFR3 is a the FGFR2 mutations in patients with clinical features suggestive of good practice to detect known and new mutations in individuals af- especially Apert, Crouzon and Pfeiffer syndrome offers a significant fected with different skeletetal dysplasias, especially when few clinical benefit to those families in terms of genetic counseling and prenatal findings are added to the application. diagnosis . P01.159 P01.157 Functional analysis of osteoporosis pseudoglioma associated Prenatal analysis of dwarfism due to mutations in FGFR3 gene missense mutations in LRP in spanish population A. Saarinen1,2, U. Lahtinen1,3, A. Lehesjoki1,3, O. Mäkitie1,4; M. Fenollar-Cortés1, M. Martínez-García2,3, M. Rodríguez de Alba2,3, D. Di- 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2De- ego-Álvarez2,3, I. Lorda-Sánchez2,3, R. Cardero2,3, C. Ramos2,3, C. Ayuso2,3, M. partment of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Neuro- Trujillo-Tiebas2,3; science Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Metabolic Bone Clinic, 1Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras Finland. (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. Background: Mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor-related INTRODUCTION: Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), achondroplasia protein 5 gene (LRP5) have been associated with high and low bone (ACH) and hypochondroplasia (HCH) are skeletal dysplasias with an mass . While homozygous LRP5 mutations cause osteoporosis-pseu- autosomal dominant pattern . We present the results of FJD skeletal doglioma syndrome (OPPG), characterized by severe osteoporosis dysplasias cases over eight years in prenatal and miscarriage samples and blindness, heterozygous mutations have been associated with re- studying mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) duced bone mass . LRP5 functions as a plasma membrane receptor in gene . the Wnt signaling pathway . We previously described LRP5 mutations MATERIAL AND METHODS: Fetal DNA was isolated from amniotic in patients with OPPG and/or severe osteoporosis . In this study we fluids (AF, 15-35 weeks of gestation), villi chorionic samples (CVS, further analyzed the role of these mutations in Wnt signal transduction 9-20 weeks) and tissue of abortion (TA, 15-35 weeks) . All samples and cellular localization . were karyotyped . 5 different PCRs that comprises the more relevant methods: Mutations were introduced to full length human LRP5-pcD- condons (248, 249, 250, 253, 370, 371, 373, 375, 380, 538, 540, 650 NA3 .1 expression vector using site-directed mutagenesis . Wnt signal and 807) were analysed by automated sequencing analyser . 30 pre- transduction assays were performed in 293HEK cells using a previ- natal cases were referred to FJD Laboratory: 18 CVS (60%) and 12 ously published Wnt-induced canonical signaling assay (Ai etal . 2005) . AF (40%) . Localization studies were performed in COS-1 cells using immunofluo- RESULTS: Of the 18 CVS only 2 were positives, and in both cases the rescence staining . pregnant women were also affected of ACH . Of the 12 AF, we obtained Results: Three different missense mutations were identified and se- 10 negative cases and 2 TD-I+ . Main referral (75%) was short limbs lected for further studies . Wnt signaling assays indicated that one of the and other skeletal anomaly in the present pregnancy . We received 19 mutations, R570W in exon 8, completely disrupted Wnt signal trans- TA but only 16 studies because of DNA degradated, with the following duction . The second mutation, R1036Q in exon 14, resulted in partial results: 1 TD-I; 3 TD-II, 2 aneuploides . disruption of Wnt signaling while the third mutation, R925C in exon 12, CONCLUSIONS: Molecular analysis of CVS in first trimester is useful did not show any alteration in the signaling assays . Localization stud- when one of the parents is affected due to the 50% of risk . Only severe ies revealed that the R1036Q and R925C mutant proteins were able to forms (TD) are detected by ultrasound in second trimester . For miscar- reach plasma membrane where as the R570W could not be detected, riages, is obligatory the fetal karyotype fetal and molecular analysis by suggesting that it might be post-translationally degraded . sequencing of FGFR3 gene . conclusions: We were able to show that some LRP5 mutations di- rectly impair Wnt signal transduction and cellular transportation while other pathogenetic mechanisms are associated with some mutations .Clinical genetics  P01.160 P01.162 characterization of the Exostosin-1 (EXt1) promoter A novel homozygous cOLL11A2 deletion causes a c-terminal I. Jennes1, W. Wuyts1,2; protein truncation without mRNA decay in a turkish patient 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Hospital of Antwerp, Ant- O. Z. Uyguner1, H. Kayserili1, G. Guven1, M. U. Emiroglu1, N. Baserer1, B. werp, Belgium. Wollnik2; Introduction 1Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2University of Cologne, Cologne, Ger- Multiple osteochondromas (MO) is an autosomal dominant skeletal many. disorder characterized by the formation of multiple cartilage-capped Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED, OMIM 215150) is a protuberances . rare autosomal recessive disorder of bone growth and development MO is genetically heterogeneous and is associated with a mutation in that results in disproportionate shortness of the limbs with abnormally the EXT1 or EXT2 tumour suppressor genes . Both genes are ubiqui- large knees and elbows, severe hearing loss, and distinctive facial tously expressed and encode proteins that function as glycosyltrans- features presenting mid-face hypoplasia, depressed nasal bridge with ferases in the biosynthesis of heparan sulphate . anteverted nares . Cleft palate and micrognathia are also the common At present, very little is known about the transcriptional regulation of findings. The phenotype is very similar to non-ophthalmic Stickler or the EXT genes . To elucidate transcriptional regulation of EXT1, we Stickler Type III (OMIM 184840), which displays more subtle signs . isolated and characterized the EXT1 promoter . Recessive mutations on collagen peptide coding gene, COL11A2, are Methods and results responsible for OSMED while dominant mutations are associated with Theoretical analysis of the 10 kb upstream of the EXT1 start codon was Stickler Type III . Furthermore, mutations in the COL11A2 gene have performed with promoter prediction programs TSSG, TSSW, FPROM, been also found in patients with isolated cleft palate, Robin sequences, BDGP, Promoter 2 .0 Prediction Server and Web Promoter Scan . This micrognathia, and non-ophthalmic Stickler syndrome . In this study, two showed presence of a CpG island containing CG and CAAT boxes but cousins with OSMED were clinically assessed and mutations testing no TATA box which, characteristic for a housekeeping gene . Two po- on patient’s cDNA identified the novel homozygous c.2763delT in exon tential functional promoter regions were identified located respectively 38 of the COL11A2 gene . The deletion which causes a frame shift af- ~2 .650 bp and ~900 bp upstream of the start codon . ter position 425 and a premature stop after additional 62 amino acids Overlapping PCR fragments of the 10 kb putative EXT1 promoter re- (p.P425PfsX62) was confirmed on genomic level in both patients and gion were generated and cloned in the pGL4 .72 Luciferase Reporter was not found in 200 ethnically matched control chromosomes . Vector . Promoter activity was determined by luciferase assays after transfection in Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK) cells . This situated P01.163 the actual core promoter within the fragment containing the predicted mutations of the sequestosome 1 gene associated with Paget‘s sequence ~900 bp upstream of the start codon. Further fine mapping disease in patients from salamanca, spain of the core promoter and potential regulatory sites was achieved by E. Corral Moro1, L. Corral Gudino2, J. García Aparicio2, S. Ciria Abad1, N. generating additional subclones, which were subsequently analyzed Alonso López1, J. del Pino Montes2, R. González Sarmiento1; for promoter activity and analyzed for protein binding capacities . This 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de allowed identification of EXT1 promoter binding proteins. Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Reumatología, Hospital Universita- rio de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. P01.161 Paget´s disease of bone (PDB) is a common condition characterized mutation screening for autosomal recessive malignant by focal abnormalities of increased bone turnover . osteopetrosis Mutations in the sequestosome 1/p62 gene (SQSTM1) are associated S. Akbaroghli1, T. Majidizadeh1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. Rostami1, M. Nat- with Paget linked to the 5q35 . eghi1, M. Sanati2, M. Houshamnd2,1; Mutations described to date cluster within the C- terminal ubiquitin-as- 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of sociated (UBA) domain of p62 and patients with truncating mutations Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of p62 in or close to the UBA domain generally suffer more severe Osteopetrosis is a congenital disorder characterized by defective or disease than those with missense mutations . absent osteoclasts, the cells that break down bone . In healthy bone, We investigated a cohort of 20 familial PDB patients for sequestosome a balance is achieved between the production of bone by osteoblasts, mutations . and the break down of bone by osteoclasts . In osteopetrosis, osteo- We identificated three mutations within exon 8: P392L, M404T, previ- clasts don’t function normally, and the production of bone by osteo- ously reported by other groups, and A426V ,a novel missense muta- blasts leads to bones that are abnormally dense and brittle . Osteope- tion . All three of these mutations affect the ubiquitin-associated (UBA) trosis may result from conditions which interfere with the production of domain of the protein which is involved in the ubiquitin binding . osteoclasts and their ability to remove bone . Moreover, analysis of exon 6 detected a G to C substitution at position Several forms of osteopetrosis exist . The most common form is au- +822, resulting in a glutamic acid to aspartic acid substitution at codon tosomal dominant . The most severe form of osteopetrosis is termed 426 . This mutation affects the PEST sequence, important for the span infantile osteopetrosis, as affected individuals usually have difficulties life to the protein . Actually, more studies are under way to examine the soon after birth, inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . The dis- effect of his mutation . ease is very rare, with about 1/300,000 children having severe osteo- petrosis . The candidate genes for Osteopetrosis are TCIRG1, CLCN7 P01.164 genes . The spectrum of CLCN7-related osteopetrosis includes in- mutations, duplications and deletions, upstream, downstream fantile malignant CLCN7-related autosomal recessive osteopetrosis, and overlapping the sHOX gene in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis intermediate autosomal and autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type or short stature patients of the Balearic islands II . Mutations of the TCIRG1 gene are the most frequent cause of AR J. Rosell1, J. Ferragut2, M. Caimari2, N. Govea1, M. Bernues1, A. Perez-Gra- osteopetrosis . TCIRG1 encoding the a3 subunit of the vacuolar proton nero1, D. Heine-Suñer1; pump is located on chromosome 11q13 consists of 20 exons . 1Genetics Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Paedi- In present study DNA was received from a consanguineous couple atrics Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. who had 1 affected child from who no sample was available and they The SHOX gene is located on the pseudoautosomal regions (PAR1) were referred us for screening the problem if any, in the fetus . For each of the X and Y chromosomes . Mutations and deletions of SHOX have sample we performed genetic analysis of hot spot axons of TCIRG1 been shown to be associated with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) by direct sequence analysis . We reported a new mutation in TCIRG1 and idiopathic short stature (ISS) . Recently, it has been shown that de- gene . letions downstream within in the PAR1 region and that do not include the SHOX gene can be also associated with LWD . We have studied a total of 120 ISS and LWD patients and their families from the Balearic islands population . The presence of deletions has been determined using microsatellites that are located upstream and/or MLPA (SALSA 18C) which can detect downstream deletions . Mutations have beenClinical genetics  analysed by sequencing exons 1 to 6A . We have found deletions, du- tient) were normal in all patients . plications or mutations in a total of 10 families . Three of these families cONcLUsiON: Though classical haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene harbour mutations in exon 4, four families had downstream deletions, shows a heterogeneous phenotypic expression in patients with short and three carry deletions overlapping the SHOX gene . The remaining stature, patients with mosaicism of this gene should be recognized as family had a duplication upstream of the SHOX gene as the sole trait . a special group of children since the genetic dose of the gene is vari- Interestingly, one of the families with a downstream deletion had also able and the final height and evolution is unpredictable. a 5’ duplication of SHOX up to exon 3 that segregated independently . Deletions and duplications show different breakpoints in each family P01.167 supporting the idea that there is no main deletion breakpoint hotspot . Microduplication of the long range SHH limb regulator (ZRS) is This work has been supported by the grant FIS 05-1585 from the Insti- associated with triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome tuto de Salud Carlos III from the Spanish ministry of Health. E. Klopocki1, C. E. Ott1, N. Benatar2, R. Ullmann3, S. Mundlos1,3, K. Lehmann1; 1Charite Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Ger- P01.165 many, 2Klinik für Handchirurgie, Krankenhaus Marienstift, Braunschweig, Ger- Detection and characterisation of partial SHOX deletions in many, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. patients with Léri-Weill dischondrosteosis (LWD), Langer An important player in establishing the anterior-posterior patterning of mesomelic dysplasia (LmD) and idiopathic short stature (iss) the limb is the developmental regulator gene sonic hedgehog (SHH) . S. Benito-Sanz1, P. Lapunzina2,3, N. S. Thomas4, Á. Campos-Barros5, J. L. Previous studies have identified a long range regulator for SHH ex- Ross6, A. R. Zinn7, K. E. Heath1; pression in the limb bud residing in a highly conserved non-coding 1Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, sequence about 1 Mb upstream from the SHH gene itself . As shown Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3CIBERER, In- in mice point mutations within this non-coding regulatory region desig- stituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Wessex Regional Genetics Service, nated ZRS lead to ectopic expression of Shh in the anterior margin of Salisbury, United Kingdom, 5Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, the limb bud and thus to preaxial extra digits . In humans ZRS point mu- Spain, 6Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7Univer- tations are associated with the triphalangeal thumb and polysyndactyly sity of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX, United States. (TPT-PS, OMIM #174500) phenotype . SHOX is located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of the X and In this study we investigated a large pedigree with a variable pheno- Y chromosomes . Mutations in SHOX or in the downstream PAR1 have type of TPT-PS . Although linkage to the SHH locus was confirmed been shown to be the cause of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), sequencing of the ZRS did not reveal point mutations . A subsequent Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD) and idiopathic short stature (ISS) . screening by array-CGH detected a microduplication in 7q36 .3 com- We routinely perform deletion screening of SHOX and the downstream prising the ZRS in an affected individual . The microduplication was PAR1 in LWD, LMD and ISS patients using MLPA . Microsatellite mark- confirmed by qPCR in all affected family members. By using a direct ers and SNPs are then utilized for further characterisation in specific sequencing strategy we showed that the duplicated segment is in di- cases . rect tandem orientation . During our screening, we identified nine partial SHOX deletions (five In summary we demonstrated that microduplication of the ZRS region LWD, one LMD and three ISS) . The deletions were all of variable size, in 7q36 .3 results in a similar phenotype as caused by point mutation in ranging from the deletion of a single exon to multiple exons . Polymor- the limb specific SHH regulatory element . Thus, genomic duplications phisms in the ligation sites were excluded in cases where deletions have to be considered as a possible mechanism which leads to dis- only included one exon . A common 5´ breakpoint region in intron 3 was turbance of long-range transcriptional control . The discovery of novel observed in five patients. Three patients also share the 3´ limit in intron mechanisms of gene regulation, i .e . distant enhancers/repressors and 2 and two more in the 3´UTR . Deletion breakpoints are currently being their relevance to human disease if disrupted is a challenging task in further delimited by fine-tiling CGH arrays and subsequently amplifica- the future . tion across the breakpoints . MLPA is an accurate, rapid and economic technique to detect com- P01.168 plete and partial SHOX deletions as well as downstream PAR1 dele- The transcription factor TRPS1 interacts with the RINGfinger tions . FISH and microsatellite analysis cannot accurately detect or de- ubiquitin ligase ARKADIA limit this class of deletions . Our results show that, although the partial C. Will1, M. Albrecht1, S. Gkalympoudis2, R. Depping3, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, deletions of SHOX are variable in size, intron 2 and 3 appear to be H. Lüdecke2, F. J. Kaiser1; hotspots for breakages . 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Es- sen, Germany, 3Institut für Physiologie, Lübeck, Germany. P01.166 Mutations or deletions of the TRPS1 gene on human chromosome mosaicism of the SHOX gene in a serie of spanish patients with 8q24 .1 cause the tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndromes (TRPS), which short stature are characterized by craniofacial and skeletal abnormalities . The gene L. Magano Casero1, K. Heath2, P. Lapunzina3, P. Arias3, I. Incera3, S. Benito encodes a transcription factor that functions as a repressor for GATA- Sanz2, A. Delicado3, R. Gracia Bouthelier3; mediated transcription . The activity of transcription factors is often 1Hospital Universitario La Paz. Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Ma- controlled by post-translational modifications. And in fact, we have re- drid, Spain, 2Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital cently found that SUMOylation of specific sites within the repression Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain. domain (RD) of TRPS1 regulates its function . The SHOX gene, located at the pseudo-autosomic region (PAR1) of In a yeast-two-hybrid screen we identified two clones encoding amino the X (Xp22) and Y (Yp11) chromosomes codifies for a transcription acids (aa) 352-505 of the 986 aa protein ARKADIA . ARKADIA is a factor implicated in the regulation of skeletal growth . Deletions or mu- RINGfinger ubiquitin ligase. In mice, Arakdia is known as a key regula- tations in SHOX may lead to haploinsufficiency of this gene and some- tor in the TGF-beta pathway by inducing the ubiquitin-dependent deg- times is associated with Turner syndrome, Leri-Weil dischondrosteosis radation of Smad7, SnoN and c-Ski . By using a variety of truncated (LWD), Langer type mesomelic displasia (LMD) and idiopathic short TRPS1 and ARKADIA constructs we could narrow down the ARKA- stature (ISS) . DIA-binding region within TRPS1 to the last 100 aa, which includes PAtiENts AND mEtHODs: Using STRs (microsatellites, repeated the RD . ARKADIA appears to interact with TRPS1 via two different sequences in tandems distributed in the DNA) we evaluated the copy regions, which were also described to enable the interaction of ARKA- number of SHOX and/or their different alleles in 340 patients with short DIA with SMAD7 . TRPS1 is known to be localized within the nucleus . stature . The peak areas of both alleles were evaluated by means of Selective inhibition of the proteasome complex with lactacystin results the ratio between both alleles and then compared and normalized with in cytoplasmic accumulation of TRPS1 in cells co-transfected with normal controls . Calculation was expressed as a percentage of each ARKADIA . Furthermore, in luciferase reporter gene assays we could allele . show that ARKADIA decreases the repressional activity of TRPS1 . Our REsULts: We detected mosaicism for SHOX in 5 out of 340 patients . results strongly indicate an ARKADIA-mediated ubiquitination which Normalization showed a percentage of deletion of 46, 33, 26, 26 and induces a cytoplasmic degradation of TRPS1 . 11% respectively . Karyotypes (100 cells were evaluated for each pa-Clinical genetics  P01.169 is due to lymphangiectasia, preferentially intestinal, and mental retar- A variant in the ZRS sonic hedgehog regulatory sequence is dation . associated with triphalangeal thumb and deregulates expression We describe two new unrelated cases of Hennekam syndrome . in the developing limb The first patient, a 3-year-old girl, is the only infant born of non-consan- D. Furniss1,2, L. A. Lettice3, I. B. Taylor1, P. S. Critchley2, H. Giele2, R. E. Hill3, A. guineous parents . At birth, she presented facial edema . Lymphedema O. M. Wilkie1; rapidly extended to legs and feet . Enteropathy appeared during the 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Depart- first year. At 3 years, she presented the facial dysmorphism of Hen- ment of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3MRC nekam syndrome and psychomotor development was normal . Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. The second case, a 36-year-old woman, is the only child of non-con- A locus for triphalangeal thumb, variably associated with preaxial sanguineous parents . polydactyly, was previously identified in the Zone of Polarizing Activ- At birth, syndactyly of toes was present associated with particular ity Regulatory Sequence (ZRS), a long range limb-specific enhancer facial features . Later, she developed psychomotor delay with mental of the Sonic Hedgehog gene (SHH) at human chromosome 7q36 .3 . retardation and seizures . Lymphedema appeared on the right leg at 3 Here, we demonstrate that a 295T>C variant in the ZRS, previously years and on the left leg at 15 years . Recurrent episodes of diarrhoea thought to represent a neutral polymorphism, acts as a dominant mu- were present without enteropathy . tation with reduced penetrance . We found this variant in 3 indepen- Abdominal cystic lymphangioma were surgically corrected at 30 years . dently ascertained probands from southern England with triphalangeal At 36 years, facial dysmorphism ressembled that of Hennekam syn- thumb, demonstrated significant linkage of the phenotype to the variant drome . She had short hands, hypoplastic thumbs, short feet with bilat- (LOD = 4.1), and identified a shared microsatellite haplotype around eral syndactylies. These two observations confirm the variable expres- the ZRS, suggesting that the probands share a common ancestor . An sivity of Hennekam syndrome . Lymphedema of the limbs and facial individual homozygous for the 295C allele presented with isolated bi- dysmorphy are the only constant features . All others traits, in particular lateral triphalangeal thumb resembling the heterozygous phenotype, intestinal lymphangiectasia, may be absent . suggesting that the variant is largely dominant to the wild type allele . As a functional test of the pathogenicity of the 295C allele, we utilised a P01.172 mutated ZRS construct to demonstrate that it can drive ectopic anterior Novel VEGFR3 missense mutation in a spanish family with expression of a reporter gene in the developing mouse forelimb . We milroy disease conclude that the 295T>C variant is in fact pathogenic and appears to M. Ballesta-Martínez1, E. Guillén-Navarro1, V. López-González1, S. Jeffery2; be the most common cause of triphalangeal thumb in southern Eng- 1Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2St. George’s Uni- land . Depending on the dispersal of the founding mutation, it may play versity of London, London, United Kingdom. a wider role on the aetiology of this disorder . Introduction: Milroy disease, or hereditary lymphedema type 1 (MIM153100), is characterized by lower limb lymphedema usually P01.170 present at birth . Variability in expression has been reported both within Fetal Alcohol syndrome a phenocopy of spondylocarpotarsal and among families . Mutations in VEGFR3 with resultant dysgenesis synostosis syndrome? of microlymphatic vessels cause this disease . It is inherited in an auto- R. Rupps1, D. Krakow2, N. Puvanachandra3, J. Gardiner3, C. F. Boerkoel1; somal dominant manner with incomplete penetrance (85-90%) . 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Objective: We describe phenotype of Milroy disease in two-genera- BC, Canada, 2Skeletal Dysplasia Registry, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los tion Spanish family . Molecular analysis of VEGFR3 gene has been Angeles, CA, United States, 3Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sci- performed . ences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Clinical description: A girl was referred at 2 years of age because of Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome is characterized by dis- bilateral swelling of feet since birth, more evident on the right foot, proportionate short stature with fusion of vertebrae, carpal and tar- which partially decreased during the first year of life. She had dys- sal bones, thoracic scoliosis and pes planus . Other features often plastic 2-4rth toenails. She was the first child of a young and non-con- described include delayed bone age, epiphyseal ossification delay, sanguineous couple . Her father referred swelling of feet at birth which cleft palate, dental enamel hypoplasia and renal anomalies . Skeletal disappeared progressively during childhood . He had dysplastic toe- manifestations of fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) include poor growth, nails . Soon after a sister was born with swelling of feet and distal part delayed bone age, congenital fusion of cervical vertebrae, coalition of of limbs as well . She is now 4 years old and the lymphedema is stable; the capitate and hamate carpal bones and transverse limb defects . We dysplastic nails are not present . The son of a father’s asymptomatic report a 6-year-old girl born to a 32-year-old mother and a 62 year old sister has also been born with bilateral swelling of feet . Analysis of father after a pregnancy complicated by alcohol abuse . She presented VEGFR3 gene revealed a heterozygote mutation c .3056T>C in exon with short stature, hypotonia, dysmorphic facial features, generalized 22 in the two girls and their father . joint laxity and hyperextensibility and hearing loss . She also had poor Conclusions: 1- We describe a novel VEGFR3 mutation in exon 22 visual acuity, extremely high bilateral myopia, pale optic nerves, thin causing Milroy disease . 2- Clinical variability and incomplete pen- retinal vessels and tigroid retinae . Subsequently, she developed an etrance is present in this family . asymptomatic complete funnel retinal detachment of the right eye . Her skeletal survey revealed normal bone age, fusion of vertebral facet P01.173 joints of C2-4 and C5-6 with narrowing of these disc spaces but widen- VEGFR mutation frequency in milroy disease and other primary ing of the C4-5 and C6-7 disc spaces, flared ilii, longer proximal than lymphoedema distal long bones, fused capiate and hamate ossification centres and F. C. Connell, P. Ostergaard, G. Brice, C. Carver, N. Williams, S. Mansour, P. bilateral coxa valga . We postulate that prenatal alcohol exposure can S. Mortimer, S. Jeffery; phenocopy spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome . Alternately, this St George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom. patient’s features could represent an overlap of fetal alcohol spectrum Milroy disease (Hereditary Lymphoedema type I) is a congenital onset disorder with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome, an extension primary lymphoedema with autosomal dominant inheritance . Muta- of the spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome or an undescribed tions in the gene, vasculo-endothelial growth factor receptor, VEGFR3 syndrome . (FLT4), are known to cause Milroy disease, but there is uncertainty about the prevalence of VEGFR3 mutations in patients with primary P01.171 lymphoedema and more specifically in those with a phenotype that Variable phenotype of Hennekam syndrome resembles Milroy disease . This study addresses this issue and there- P. Blanchet, L. Pinson, C. Coubes, G. Lefort, P. Sarda; by delineates the Milroy disease phenotype . Fifty-four patients with Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Service de Génétique, Montpellier, France. primary lymphoedema were analysed for mutations in VEGFR3 . Pa- Hennekam syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive anomaly charac- tients were divided into four groups: Typical Milroy disease with family terized by lymphedema, lymphangiectasia, facial dysmorphism and history (group I), typical Milroy disease with no family history (group developmental delay . Heart, renal, skeletal anomalies and growth re- II), atypical Milroy disease (group III), and complex primary lymphoe- tardation may also be a part of the spectrum . Severity of the syndrome dema (group IV) . Results demonstrated that with rigorous phenotypingClinical genetics  the likelihood of detecting VEGFR3 mutations is optimised . Mutation P01.176 prevalence is 72% in typical Milroy patients with a family history (group Noonan syndrome and marfanoid habitus in a patient with SOS I) and 64% if positive family history is not a diagnostic criterion . A posi- mutation tive family history is not essential in Milroy disease . The likelihood of G. Morin1, E. Gailly1, M. Mathieu1, H. Cavé2, C. Boileau3, J. Lebrun4, A. Ver- detecting VEGFR3 mutations in patients who have a phenotype which loes2; is not typical of Milroy disease is very small (<5%) . For the 22 mutation 1Unité de Génétique Clinique, Amiens, France, 2Département de Génétique positive patients, 14 novel VEGFR3 mutations were identified, two of - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire which were in exon 22 and one in exon 17, confirming that these exons - Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 4Service de Pédiatrie, Soissons, should be included in VEGFR3 analysis . France. We report the observation of a 24-year-old male patient exhibiting P01.174 features suggesting Noonan syndrome (mild mental retardation, low- microcephaly, lymphedema, chorioretinal dysplasia syndrome set hair, hypertelorism, bilateral ptosis, dysplastic low-set ears, and (mLcRD) and atrial septal defect (AsD) further delineation of a webbed neck), and others compatible with Marfan disease (height at rare syndrome 1m83, joint hyperlaxity, arachnodactyly, pectus carinatum, severe sco- A. Singer1, S. Eventov-Friedman2, C. Vinkler3; liosis, myopia) . Cardiac ultrasound examination was normal . Familial 1Genetic Institute, Barzilai Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Department of stature was tall (mother 1m73, father 1m83, and brothers 1m95 and Neonatology, Kaplan Medical center, Rehovot, Israel, 3Institute of Clinical Ge- 2m) . Blood standard karyotype was normal . Noonan syndrome was netics, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. confirmed by molecular analysis of SOS1 gene (heterozygous muta- Combinations of microcephaly and lymphoedema, as well as micro- tion 1654 A>C (R552G)) . However Marfan disease was not document- cephaly and chorioretinopathy, have been well described in the past . It ed with a negative screening of FBN1 gene . We discuss the hypoth- has been later suggested these two entities represent a single entity: esis of a pleiotropic effect of the SOS1 mutation, the influence of the lymphoedema, microcephaly, chorioretinopathy syndrome (MLCRD familial stature, and the eventuality of two concomitant independent OMIM 152950) . Todate, less then 30 patients have been reported in diseases . the literature . This entity is characterized by microcephaly, lymphoe- dema of the limbs, chorioretinal dysplasia, and normal or near-normal P01.177 intelligence . The inheritance can be autosomal dominant, or recessive . SOS and PTPN mutations in five cases of Noonan syndrome A few sporadic instances have also been reported . Although this condi- with multiple giant cell lesions tion is thought to be a single genetic entity with variable expression, C. Beneteau1,2, H. Cavé3, A. Moncla4, N. Dorison5, A. Munnich6, A. Verloes3, B. only three cases were previously described in the literature with car- Leheup1,2; diac anomaly . 1Service de Médecine Infantile III et Génétique Clinique, Hôpital d’Enfants CHU We describe here another case of MLCRD with a cardiac anomaly . de Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 2Faculté de médecine Nancy Univer- A six months male infant has been first referred to our clinic because sité Henri Poincaré, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3Département de Généti- of microcephaly and lymphedema . Further evaluation revealed chorio- que clinique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Département de Génétique retinal changes, severe myopia and atrial septal defect (ASD) . Brain Médicale, Hôpital d’enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 5Neuropédiatrie MRI was normal. He is the first child of healthy and unrelated couple pathologie du développement, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 6Ser- with unremarkable medical history, except for nonsyndromic familial vice de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. microcephaly in the mother’s family . We report five cases of multiple giant cell lesions in patients with typical At the age of one year he came for a regular follow up to our clinic . The Noonan syndrome . Such association has been frequently referred to infant developed normally and achieved the expected motor, mental as Noonan like-Multiple Giant Cell syndrome before the molecular def- and social milestone for his age . inition of Noonan syndrome . Three patients carry mutations in SOS1 This case further emphasizes the inter- and intra-familial variable ex- (p .Arg552Ser and p .Arg552Thr) and two in PTPN11 (p .Tyr62Asp and pressivity of MLCRD . p.Asn308Asp) and are the first SOS1 mutations in Noonan like-Mul- tiple Giant Cell syndrome . P01.175 The five patients have typical features for Noonan syndrome. Con- Neurofibromatosis-Noonan like Syndrome/Watson Syndrome- genital heart diseases were diagnosed during gestation or after birth . the syndromes of the same mitogen-activated protein kinase Radiograph and CT scan showed unilateral or bilateral mandibular ra- (MAPK) pathway. diolucencies characteristic of cherubism for five patients with cherubic E. Jamroz1, A. Pyrkosz2, J. Surmik1, E. Marszał1; appearance or incidentally discovered at systematic radiographic ex- 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po- amination . The other patient presented typical imaging and histopatho- land, 2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Medical University of logical signs of a left ankle pigmented villonodular synovitis . Three of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. the five patients had short stature and three had learning disabilities. Since 1967, when G.H. Watson described first three families with a They show two distinct phenotypes: Noonan with cherubinism and condition characterized by café au lait spots, pulmonary valvular ste- Noonan with pigmented villonodular synovitis, demonstrating that both nosis, short statue and dull intelligence-there have been only few more clinical phenotypes are not PTPN11-specific anomalies and represents patients diagnosed with this disease . The authors report a 11-month- a rare complication of overexpression of the RAS/MAPK signaling old child manifesting the symptoms, which are in the picture of Neuro- pathway . We discuss the clinical overlap between Noonan syndrome, fibromatosis-Noonan like /Watson syndrome: café au lait spots, pectus Noonan like-Multiple Giant Cell syndrome, “true” cherubism and pig- abnormality, pulmonary stenosis . Additionally, magnetic resonance mented villonodular synovitis . The two latter terms should be used only imagining of the head demonstrated the lesion, diameter about 4mm when multiple giant cell lesions occur without any other evidence of change, situated in the capsula interna on the border with the poste- Noonan syndrome . Noonan like-Multiple Giant Cell syndrome previ- rior part of thalamus which is possibly hamartoma. Significant is, as ously regarded as an entity distinct from Noonan syndrome is more well, the family history- the father of the child has phenotype of Neu- likely as a phenotypic variation within the Noonan spectrum . rofibromatsis-Noonan like /Watson Syndrome, although, his condition was diagnosed as neurofibromatosis type I in childhood. The authors P01.178 analyse the clinical phenotype, overlapping characteristic features of clinical study of a family with Noonan syndrome (Ns) above mentioned syndromes and discuss the molecular basis of this transmited from mother to daughter phenomen . L. I. Butnariu1, E. Gorduza1, D. Anton2, M. Covic1; 1*University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, Department of Human Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 2*University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, “Saint Mary” Hospital, Iasi, Romania. Noonan Syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disease, with muta- tion inherited essspecially from mother, characterized by typical facial dysmorphism, short stature, heart defect, mental retardation and he-Clinical genetics  matological anomalies . Almost 50% of patients with NS (sporadic or sible for 29-60% of NS cases . The aim of our study was to estimate familial) carry an missense mutation of PTPN11 gene (12q24), while the frequency of PTPN11 gene mutations in Polish patients with NS . other genes ( KRAS and SOS1) play a minor role in the molecular Results of clinical and molecular studies the group of 95 probands are pathogenesis of the disease . reported . Detailed clinical evaluation, including family pedigree, dys- We present a familial case, mother and daughter, with NS diagnosed morphic features, pre- and postnatal development and congenital mal- by used a scoring system based by clinical signs . formations is presented . Direct sequencing analysis of the 15 exons of The diagnosis was performed first in daughter, wich was identified at PTPN11 gene was performed and mutation was found in 32 (35%) of birth . She presented polihidramnyos, nuchal oedema and premature the probands. The most frequent among 15 identified missense muta- born . The patient was reevaluated of two months age . Clinical and tions were: 1510A>G and 922A>G . In 9(28%) patients mutation was paraclinic evaluation revealed the major features of NS: feeding diffi- familiar and in 77% of cases was maternal in origin . culties with failure to thrive, short stature, typical facial dysmorphy (mi- All patients with PTPN11 mutation demonstrated typical NS phenotype . crocephaly, broad and high forehead, down-slanting palpebral fisusu- Pulmonary valve stenosis, atrial septum defect, coagulation abnormal- res, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, micrognathia, low-set posteriorly ities, mild mental retardation, short triangular face with pointed chin rotated ears), short neck with excess nucal skin, pectus excavatum, were statistically the most frequent in patients with PTPN11 mutation . Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopaty (HOMC) with asymmetrical Statistically significant correlation of pulmonary stenosis with 922A>G septum hypertrophy and neuromotor retardation . Other feature was and 1510A>G mutation was found . Heart defect was present in all pro- ombilical hernia . She had anemia, but no thrombocytopenia or other bands with PTPN11 mutation, but only in 66% of their parents . coagulation defect . Clinical genetic examination of mother (N .C .M .), We concluded that probably another mutations within SOS1, KRAS 31 years old, after delivery revealed the phenotype of NS (facial typical and BRAF genes involved in the RAS-MAPK pathway may be respon- dysmorphysm, pterygium colli, pectus carinatum superior and excava- sible for NS in subset of presented patients without PTPN11 mutation . tum inferior), pulmonar stenosis and mental retardation . The analysis Further investigations are planned to explain NS phenotype in these of pedigree showed the absence of other cases in family .In conclusion, patients . we emphasize, the importance of the clinical features for diagnosis, leading further to an aprropiate management and for according genetic P01.181 counseling sOs1 mutation as a cause for Noonan syndrome type 4: A report of two patients P01.179 G. Yesil1, B. Tuysuz1, M. Zenker2; Noonan and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes: two clinically 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Univer- and Genetically Overlapping Disorders sitatsklinikum Erlangen, Humangenetisches Insitut, Erlangen, Germany. A. M. Nyström1, S. Ekvall1, E. Berglund2, M. Bjorkqvist3, G. Braathen4, K. Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease Duchen5, H. Enell6, E. Holmberg4, U. Holmlund7, M. Olsson-Engman8, G. An- characterized by mental retardation (25%), short stature, pterygium nerén1, M. L. Bondeson1; colli, congenital heart defect and hypogonadism . Approximately 50% 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Central Hospital, Skelleftea, Sweden, of cases are caused by mutations in the PTPN11 gene on chromo- 3University Hospial, Orebro, Sweden, 4Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Go- some 12q24 .1 . Recently, Roberts and Tartaglia (2007) found mutation thenburg, Sweden, 5University Hospital, Linkoping, Sweden, 6Regional Hospital in the SOS1 gene on chromosome 2p22 to be responsible from %20 of Halmstad, Halmstad, Sweden, 7Central Hospital, Vasteras, Sweden, 8Re- of NS who had ectodermal abnormalities but normal development . gional Hospital of Karlskrona, Karlskrona, Sweden. This subtype called NS4 which share many clinical features with a Noonan and Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndromes are related dis- group of developmental disorders including Costello and CFC (Car- orders associated with dysregulated RAS-MAPK signalling . Noonan diofaciocutenous) syndrome. Our first patient was a 7 month old male syndrome (NS) is associated with mutations in the genes PTPN11, and the second was 45 days old girl who had coarse face, sparse hair SOS1, KRAS and RAF1 . The genetic aetiology of the clinically over- and eyebrows and skin loss . Valvular pulmonary stenosis was shown lapping CFC syndrome was recently assigned to four genes, BRAF, in echocardiography at the first patient and atrioventricular channel KRAS, MEK1 and MEK2 . Here, we present a comprehensive mutation defect and pulmonary hypertension at the second . One of our patients analysis of BRAF, KRAS, MEK1, MEK2 and SOS1 in 31 unrelated NS/ had signs of hyperkeratotic skin too . SOS 1 mutation were detected on CFC patients without mutations in PTPN11. Mutations were identified exon 6; c .797C-> A heterozygous, p .T266K and on exon16 c .2536G>A in 8 patients, in whom we also present a detailed clinical investigation . heterozygous p .E846K in patient 1 and patient 2 respectively . Pulmo- Seven of the mutations were identified in patients with CFC diagno- nary stenosis was found more frequently in patients with SOS1 muta- ses (2 in BRAF, 1 in KRAS, 1 in MEK1, 2 in MEK2 and 1 in SOS1) . tions than PTPN1 mutations and atrial septal defect was relatively rare Two mutations were novel: MEK1 E203Q and MEK2 F57L . The SOS1 in affected individuals with SOS1 mutations . Thus clinical examination E433K mutation, identified in a patient diagnosed as CFC, has previ- can be indeterminative . It is important to remember to identify SOS1 ously been reported in patients with NS . In one NS patient, we also gene on patients who are free of BRAF, KRAS, MEK 1, 2 mutations identified a BRAF K499E mutation, previously reported in patients with that are responsible from the etiology of CFC syndrome . CFC . We thus suggest involvement also of BRAF in the pathogenesis of NS . P01.182 Taken together, our results indicate that the molecular and clinical Prenatal images and evolution to cutis verticis gyrata in a overlap between CFC and NS is more complex than previously sug- newborn with Noonan syndrome gested and that the syndromes might even present as allelic disorders . A. Moresco1, J. van der Velde2, M. Ingilde2, G. Chernovetzky2, S. Naddeo2, S. Furthermore, we suggest that the diagnosis should be refined to, e.g., Spinelli2, M. Rittler2; NS-PTPN11-associated or CFC- BRAF-associated after the genetic 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Grupo de defect has been established since this may have an impact on progno- Diagnóstico Prenatal. Hospital Materno Infantil Ramón Sardá, Buenos Aires, sis and treatment of the patients . Argentina. Cutis verticis gyrata (CVG) is a rare defect, characterized by skin ridg- P01.180 es and clinical and molecular studies in 95 polish patients with noonan furrows forming cerebriform folds . Its primary form is associated with syndrome neuropsychiatric disorders or genetic syndromes, such as Turner and, E. Obersztyn, J. Klapecki, M. Łaniewski -Wołłk, A. Szpecht - Potocka, J. Bal, more rarely, Noonan . Secondarily, CVG may be due to a local process T. Mazurczak; or a systemic illness . Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. Objective: To show the prenatal images of CVG in a fetus, and its Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is genetically heterogenous evolution until birth, when Noonan syndrome was diagnosed . disorder characterized by facial dysmorphism, short stature, variety case report: The propositus was the third child of a young and healthy of heart defects (particularly pulmonary stenosis), chest deformations, couple . Pregnancy was uneventful until 18 gestational weeks, when an pterygium colli, lymphatic dysplasia, cryptorchidism and psychomotor ultrasound (US) scan revealed a cystic hygroma, hydrothorax and a retardation . Heterogeneous mutations in PTPN11 gene are respon- fluid collection at the cephalic pole, which first suggested an underlyingClinical genetics  skull defect, until bony tissue between the intracranial structures and and hyperkeratotic eczema on face and legs . SOS1 mutation found in the overlying lesion could be identified. At 22 gestational weeks, the this patient with CFC phenotype further emphasizes the need of phe- mentioned fluid collection had disappeared, leaving a residual scalp notype-genotype correlation studies in SOS1 mutation patients . thickening and an enlarged nuchal fold . Fetal karyotype by amniocen- tesis was normal (46,XY) . At birth, the infant showed a Noonan syn- P01.185 drome phenotype and a CVG . improved mutation Detection in the Polygenic Disorders Noonan Discussion: CVG is possibly due to an initial scalp lymphedema and syndrome and LEOPARD syndrome its further resolution, and should be distinguished from a cephalocele . S. Ramos1, J. Short1, N. Elanko1, K. Kalidas2, S. Cottrell1, R. Poh1, R. Taylor1; This is the third description of a patient with Noonan syndrome and 1South West Thames Molecular Genetics Laboratory, St George’s Hospital, CVG, and the second describing a fluid collection at the cephalic pole London, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Developmental Sciences, St George’s Uni- that progressed to CVG . The observed images and their evolution are versity of London, London, United Kingdom. of clinical importance, because they can strengthen the suspicion of Noonan syndrome (NS) is a common autosomal dominant multiple Noonan syndrome prenatally . congenital anomaly syndrome exhibiting short stature, heart defects and facial dysmorphism . LEOPARD syndrome (LS) is a rare autoso- P01.183 mal dominant multiple congenital abnormality syndrome . The acronym Gain-of-function RAF mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD LEOPARD defines the common features: multiple Lentigines, ECG syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy conduction abnormalities, Ocular hypertelorism, Pulmonary stenosis, B. Pandit1, A. Sarkozy2, L. Pennacchio3, C. Carta4, K. Oishi1, S. Martinelli4, W. Abnormal genitalia, Retardation of growth and sensorineural Deaf- Schackwitz3, A. Ustaszewska3, S. R. Ommen5, F. Lepri2, C. Faul1, P. Mundel1, ness . Defects in the RAS-MAPK pathway have been implicated in both J. P. López Siguero6, R. Tenconi7, A. Selicorni8, C. Rossi9, L. Mazzanti9, I. syndromes . Torrente2, B. Marino10, M. C. Digilio11, G. Zampino12, M. J. Ackerman5, B. Dal- lapiccola2, M. Tartaglia4, B. D. Gelb1; Since 2001 missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene have been recog- 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 2CSS-Mendel nised as causative in approximately half of NS cases and the majority Institute, Rome, Italy, 3Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, of LS cases . We established a service in 2002 to analyse exons 3 and United States, 4Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5Mayo Clinic College 8 of this gene which contain ~80% of known NS mutations . Since 2005 of Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States, 6Hospital Materno-Infantil, Málaga, we have screened all exons in which mutations had been identified Spain, 7Università di Padova, Padua, Italy, 8Università di Milano, Milano, Italy, and thus allowed molecular confirmation of LS. 9Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 10Poli- Mutations in the SOS1, RAF1 and KRAS genes, which also encode clinico “Umberto I”, Università di Roma “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 11Ospedale proteins in the RAS-MAPK pathway, have been identified in 10-20% of “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, Italy, 12Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, PTPN11 negative NS cases . RAF1 mutations have also been identi- Italy. fied in a proportion of PTPN11 negative LS cases . We have set up a Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes (NS and LS) are developmental diagnostic service to analyse the known mutation-containing exons of disorders with overlapping features including cardiac abnormalities, SOS1 and RAF1 and all exons of KRAS . Testing involves a dHPLC short stature and facial dysmorphisms . Increased RAS signaling due pre-screen followed by bidirectional sequencing of any variants . We to PTPN11, KRAS and SOS1 mutations cause approximately 60% of have identified 12 pathogenic mutations in SOS1 and RAF1 in our NS cases, while PTPN11 mutations cause approximately 90% of LS initial cohort of 110 PTPN11 negative cases referred for NS/LS . This cases . Here, we report that 18 of 231 NS and two of six LS patients analysis is now integrated with the PTPN11 screen to facilitate a com- without mutations in known genes have missense mutations in RAF1, prehensive molecular investigation of NS and LS referrals . which encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase that activates MEK1 and MEK2. Most mutations altered a motif flanking Ser259, a residue P01.186 critical for RAF1’s autoinhibition through 14-3-3 binding . RAF1 muta- molecular analysis of the PtPN11 (protein-tyrosine phosphatase, tions in two hotspots were strongly associated with hypertrophic car- nonreceptor-type 11) gene in Estonian patients with Noonan diomyopathy (HCM; 95% vs . 18% of all NS) . Ectopically expressed syndrome RAF1 mutants from HCM clusters had increased kinase activity and I. Kalev1, K. Muru2, M. Zimmermann3, T. Reimand4, R. Teek4, S. Virro5, M. enhanced ERK activation, while non-HCM-associated-cluster mutants Sõnajalg5, K. Õunap6; were kinase impaired. Our findings further implicate increased RAS 1Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and Mo- signaling in pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy . lecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University P01.184 of Tartu; Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University, Tartu, sOs1 mutation in a cFc patient Estonia, 3Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and M. Somer1, M. L. Väisänen2, M. Lähde3, J. Ignatius2; Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu; Department of Cell Biology, Institute of 1Dept Medical Genetics, The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of 2Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 3North Carelian Central Hospital, Jo- Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Chil- ensuu, Finland. dren’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 6Department of Genetics, After the CFC syndrome was originally published in 1986 it was con- United Laboratories,Tartu University Hospital; Department of Pediatrics, Univer- tinuously debated whether it can be separated from the Noonan syn- sity of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. drome . Molecular genetic studies have shown that at least one gene Noonan syndrome (NS; OMIM# 163950) is a relatively common in the RAS pathway, KRAS can cause both syndromes . When SOS1 (1:1000-2500) autosomal dominant disorder characterized by propor- was described to be the second most common gene in Noonan it was tional short stature, facial dysmorphisms and cardiac anomalies . Mis- emphasized that it usually does not cause the CFC syndrome . We sense mutations of PTPN11 gene have been documented in about describe a 4-y-o boy with SOS1 exon 6 missense mutation c .797C>A 50% of NS cases, while molecular lesions of other genes of the RAS (p .T266K), earlier reported by Roberts et al in 2007 in a Noonan pa- pathway (KRAS, SOS1, RAS1) play a minor role in the molecular tient . Parental studies were normal . He was born at after 37 weeks of pathogenesis of the disease . pregnancy complicated by fetal hydronephrosis and polyhydramnios Study group consisted of 10 probands (age 1-36 y; 5 males/5 females), with birth weight 4000g, length 51 cm and OFC 36,5 cm . There was 4 of which were familial cases . All patients had the typical face and oedema, opistothonus, poor feeding, cryptorhidism, and umbilical her- inclusion diagnostic criteria of NS proposed by van der Burgt (1994) . nia . He has pulmonary and mild aortic stenosis, ASD secundum, and All of the patients had a normal karyotype . Sequence analysis was hypertrophy of the ventricular septum . His growth is on the -1 .2 SD performed for five coding PTPN11 exons 3, 4, 7, 8, 13 and their flank- curve and OFC +1 .5 SD . He started to walk at 18 months but is not ing regions . Mutation analysis of the PTPN11 hot spot coding exons yet able to run. He spoke the first words at 3,5 years and mainly uses revealed two different heterozygous missense mutations in two unre- sign language . He has melatonin treatment for poor sleeping patterns . lated families . A transition A1510G in exon13 for family NS-VI, which Dysmorphic features are compatible with the CFC syndrome with bi- predicts the Met504Val substitution, was described previously (Tarta- temporal constrictions, sparse hair, absent eyebrows, dystrophic nails glia, 2001), resided in the PTP domain of SHP-2 protein . A172G tran-Clinical genetics 0 sition was identified in the exon3. This change predicts the Asn58Asp cytosine at nucleotide 1403 as the driving factor leading to the high substitution in family NS-X, and affects the N-SH2 domain of SHP-2 . prevalence of the T468M change in LS . Patients with PTPN11 disease related mutations had characteristic phenotypes: a proband from NS-VI family presented short stature, P01.189 dysmorphic facial features and atrial septal defect; a proband from NS- Diagnostic tests for costello syndrome and cardio-facio- X family had short stature, pulmonary valve stenosis and dysmorphic cutaneous syndrome - two years service experience. facial features . Future studies involving clinical and genetic investiga- J. A. Shorto1, B. Kerr2, B. Tang3, R. Elles1; tions are necessary to correlate genotype-phenotype expression . Sup- 1Regional Molecular Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Clinical ported by Estonian Science Foundation grant GARMP6573 . Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom. P01.187 Costello and Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous (CFC) syndromes are autoso- PtPN11 gene analysis in a sample of mexican patients with mal dominant multiple congenital abnormalities with phenotypic over- Noonan syndrome laps to Noonan syndrome . The main difference with respect to their C. N. Gonzalez-Huerta1, L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; management is an increased tumour risk in Costello syndrome (ap- 1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitacion, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Hospital General proximately 17%) . de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Me- Costello syndrome is associated with mutations in HRAS (82-92%), dicina, UNAM, Mexico DF, Mexico. the majority of the mutations identified to date are in codons 12 and 13. Noonan syndrome (NS) is a dysmorphic syndrome characterized by No other disease causing genes have been identified. All five coding hypertelorism, low-set posteriorly rotated ears, short stature, a short exons of HRAS are screened by bi-directional fluorescent sequenc- neck with webbing or redundancy of skin, cardiac anomalies, epican- ing . thic folds and motor delay . NS may occur on a sporadic basis, with a So far four genes have been identified in CFC syndrome; BRAF (37- predominance of paternal origin, or in an autosomal dominant inheri- 78% patients), KRAS, MEK1 and MEK2. We use bi-directional fluo- tance with a predominance of maternal transmission . NS is clinically rescent sequencing to screen BRAF (exons 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and similar to the Turner syndrome . More than 50% of patients with NS 16), KRAS (all five coding exons), MEK1 (exons 2 and 3) and MEK2 have mutations in the PTPN11 gene . Most of the mutations are recur- (exons 2 and 3) . rent and cluster in exons 3, 8 and 13 . All the PTPN11 missense muta- We have been offering a diagnostic service for both Costello syn- tions are present in the interacting regions of the amino N-SH2 domain drome and CFC syndrome for 2 years, since June 2006 . So far 125 and the phosphotyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domains . It seems that patients with a likely diagnosis of either Costello or CFC syndrome gain-of-function changes are responsible of the phenotype observed have been referred to us . We detected 26 pathogenic mutations in 101 in NS . In the present study we analyzed the PTPN11 gene in a group patients tested for HRAS mutations . In the cohort of 71 patients tested of 10 patients with diagnosis of NS . DNA genomic from leukocytes for CFC syndrome we detected 19 pathogenic mutations (BRAF=14, was extracted with conventional methods . All exons of the PTPN11 KRAS=2, MEK1=3) and a further seven that are likely to be pathogenic were amplified and sequenced trough polimerase chain reaction and (BRAF=4, KRAS=2, MEK2=1) . We tested both parents of 14 patients DNA sequencing analyzes . We detected a low frequency of mutations with a known pathogenic mutation and 2 patients with a likely patho- in the PNP11 gene in the patients; most patients showed a normal se- genic mutation, in all cases the mutation was shown to be de novo . quence of the PNP11 gene . These data indicate that probably PNP11 gene mutations are not the most frequent cause of NS in Mexican P01.190 population . complex Approach to Diagnostics and Data Analysis for Neurofibromatosis type 1 P01.188 T. Marikova1, A. Krepelova1, S. Bendova1, B. Petrak1, M. Kaluzova1, M. Za- Diverse driving forces underlie the occurrence of invariant kova2, L. Novakova2, O. Stepankova2; PTPN mutations in Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes 12nd Medical School, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic, 2Czech Technical S. Martinelli1, P. Torreri1, M. Tinti2, L. Stella2, G. Bocchinfuso2, E. Flex1, A. Grot- University, Prague, Czech Republic. tesi3, S. Delle Vigne1, M. Ceccarini1, A. Palleschi2, G. Cesareni2, L. Castagnoli2, The Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common single T. C. Petrucci1, B. D. Gelb4, M. Tartaglia1; gene diseases (the expected incidence is 1:3000) . 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, There was implemented a database of 300 records of patients suffer- Italy, 3Consortium for the Application of Super-Computing for Universities and ing from NF1 in the Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics 2nd Medi- Research, Rome, Italy, 4Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United cal School, Charles University in Prague . States. The complex investigation methodology in the patients with a NF1 has Missense PTPN11 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syn- been verified. The DNA bank for these patients was created containing dromes (NS and LS), two developmental disorders with pleiomor- 150 DNA samples . We have implemented reliable molecular genetic phic phenotypes . PTPN11 encodes SHP2, an SH2 domain-contain- diagnostics of the NF1 gene using MLPA and DHPLC methods .We ing protein tyrosine phosphatase functioning as a signal transducer . have investigated 39 families and detected causal mutation of the NF1 Generally, different substitutions of a particular amino acid residue gene in 26 patients, from which 13 mutations were not been previously are observed in these diseases, indicating that the crucial factor is detected . Last year, we have implemented high resolution melt analy- the residue being replaced . For a few codons, only one substitution sis (HRM) as an effective tool for the mutation scanning of the NF1 is observed, suggesting the possibility of specific roles for the residue gene with sensitivity comparable with the DHPLC method . introduced . We analyzed the biochemical behavior and ligand-bind- The clinical, neurological, neurophysiological, and biochemical data ing properties of all possible substitutions arising from single-base of patients have been analyzed in detail by support of artificial intel- changes affecting codons 42, 139, 279, 282 and 468 to investigate the ligence methods . mechanisms underlying the invariant occurrence of the T42A, E139D The patient records are stored in the form of text files. Their content and I282V substitutions in NS and the Y279C and T468M changes in has to be converted into a database format to analyze them by avail- LS . Our data demonstrate that the isoleucine-to-valine change at co- able machine learning techniques . The pilot data analysis will be sum- don 282 is the only substitution at that position perturbing the stability marized . of SHP2’s closed conformation without impairing catalysis, while the supported by projects AV-CR-1ET 101210513 and GAUK 62007 threonine-to-alanine change at codon 42, but not other substitutions of that residue, promotes increased phosphopeptide binding affinity. The P01.191 recognition specificity of the C-SH2 domain bearing the E139D sub- Neurofibromatosis type 1 in adulthood: clinical analysis of a 80 stitution differed substantially from its wild type counterpart acquiring patients cohort binding properties similar to those observed for the N-SH2 domain, re- F. Natacci1, G. Melloni1, M. F. Bedeschi1, E. Vismara2, G. Tadini3, M. Moggio4, vealing a novel mechanism of SHP2’s functional dysregulation . Finally, M. Caroli5, C. Lamperti4, M. Sciacco4, M. Brambilla6, L. Trespidi7, A. Costa8, F. while functional selection does not seem to occur for the substitutions Viola2, D. Bianchessi9, G. Finocchiaro9, P. Riva10, L. Larizza11, F. Lalatta1; at codons 279 and 468, we point to deamination of the methylated 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,Clinical genetics  Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 2Oculistic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, of 10 months . Since 10% to 14% of patients with JMML have NF1; the Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 3Der- present patient had multiple café-au-lait spots allowing to consider for matologic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli Neurofibromatosis Type I (1,2). The standard karyotype on lympho- e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 4Neurology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale cytes was 46,XY normal male . Bone marrow karyotype showed mono- Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 5Neurosurgery somy 7 . By cDNA sequencing a frameshift mutation in NF1 gene was Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina characterized, c .2033dupC . With MLPA, total NF1 gene deletion was Elena, Milano, Italy, 6Reconstructive Surgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospe- observed. These mutations were confirmed on a second independent dale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 7Obstetrics sample. On fibroblasts, we confirmed the total gene deletion providing and Gynecology Clinic I, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, evidence for a germline mutation while the c .2033dupC was absent Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 8Neuroradiology Unit, Fondazione (most likely representing a second hit mutation) . Investigation on bone IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, marrow is planned. This is the first report on a NF1 microdeletion pa- Italy, 9Neuro-oncology Unit, Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Milano, Italy, 10Biolo- tient with JMML. The finding of a second hit point mutation in a patient gy and Genetics for Medical Sciences Department, University of Milan, Milano, with NF1 microdeletion represents another example of that the type Italy, 11Medical School Department - Polo Osp. San Paolo, University of Milan, of germline mutation influences the type of second hit in the tumors Milano, Italy. (3) . Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the NF1 region is not an usual Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), a genetic disease, with an estimate mechanism for somatic NF1 inactivation from tumors in patients with a incidence of 1/3000 . It is a neurocutaneous disorder characterized by microdeletion . It is postulated that LOH of NF1 microdeletion region in multisystemic involvement . NF1 has a wide clinical variability even these patients would de facto lead to a nullizygous state of the genes between family members, with the possibility of mild forms and age and might be lethal . specific complications. References Although childhood clinical spectrum and possible complications are (1) L. Side et al. Blood 1998;92:267-272 well known, few data are available on adult patients, concerning the (2) L. Side et al. New Engl J Med 1997;336:1713-1720 evolution of the disease, the applicability of a follow up program, the (3) De Raedt et al, Genes Chromosomes Cancer . 2006;45(10):893- indications for genetic testing, the social and health needs typical of 904 this age . We describe a clinical cohort of 80 adult NF1 patients, referred to P01.194 Clinical Genetics Unit at Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Mangiagalli e Germline and somatic NF mutations and copy number Regina Elena . The cohort is composed by 46 females and 34 males alterations of chromosome 17 in sporadic and NF1-associated patients, age range: 19-69 years . NF1 was inherited from an affected malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors parent in 24 cases (30%) . The diagnosis was segmental NF1 in 5 cas- I. Bottillo1, I. Torrente1, T. Ahlquist2, H. Brekke2, S. A. Danielsen2, E. van den es, while the other 75 patients have a classical form of the disease . Berg3, F. Mertens4, R. A. Lothe2, B. Dallapiccola1,5; Clinical features and detected complications of this cohort are com- 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute pared with the available literature data. Specific attention will be given for Cancer Research, Rikshospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 3Depart- to the typical and specific needs of adulthood, related to the reproduc- ment of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Gron- tive life: demand for genetic counselling, recurrence risk, procreative ingen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund option discussion, prenatal diagnosis request, pregnancy follow up in University Hospital, Lund SE-221 85, Sweden, 5Department of Experimental affected women . Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) is a rare malignan- P01.192 cy occurring with increased frequency in patients with neurofibroma- Prenatal diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1: Importance of tosis type 1 (NF1) . In contrast to the well known spectrum of germline genetic counseling NF1 mutations, the information on somatic mutations in MPNSTs are Y. Terzi1, S. Oguzkan Balci2, B. Anlar3, S. Aysun3, S. Ayter1; limited . In this study we evaluated the presence of NF1 mutations in 47 1Hacettepe University, Department of Medical Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Univer- MPNSTs from patients with (n=25) or without (n=22) NF1; from 7 of the sity of Gaziantep, Department of Medical Biology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3Hacette- NF1-patients neurofibromas were also analyzed. The mutation status pe University, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara, Turkey. was assessed for two other genes, KRAS and BRAF. Mutation profiles Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder were compared with copy number changes for chromosome 17 and with an incidence of about 1 in 3500 live births . Because of the large TP53 mutation status . Germline NF1 mutations were detected in 17 size and complexity of the NF1 gene, the variety of mutations and the NF1-patients: 6 frameshift, 5 truncating, 3 missense mutations, 2 large need to identify the specific mutation in each family, indirect diagnosis deletions, and 1 chromosome 17 imbalance . Somatic NF1 mutations using linked markers has an important part in genetic counseling . were found in 17/25 NF1-associated MPNSTs, in 3/7 neurofibromas In this study, thirty-seven families have been characterized and two and in 9/22 sporadic MPNSTs . Large chromosomal imbalances ac- prenatal diagnoses have been performed by using indirect analyses . counted for 13/17 and 7/9 somatic mutations in NF1-associated and Two family were informative for NF1 markers . One of fetuses was un- sporadic MPNSTs, respectively . In the present cohort, 20 NF1-associ- der NF1 risk . Now, she is 15 month old, has NF1 features . ated and 11 sporadic tumors harbored distal 17q gain . Two NF1-as- The variability of the phenotypic expression of the NF1 gene makes sociated and 13 sporadic MPNSTs did not show any NF1 mutation, reproductive decisions in NF1 families very difficult. Even mutation de- arguing for a contribution of other genes . However, a major role of the tection can not help for decision because molecular diagnosis can not KRAS or BRAF gene was excluded . Loss of the 17p13 region includ- predict the severity of the disease . Therefore good genetic counseling ing the TP53 gene appeared to be implicated both in NF1-associated is very important for the couples with the NF1 risk . and sporadic MPNSTs . The present results suggest that somatic and germline NF1 mutations involved in MPNST development develop by P01.193 two distinct mechanisms, the former being the same in sporadic and Detection of a de novo germline deletion and somatic NF NF1-associated cases . mutation in a 2 year-old boy with JmmL and multiple café au lait spots P01.195 Y. J. Sznajer1,2, A. Klein3, P. Heimann4, M. Hortala5, K. Claes6; Early-onset breast cancer in Neurofibromatosis type I 1Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for C. D. Delozier1,2, W. J. Podalsky3, C. J. Curry1,2; Human Genetics, U.L.B, Brussels, Belgium, 3Haematology-Oncology, Hopital 1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2UCSF- Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 4Genetic Oncology, Fresno, Fresno, CA, United States, 3Radiation Oncology, Saint Agnes Medical Center for Genetics, ULB Hopital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium, 5Dermatology, Center, Fresno, CA, United States. Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 6Center for Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), with an incidence of approximately Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. 1/3500, is one of the most common hereditary disorders . Breast can- We describe the history of a child from healthy unrelated parents di- cer, usually due to somatic rather than inherited gene mutations, is one agnosed having juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) at the age of the most common malignancies; the lifetime risk for breast cancer inClinical genetics  women ranges by population from 8-12% . and in 8% of the literature cases . Individuals with NF1 have a well-documented increase in the relative conclusions There is a need for more unified criteria for classifying risk of several rare malignancies, including malignant nerve sheath mosaic NF1 . The incidence and disease features of mosaic NF1 in tumors, childhood myeloid malignancies, neurogenic sarcomas, ma- Finland are similar to those found in other countries and in the litera- lignant CNS tumors, rhabdomyosarcomas, pheochromocytomas and ture . carcinoid tumors . There has not, however, been a well-documented increase in the incidence of common adult-onset malignancies such P01.198 as colon, breast and prostate, in individuals with NF1 . Analysis of the NF gene in a cohort of 118 unselected NF1 Over the past six months in our familial cancer clinic we have encoun- patients using direct cDNA sequencing complemented with tered two women with a classical presentation of NF1 who developed mLPA analysis pre-menopausal invasive ductal carcinoma . A literature and database B. Campos1, J. Gardenyes1, O. Abad1, P. Fábregas1, S. Bernal2, V. Volpini1; review initially revealed only anecdotal case reports of breast cancer in 1IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant NF1, but a recent publication (Sharif et al ., J MED GENET 44:481-484, Pau, Barcelona, Spain. 2007) concluded that women with NF1 under age 50 have an approxi- Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) [MIM 162200] is a common dominant mately 5-fold increased risk of breast cancer . We next proceeded to a autosomal disorder, affecting 1 in 3500 individuals . The disease is more complete review of publications dealing with mortality and mor- caused by mutations in the NF1 gene at 17q11 .2, in which has been bidity in NF1 and now agree with the above authors that women with identified a wide range of molecular abnormalities. In the last years NF1 should be offered earlier mammographic screening because of a it has made clear the need for a reliable and sensitive genetic test moderately-increased risk of pre-menopausal breast cancer . Although for the NF1 gene to help resolve diagnostic dilemmas in patients not a genotype-phenotype correlation might be suspected, such correla- fulfilling clinical criteria as those defined by The National Institutes of tions have been difficult in NF1 in general and have not been identified Health (NIH) . in relation to breast cancer . We screened for mutations a panel of 118 unrelated patients sus- pected of having NF1, using direct cDNA sequencing complemented P01.196 with multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis. Neurofibroma by numbers: mutational mechanisms, models and Possible disease causing mutations were identified in 82 (69%) cases. modifier genes These comprised 74 different sequence alterations, of which 46 were C. Garcia Linares1, B. Canet2, J. Fernandez2, L. Benito2, I. Blanco2, C. Lázaro2, novel. Among the 82 changes identified, we observed 26 (32%) frame- E. Serra Arenas1; shift mutations, 21 (26%) nonsense mutations, 15 (18%) splice errors 1IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain, 2Institut Català and 6 (7%) missense mutations . Furthermore, using MLPA approach d’Oncologia, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain. we found 14 mutations (17%): 8 total gene deletions, 4 multiexon dele- The number of dermal neurofibromas (dNFs) in Neurofibormatosis tions and 2 multiexon duplications . type 1 patients is highly variable . It has been shown that there is an Out of the 118 cases referred, there were 84 patients with reliable clini- important genetic component in the variation of neurofibroma number cal data, of whom 53 satisfied the NIH diagnostic criteria. Within this that seems to be consistent with a polygenic effect. Neurofibroma initi- better defined cohort of NF1 patients, mutations were identified in 47 ates due to the double inactivation of the NF1 gene . Most (if not all) individuals (89%) . Interestingly, 10 out of 24 (42%) patients who satis- somatic NF1 inactivations in dNFs are due to mutation, thus genes fied only one NIH criteria carried a mutation. important for DNA repair mechanisms are good candidates as modifier Our results show that direct cDNA sequencing together with MLPA genes of neurofibroma number variability. We have chosen to study analysis provide a sensitive and specific method for the rapid identifi- genes responsible for mitotic recombination as candidate modifiers, cation of NF1 mutations . since mitotic recombination is an important mechanism leading to LOH that accounts for the 20-30% of somatic NF1 inactivations in dNFs . We P01.199 are employing different strategies, either directly in humans or using Genetic diagnosis of Neurofibromatosis 1 in 62 Spanish patients Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model, for identifying candidate genes and determination of the mutational spectrum of the NF1 gene in that will be used in association studies in a well-characterized cohort our population of NF1 patients . J. Garcia-Planells1,2, M. Molero1, M. Bellón1, M. Torres-Puente1, M. Perez- Alonso1,2; P01.197 1Sistemas Genomicos, Valencia, Spain, 2Instituto Valenciano de Genética, Mosaic neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) in Finland IVGEN, Valencia, Spain. M. Pöyhönen1,2, J. Ruohonen1, J. Peltonen3, S. Peltonen4; Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is a multisistemic disease characterized by 1Dept of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Dept of the presence of multiple cafe au lait spots, freckling, neurofibromas Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Insti- and iris Lisch nodules . NF1 is caused by mutations in the NF1 gene, tute of Biomedicine, Department of Anatomy, University of Turku, Turku, Fin- more than 500 different mutations been identified and many of them land, 4Department of Dermatology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. are private . A half of mutations are de novo and the mutational hetero- Background Neurofibromatoses are hereditary diseases that belong geneity of NF1 gene is high: point mutations (27%), splicing mutations to the group of phakomatoses . NF1 has distinctive cutaneus features (20%), small deletion or insertion (47%) and large deletions or rear- and NF2 has mainly intracranial lesions . In the segmental or mosaic rangements (8%) . The aims of this work are: i) to achieve a genetic type (NF5) the disease features of NF1 are distributed regionally on diagnosis in patients with clinical criteria of NF1, ii) to evaluate the the body . There is no previous data on mosaic NF1 in Finland . RNA sequencing of the NF1 gene as a diagnostic methodology for methods Patients’ disease features were collected from hospital files. Neurofibromatosis 1, iii) to determinate the mutational spectrum of the A large literature search was made and the cases were compared with NF1 gene in our series . Here we report our three years results and the Finnish patients . The objective was to study the incidence of mo- experience with genetic diagnosis of NF1 . We have achieved a genetic saic NF1 in Finland and the disease features in Finnish patients . diagnosis in 75 patients and 42 mutations not reported previously have Results Classification of patients unequivocally according to exist- been identified. RNA sequencing of the NF1 gene is the methodol- ing criteria for mosaic NF1 proved difficult. The incidence of mosaic ogy gold standard for the genetic diagnosis of Neurofibromatosis 1, NF1 in Finland (0,0005%) was lower than that found in other coun- because it allows to identify point mutations, splicing mutations and tries (0,0014%-0,002%), but in areas where the material was the most duplications or deletions, including these affecting to one or a only a comprehensive (Turku and Oulu University Hospital districts) the in- few exons . The mutational spectrum of the NF1 gene obtained in our cidences (0,0013% and 0,0011% respectively) were very similar to population provides an interesting epidemiologic and pathogenic infor- the other studies . The most common disease feature was the neuro- mation . A high expertise and experience must be required for the inter- fibroma, which was found in 81% of the Finnish patients and in 76% pretation of nucleotide changes identified in the sequencing of genes of the cases in the literature . The frequence of café-au-lait-spots was with a high rate of de novo mutations respectively 39% and 35% and that of freckles 26% and 38% . Lisch nodules, mainly unilateral, presented in 15% of the Finnish patientsClinical genetics  P01.200 and sequenced six of them . First data of these comparisons will be UmD-DmD France: A national knowledgebase of molecular presented . defects in the dystrophin gene S. Tuffery-Giraud1, C. Béroud2, F. Leturcq3, R. Ben Yaou4, D. Hamroun5, F. P01.202 Desmet6, L. Michel-Calemard7, N. Monnier7, A. Guiochon-Mantel7, B. de Mar- congenital muscular Dystrophy with heterozygous mutations in tinville7, R. Bernard7, P. Boisseau7, M. Blayau7, M. Cossée7, C. Philippe7, I. LAMA2 and FKRP Creveaux7, E. Bieth7, M. Moizard7, P. Khau Van Kien8, V. Humbertclaude8, J. Y. Nevo1, M. Becker-Cohen1, Y. Yaron2, E. Pras3, H. Resnik-Wolf3, M. Rach- Kaplan9, J. Chelly10, M. Claustres11; miel1, S. Mitrani-Rosenbaum1; 1Université Montpellier 1, Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, 1Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Tel Aviv France, 2Inserm U827, Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire CHU, Montpellier, Souraski Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv Uni- France, 3CHU Hôpital Cochin, laboratoire de biochimie et génétique molécu- versity, Tel Hashomer, Israel. laire, Paris, France, 4INSERM, U582, IFR14, Institut de Myologie, Montpellier, A child presenting with hypotonia and muscle weakness since infancy, France, 5CHU Montpellier, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, ambulation until twelve years of age, seizures and normal cognitive France, 6Inserm U827, Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, function is described . CK was elevated (650-1420 IU/L) . Brain MRI 7French Collaborative Network of molecular diagnostic laboratories, France, showed a few abnormal T2 white matter changes . Muscle biopsy France, 8Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Montpellier, France, showed dystrophic features and skin biopsy demonstrated absence 9laboratoire de biochimie et génétique moléculaire, CHU Cochin, Paris, France, of merosin immunostaining (300 kd antibodies, Novocastra Labora- 10Laboratoire de biochimie et génétique moléculaire, CHU Cochin, Paris, Fran- tories) . Molecular genetic studies detected heterozygote mutations in ce, 11Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Inserm U827, Montpellier, France. both the LAMA2 (Val1754X) and FKRP (A114G ) genes, which were UMD-DMD France is a national locus-specific database (LSDB) dedi- traced to the father and to the mother respectively . Two subsequent cated to dystrophinopathies . It has been developed through a multi- sibling fetuses carried the LAMA2 mutation . In one of them the FKRP center academic effort to provide an up-to-date resource of curated mutation was also detected in one allele and in the other the FKRP information covering all identified and fully validated mutations in pa- gene was normal at both alleles . Even though the genotype of the two tients with dystrophinopathies in France . Whenever necessary, mu- aborted fetuses and the patient were identical at the LAMA2 locus, tations have been reevaluated at the light of the currently available the fetuses had normal merosin staining in chorionic villus sampling, techniques . The database includes 2270 entries corresponding to whereas the patient was merosin-negative. Our findings suggest an 2070 independent mutational events identified in either male patients additional potential interactive mechanism to LAMA2, possibly of the (2034) or symptomatic female carriers (36) . These mutations consist FKRP protein which is essential for preserving the sarcolemma integri- in 1420 deletions, 261 duplications, and 449 small rearrangements of ty. These findings suggest that merosin-defficiency could be the result which 39 .1% are nonsense . Most of them are unpublished . Experts in of di-genic inheritance . the DMD gene and related diseases are responsible for data quality and accuracy . In addition to gather mutations, the UMD-DMD France P01.203 includes available data on dystrophin and RNA analysis, phenotypic Genetic testing and counseling for Facioscapulohumeral groups, and transmission . The database aims to include extensive de- muscular Dystrophy (FsHD) in israel, 2000-6 scription of phenotypes associated with the reported mutations to bet- M. Yanoov-Sharav1, E. Leshinsky-Silver1, C. Vinkler1, M. Michelson-Kerman1, S. ter delineate the clinical spectrum of dystrophinopathies and to allow Cohen1, T. Lerman-Sagie1,2, M. Ginzberg1, M. Sadeh1,2, D. Lev1,2; genotype/phenotype correlations . In addition to the existing routines 1Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. in the UMD software, new tools have been specifically developed to In the last few years our laboratory at Wolfson Medical Center has facilitate large-scale mutation analyses of the DMD gene . UMD-DMD been the only lab in Israel to perform genetic testing for FSHD, a com- is a searchable anonymous database which will benefit to all the sci- mon, dominantly inherited, late onset, progressive, but relatively mild entific community interested in dystrophinopathies including geneti- type of muscular dystrophy, with considerable clinical variability even cists, clinicians, and researchers involved in the design of therapeutic within families . No treatment or prevention of symptoms are available, strategies . It will prove useful also to implement forthcoming global prenatal diagnosis is complicated and pregnancy termination of affect- registries of patients for clinical trials as ultimate goal within the Euro- ed fetuses - ethically controversial . FSHD genetic testing is important pean network of excellence for treatment of neuromuscular disorders for prognosis and genetic counseling, since clinical overlap exists be- (TREAT-NMD) . tween FSHD and other LGMDs . The gene causing FSHD has not been identified, but molecular diag- P01.201 nosis can be made by analyzing D4Z4 repeat length on chromosome Analysis of duplications within the DmD gene 4q35 . Results can support or rule out the clinical diagnosis of FSHD, B. Dworniczak, E. Minor, S. Hamer, B. Hitschfeld, P. Pennekamp; but there are also “gray zone”, non-conclusive results . University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. 66 individuals were tested during the years 2000-6, including 7 asymp- The DMD gene is one of the largest human genes identified, span- tomatic individuals . ning more than 2000 kb of genomic DNA encoding a 14-kb transcript . We present our results and conclusions and recommendations regard- It is known that 60 to 65% of the mutations causing DMD/BMD are ing the percentage of conclusive results obtained after FSHD genetic large deletions in the dystrophin gene . The deletions are nonrandomly testing, cognitive involvement frequency and anticipation in our patient distributed and occur primarily in the center (80%) and less frequently sample . Additionally, based on our results, recommendations for ge- near the 5’ end (20%) of the gene . The large size of the gene may netic counseling of individuals and families referred for FSHD testing account for part of the high deletion rate . However because of the are given, including addressing the issue of presymptomatic testing . nonrandom distribution of the deletions, in addition to target size, other factors must be involved like variation in chromosomal stability . P01.204 Although partial gene duplications in the DMD gene were reported to A novel mutation in FKRP gene in Italian patient with LGMD be relatively frequent (5% - 10%), only recently - with the development R. Cittadella1, A. La Russa1, P. Valentino2, V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, I. Manna1, of MLPA - detection of duplications in male patients and deletions and M. Liguori1, P. Spadafora1, A. Quattrone1,2; duplication in female carriers became feasible in a routine setting and 1Institute of Neurological Science National Reserche Council, Cosenza, Italy, first data concerning frequency and distribution of duplications within 2Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. the DMD gene became available . Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2I (LGMD2I) is an autosomal re- These data show that unlike the deletion distribution, the majority of cessive muscular dystrophy caused by mutations in the gene coding the duplications (80%) are found at the 5’ end of the gene and only for fukutin-related protein (FKRP) . LGMD2I is clinically heterogeneous, 20% in the central region suggesting that deletions and duplication and it is allelic to MDC1C (congenital muscular dystrophy type1C) with originate by different mechanism . onset in the neonatal period . The function of FKRP in skeletal muscle To investigate the mechanism causing duplications in more detail and is largely unknown; however, indirect evidence suggests that FKRP to compare this mechanism with mechanism causing deletions in the may be a putative glycosyltransferase involved in α-dystroglycan (α- same region of the gene we precisely mapped duplication breakpoints DG) processing . Muscle biopsies of patients affected by either LG-Clinical genetics  MD2I or MDC1C show a variable reduction of α-DG glycosylation. We since 1996 . report a 70 year-old man he was referred for muscle weakness of the During period 1996-2007 in total 54 prenatal tests were performed in lower limbs starting at age 20 and mild but progressive hypotrophy of 43 families . From these, 34 pregnancies were male pregnancies at risk girdle . After informed consent, mutations screening was performed on of D/BMD and 8 of them (23 .5%) showed an increased risk . genomic DNA in regard to of CAV3 and CAPN3 genes . The patient DNA extraction was done from chorionic villuses samples in 41 (76%) found negative screening of these genes, has been investigated for cases, amniotic fluid cells in 11 (20.3%) cases and in 2 cases (3.7%) mutations of FKRP gene . The mutation analysis showed a missense from fetal blood samples . Prenatal diagnosis was based on direct de- change (Ser115Leu), in heterozygous state, never described . To con- tection of the mutation in 51 cases . In 49 of them, we used standard firm that the alteration found was mutation and not polymorphism, a multiplex PCR for simultaneous amplification of 18 DMD exons. In two screening was carried out with 100 control Caucasian chromosomes . cases MLPA was applied for determining carrier status of mothers and In conclusion this mutation of the FKRP gene could even be respon- the detection of the duplications in DMD gene of fetuses . In 3 cases sible for mild phenotype of the patient . (5 .55%), with unknown mutation in proband, prenatal diagnosis was done by indirect DNA analysis . Maternal contamination has been ex- P01.205 cluded in all cases using polymorphic CA markers . mutation analysis of the cAPN3 gene in italian patients with Since no clinically applicable and effective therapy for DMD patients suspected LGmD type 2 has yet been developed, a molecular diagnosis should be proposed A. La Russa1, P. Valentino2, V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, I. Manna1, M. Liguori1, P. to the families in order to detect the carrier women and to suggest an Spadafora1, R. Cittadella1; antenatal diagnosis . 1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Cosenza, Co- senza, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University “Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, P01.208 Italy. Genetic testing, carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis of 300 Autosomal recessive limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD type 2) Egyptian families with Duchenne muscular dystrophy: a 10 are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders, char- years experience acterized by progressive involvement of proximal limb girdle muscles . K. S. Amr, A. Elharouni, L. K. Effat; LGMD2A (MIM# 253600), whose locus has been mapped to chromo- National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. some 15q15 .1, is considered to be the most frequent form of reces- Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is the most common lethal X- sive LGMD . LGMD2A is caused by single or small nucleotide changes linked recessive muscle disorder that is caused by mutations in the widespread along a 40-kb gene, named CAPN3 (MIM# 114240), which dystrophin gene. Due to lack of efficient rehabilitation and treatment, encodes for the calpain-3 protein . Aims of this study were to assess prenatal diagnosis and counseling of families with DMD are of great the frequency of mutations in 30 Calabrian patients suspected diag- importance . Here we report a 10 years Egyptian experience on the nosis LGMD and identify possible genotype-phenotype correlation as molecular diagnosis and genetic counseling of 300 families with DMD prognostic factors . At the screening of gene CAPN3 have been identi- at the National Research Centre, Cairo . fied already described mutation (R748X) in exon 21 and a new poly- 300 probands with DMD were screened for dystrophin gene deletion morphism ( CTCT) in intron 14, while all other samples had already mutations by multiplex PCR . Four CA dinucleotide repeats and three described polymorphisms . The subject bearer of R748X mutation in restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) were used to de- heterozygosity had a mild phenotype, in fact related onset of disease tect the carrier status in 35 families . Prenatal molecular diagnosis was at 48 years and the muscle biopsy showed a slight myopathy associ- pursued for 32 pregnant mothers at risk of having a child with DMD by ated with a pain and weakness in the lower limbs . In particular, this multiplex PCR when there is a deletion mutation in the affected sib or mutation was associated with another exchange in exon 5 Ala236Thr by intragenic markers in families with no deletion mutations . described in the literature as polymorphism . However, the combination 55% of probands had deletion mutations . 60% of detected deletions in- of a polymorphism in one copy of the CAPN3 gene with an LGMD2A volved multiple exons spanning the major and/or minor hotspots of the mutation in the other copy could even be responsible for very mild phe- gene while 40% involved single exon deletions . The combined use of notyphe with low penetrance . Patients with LGMD2 phenotype in the CA repeats and RFLPs detected the carrier status in all families identi- absence of mutations in CAPN3 should be investigated for the genes fying 20 female carriers . Molecular diagnosis of the fetal DNA showed responsible for other forms of LGMD2 . that 15 fetuses inherited the same deletion mutations present in the index cases . A high acceptability of seeking prenatal diagnosis and a P01.206 change in attitude towards the decision of abortion was noticed . Myopathy - an early finding in several rare genetic syndromes Molecular diagnosis, carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are ef- M. Bembea, C. Jurca, C. Skrypnyk, D. Bembea, C. Moldovan, C. Cladovan, K. fective tools for definitive diagnosis and genetic counseling in families Kozma; affected with DMD . Clinical Municipal Hospital “dr. G. Curteanu”, ORADEA, Romania. Introduction . Myopathies are part of the larger group of neuromuscular P01.209 disorders . The main clinical manifestation is muscular weakness . My- Prenatal diagnosis in a DmD family at risk opathy is associated with over 150 hereditary entities and may be the D. F. Albu, C. Albu, E. Severin; first clinical manifestation in several rare genetic syndromes. Objec- “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. tive . To present a case series of rare monogenic syndromes that were A 23-year-old pregnant woman is the sister of a patient who is affected initially diagnosed based on the finding of myopathic features. Results. by Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) . Her brother, an 18-year-old We are presenting a case of Schwartz-Jumpel syndrome with familial male, was detected to have a novel mutation in exon 6 of the DMD distribution (consanguineous parents with three affected daughters), gene (c .587delAT) . She asked for prenatal diagnosis to detect whether a case of Dubowitz syndrome with familial distribution (consanguine- her unborn child has DMD or not . A prenatal diagnosis by chorionic villi ous parents with two affected sons) and a case of Camurati-Engel- sampling (CVS) was performed at 10 weeks of pregnancy . Analysis mann syndrome. In all cases, the first manifestations of disease that consisted of PCR amplification followed by direct sequencing of the prompted medical care were myopathic in nature . Conclusion . Muscle entire coding region of the DMD gene . The fetus showed a normal weakness in children, if no clear cause is found, should prompt further male karyotype (46,XY) and no abnormality of the dystrophin gene . In investigation to rule out rare genetic disorders . this case, prenatal diagnosis by CVS was able to exclude DMD in the unborn child . P01.207 Prenatal diagnosis of Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy in serbia-twelve years experience T. Lalic, D. Radivojevic, M. Djurisic, M. Guc-Scekic, V. Ivanovski; Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. In Serbia, prenatal testing for Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (D/BMD) is an option for women at risk of having an affected son,Clinical genetics  P01.210 and IVS1+3A>T mutations (5 cases), as well as the compound het- the high frequency of new mutations in dystrophin gene in erozygous mutations G482R and T550R (1 case), always resulted in the group of Polish patients affected with Duchenne?Becker marked TD . Conversely, F167L seems to associate with mild or no TD, muscular dystrophy since 8 of 10 patients carrying this mutation (in compound heterozy- J. G. Zimowski, M. Holding, W. Szirkowiec, E. Fidzianska, J. Kubalska, E. gosity with other mutations) had clinical absence of TW and a negative Zdzienicka, J. Zaremba; RNS test . Finally, the 3 patients heterozygous for the A531V change Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. (compound with either R377X or R894X) presented a peculiar pattern The frequency of Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) of fluctuating TD. This study shows that the 3Hz RNS protocol, well among the newborn males is 1: 3500 . The constant of DMD/BMD in- tolerated by patients, is able to identify distinct neurophysiological TD cidence in male population is the evidence of the stable frequency patterns correlating with specific CLCN1 mutations. In turn, this may of new mutations . Although men affected with DMD/BMD usually are help understand the molecular basis underlying the phenotypic vari- not abble to reproduce incidence of the disease remains the same . It ability of MC, and may represent a step towards rational therapeutic is assumed that 1/3 of single DMD/BMD male are the cases of new strategies . mutations . The study of carriership was carried out in a group of 249 mothers with P01.213 one son affected with DMD/BMD in whom deletions in dystrophin gene DNA-diagnostics of myotonic dystrophy type 1 in Belarus were found . The studies of microsatellite sequences in the mothers T. Asadchuk, K. Mosse, N. Rumyantseva; revealed the presence of two different alleles in 138 females, therefore Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. their carriership could be excluded . In 38 cases, in which mothers or Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant, multisys- daughters (sisters of affected males) were tested, the presence of the temic disease, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 8000 . DM is caused deletion was observed . The homozygozity was detected among 73 fe- by expansion of CTG trinucleotide repeats located in the 3´ untrans- males . Some of them may be instances of hemizygozity . The exclusion lated region of the myotonin protein kinase (DMPK) gene . The range of of carriership in 55% of tested females is statistically different from the expansion varies widely from 50 to several thousand repeats . First, we expected incidence of 33% . analysed the distribution of CTG-repeats in a cohort of normal individu- Support from State Committee Scientific Research (PBZ-KBN-122/ als from the Belarusian population, and assessed the heterozygosity P05/2004) and number of alleles . PCR-products were analysed by the automated capillary electrophoresis on the ABI Prism 310 . We found 15 different P01.211 allelic variants from 5 up to 28 CTG-repeats . The most common alleles two novel mutations in a Russian family with X-linked Emery- had 5 repeats (38%) . The heterozygosity of the CTG polymorphism of Dreifuss muscular dystrophy the Belarusian population was established as 78% . DNA-diagnostics A. L. Chuhrova, T. B. Tiburkova, O. A. Schagina, E. L. Dadaly, A. V. Polyakov; of DM1 was done in 75 patients from 32 families showing different Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. symptoms related to the disease . We found small expansions with 70 Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a neuromuscular and 86 CTG repeats in two affected men from two different families . disease characterised by early contractures of Achilles-heel, elbows PCR analysis also shows the high risk of mutation of the DMPK gene and spine, slow progression and symmetric weakness prominent in in 10 patients from 3 families, further confirmed by the Southern blot. humero-peroneal muscle, cardiac conduction abnormality and/or car- So our PCR-based protocol allows amplification of normal-sized al- diomyopathy and myopathic features . Two main modes of inheritance leles and small expansions . For the large expansion Southern blot exist: X-linked and autosomal dominant . The frequency of the X-linked analysis is still the method of choice . form is at 1:100 000 . EMD gene mutations, which encodes a nuclear membrane protein named emerin, are causes of the X-linked form of P01.214 EDMD . EMD gene has been mapped to the region Xq28 . Mutation molecular studies on two myotonic dystrophies (Dm1 and Dm2) analysis in EMD gene was performed by direct automatic sequence in Polish patients group on Genetic Analyzer 3130 of all exons and exon-intron splices . We W. Krysa1, A. Sulek-Piatkowska1, M. Rajkiewicz1, E. Szmidt-Salkowska2, A. describe two novel mutations in the EMD gene in two Russian fami- Kamińska2, J. Zaremba1; lies . Mutations change nucleotide sequence of the sixth exon in the 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University, EMD gene . Family 1 had a c .664C>T (p .Gln222Stop) which causes a Warsaw, Poland. premature stop-codon at position 222 . In second family we found the Myotonic dystrophies type 1 and type 2 (DM1 and DM2) are autosomal mutation c .449+1delG which causes a disappearance donor spicing- dominant disorders and share similar symptoms comprising myotonia, site and subsequent - a premature stop-codone at position 221 . muscular dystrophy, and multisystem involvement (cataracts, diabetes and hypogonadism), but overall clinical picture of these two conditions P01.212 is not identical . Genotype-phenotype correlates in autosomal recessive Molecular defect causing DM1 and DM2 is known as dynamic muta- myotonia congenita tion in DMPK and ZNF7 genes respectively . Expansions up to 4000 I. Torrente1, A. Modoni2, E. Pisaneschi1, A. D’Amico2, L. Merlini3, G. Silvestri2, CTG repeats result in DM1 whereas a CCTG tetramers up to 11000 in E. M. Valente1,4, B. Dallapiccola1,5, M. Lo Monaco2; patients with DM2 are observed . 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Neuroscience, Catholic Molecular testing is the only reliable diagnostic definition in DM1 and University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Experimental and Diagnostic DM2 . Prior to its introduction we have performed the analysis of normal Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, alleles distribution in Polish control group . For DM1 locus the range is 4Dpt of Medical and Surgical Pediatric Science, University of Messina, Mes- 5-31 repeats and for DM2 the range of repeat motif varied from 123 sina, Italy, 5Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, “La Sapienza” to 159 bp . University of Rome, Rome, Italy. For 5 years 372 individuals were tested for DM1 and/or DM2 by routine Myotonia Congenita (MC) is a chloride channel disorder due to muta- PCR, then all homozygous cases were analyzed by TP-PCR . Among tions in the CLCN1 gene, inherited in autosomal dominant or reces- them we have identified 76 pedigrees with 144 DM1 and 34 pedigrees sive fashion . Beside myotonia of variable severity, transitory weakness with 35 DM2 mutation carriers . Within the group of DM1 patients we (TW) can be detected, especially in recessive cases . Neurophysiologi- identified one family with a case of premutation which resulted in full cally, TW corresponds to a transitory depression (TD) of the compound mutation in the following generation. Moreover, we identified a patient muscle action potential during repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) . We with a coexistence of full mutation and premutation in DMPK gene . sought to correlate specific CLCN1 mutations with both TW and RNS- Among DM2 group we came across a family with two patients having induced TD in 28 patients with recessive MC, by adopting a low fre- extended alleles - 189 bp and 197 bp i .e . clearly above the normal quency RNS protocol (3Hz for 500 stimuli) . The 3Hz RNS induced a range but below the considered as pathogenic range in DM2 (normal significant TD in 19 patients, all of whom experienced variable epi- range 104-176 bp) . sodes of TW. Several mutations appeared to correlate with specific TD patterns . In particular, the homozygous exon 9 deletion, C481XClinical genetics  P01.215 QC, Canada, 2University of McGill, Montreal, QC, Canada. the ctG repeat expansion size correlates with the splicing Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal domi- defects observed in muscles from myotonic dystrophy type 1 nant late-onset myopathy characterized by progressive eyelid droop- patients ing, swallowing difficulty and proximal limb weakness. OPMD results A. Botta1, F. Rinaldi1, C. Catalli2, L. Vergani3, E. Bonifazi2, V. Romeo3, E. Loro3, from the expansion of a polyalanine repeat (GCG)8-13 in exon 1 of A. Viola1, C. Angelini3, G. Novelli1,2; the poly(A)binding protein nuclear1 (PABPN1) gene . Nuclear aggre- 1Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2Tor Vergata Hospital, Rome, gates consisting of tubular filaments within muscle fibers of OPMD Italy, 3University of Padoa, Padoa, Italy. patients are the pathological hallmark of the disease . These aggre- Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1; MIM#160900) is caused by an un- gates contain expanded PABPN1 (expPABPN1), poly(A)RNA as well stable (CTG)n repetition located in the 3’UTR of the DMPK gene . Un- as components of the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation pathway and translated expanded DMPK transcripts are retained in ribonuclear foci molecular chaperones . Whether nuclear aggregates are pathogenic or and sequester CUG-binding proteins essential for the maturation of simply the consequence of a molecular defense mechanism remains pre-mRNAs . In this study, we investigated the effects of CTG expan- controversial in OPMD and in the field of neurodegenerative disorders. sion length on three molecular parameters associated with the DM1 To evaluate the contribution of nuclear aggregates to cellular toxicity, muscle pathology: 1) the expression level of the DMPK gene; 2) the we first targeted molecular mechanisms known to interfere with exp- degree of splicing misregulation and 3) the number of ribonuclear foci . PABPN1 aggregation . Our cellular model shows that increasing the To this purpose, we selected 6 muscle biopsies from DM1 patients availability of nuclear soluble expPABPN1 significantly exacerbates with an expansion below 500 repetitions, 6 muscle samples from DM1 cell death . We also used time lapse imaging to follow the evolution of patients carrying a mutation above 1000 CTGs and 6 controls muscle cells overexpressing expPABPN1 without interfering with any cellular samples . Splicing analysis of the IR, MBNL1, c-TNT and CLCN1 genes pathway. Cells with nuclear aggregates show a significantly prolonged demonstrated that the level of aberrant splicing isoforms is strikingly lifespan compared to cells harbouring a diffusely distributed soluble different between the two groups of DM1 muscle samples . In addition, expPABPN1. This is the first report indicating the beneficial effect of a significant correlation was observed in the extent of abnormal splic- nuclear aggregation in OPMD . The formation of nuclear aggregates ing and the CTG repeat length for all the genes studied . RNA-FISH may reflect an active process by which cells sequester and inactivate analysis reveals that the number of ribonuclear foci accumulating in the soluble toxic form of expPABPN1 . The structural change in exp- DM1 muscle sections increases in patients with a higher (CTG)n num- PABPN1, induced by the pathogenic alanine expansion, may lead to a ber. On the contrary, we did not find any relationships between the gain of aberrant protein interactions, or alternatively prevent normally expression level of the DMPK gene transcript and average expansion occurring interactions to take place . sizes . These data indicate that the CTG repeat length plays a key role in the extent of splicing misregulation and foci formation, thus provid- P01.218 ing a useful link between the genotype and the molecular cellular phe- spinal muscular atrophy in University Hospital Brno, czech notype in DM1 . Republic- Genetic counselling, DNA analysis, Prenatal analysis R. Gaillyová1, E. Zapletalová1, L. Fajkusová1, Š. Prášilová1, J. Šoukalová1, I. P01.216 Valášková1, Z. Kalina2, A. Michenková2, E. Makaturová2; the results of a systematic screening for new mutations in NAiP 1University Hospital Brno, Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, gene 2University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. P. Apostol, D. Cimponeriu, M. Stavarachi, N. Butoianu, I. Minciu, C. Burloiu, M. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the second most frequent lethal au- Toma, D. Cheta, C. Serafinceanu, L. Gavrila; tosomal recessive disease in Europeans with the incidence of 1/6000 Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania. -10 000 and a carrier frequency of 1/40-50 . SMA is in approximately Background: The NAIP gene is located in an inverted duplicated re- 96% of cases caused by homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene . 4% gion (5q13), enclosed to some repetitive elements which predispose of SMA patiens have a combination of the deletion or conversion in to chromosomal rearrangements . However, a small number of NAIP one allele and an intragenic mutation on the second one . The SMA- mutations/polymorphisms were reported in this region which is con- determining gene (survival motor neuron - SMN), is present on 5q13 sidered a hot-spot mutational . The most common NAIP mutation is a in two copies, a telomeric SMN1 gene and a cetromeric SMN2 gene, deletion involving exon 5, which has been reported to be associated which are highly homologous and contain only five base-pair differ- with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) complications . ences . However, increased SMN2 gene copy number, which can occur Aim: The aim of this study was to screen the NAIP gene for new muta- as the result of gene conversion events, is associated with a milder tions/polymorphisms . SMA phenotype . Material and methods: We selected for this study SMA patients (n=63), Since 1999, we have performed the DNA analysis of SMA, the carrier dialyzed patients (n=200) and healthy clinical subjects (control group, detection from 2003 and from 2005 we analysed the copy number of n=370) after informed consent obtaining . The DNA samples for all sub- SMN2 gene . jects were screened for presence of NAIP exon 5 by PCR . We also Until now, we examined more then 300 SMA patients, only one SMN1 used specific molecular methods to test the presence of additional mu- copy was detected in 17 of them, we identified 6 point mutations. tations in this region . Currently, we perform the genetic counselling in families with SMA oc- Results and discussion: The homozygous absence of NAIP exon 5 currence, we offer DNA analysis of the SMN1 gene in the proband and was observed in 20,6% SMA patients and in 1% of dialyzed and con- the detection of SMA carriers . We offer the DNA analysis of SMN1 trol subjects . The restriction pattern (DraI) and the indirect methods gene for partners of SMA carriers . In families with high risk of SMA have been shown that a sample from dialyzed lot has an abnormal in the child we offer prenatal DNA diagnostics from cultivated amnial electrophoretic and melting comportment . The sequencing analyses cells . have confirmed a heterozygous state for a G/T substitution (Arginine/ Supp . by 1A/8608-4, Molecular aspects of diagnostics and therapy of Serine), which creates a new restriction site for DraI endonuclease . spinal muscular atrophy, IGA MH CR The etiology of renal failure could not be established . Conclusion: In this study we have identified a new coding G/T SNP in P01.219 NAIP gene and the highest frequency of homozygous NAIP exon 5 Accuracy of marker analysis, quantitative real time PcR and deletion in SMA patients (20,6%) . Multiple Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification to determine smN2 copy number in patients with spinal muscular atrophy P01.217 L. Alias, M. J. Barcelo, S. Bernal, E. Also-Rallo, R. Martínez, M. Baena, P. Gal- soluble expanded PABPN1 exacerbates cell death in lano, M. Baiget, E. F. Tizzano; Oculopharyngeal muscular Dystrophy Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. C. Messaed1,2, P. Dion1, A. Abu-Baker1, D. Rochefort1, J. Laganiere1, B. Brais1, Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disease G. A. Rouleau1; characterised by degeneration of motor neurons of the spinal cord and 1Center of excellence in neuromics, Notre-Dame-CHUM, Montreal, Canada, is caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene . The SMN2 gene is the highly homologous SMN1 copy that is present in all patients . There isClinical genetics  evidence that the number of SMN2 copies acts as a phenotypic modi- rare exon deletions were detected in 7 male patients, whereas duplica- fier. Acute type I patients usually have one-two copies and chronic type tions were observed in 5 cases . Thus, the overall deletion frequency II and III patients usually have three-four copies . Traditionally, the link- was 69% in the Hungarian DMD/BMD patients . Out of the 95 female age analysis with C212 and C272(ag1-CA) markers was helpful in es- samples analysed by Southern blot and MLPA techniques, 41 female timating the SMN2 copies . Quantitative real time analysis (Q-RT) and relatives proved to be carriers, including two duplication events and recently multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) have three manifesting carriers . been incorporated into laboratory diagnosis to establish the SMN2 With the help of this reliable new method a large portion of the Hungar- copies with greater accuracy . ian DMD/BMD patients and their female relatives were exactly geno- We compared the SMN2 copy number of 22 unrelated Spanish SMA typed and given a precise genetic counselling . Moreover, this opens patients with SMN1 absence, correlating the three aforementioned the perspective for participation in future therapeutic interventions, approaches . Using marker analysis, we determined the maximum also for the Hungarian patients . number of alleles by C212 or C272(ag1-CA), estimating the number of SMN2 copies . The marker results of the respective parents were used P01.222 to confirm the copy number. In 4 cases, marker analysis predicted two three mutations in the DYSF gene in a LGmD2B patient SMN2 copies and Q-RT (LightCycler) and MLPA revealed three SMN2 L. González-Quereda1, N. de Luna2, J. Juan3, M. Rodríguez3, E. Gallardo4, E. copies . This discordance may be the result of an uninformative marker . Tizzano3, I. Illa4, M. Baiget3, P. Gallano3; In 2 other cases, marker results predicted at least three SMN2 copies 1Ciberer, Genetics, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Ciberned , Neurol- although Q-RT showed two copies and MLPA results were compatible ogy, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genetics , Hospital Sant Pau, Bar- with three copies. This discordance may reflects the lack of probe hy- celona, Spain, 4Neurology, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. bridisation in some samples and highlights the importance of matching Mutations in the dysferlin gene (DYSF) give rice to different muscular results of the three approaches . FIS05-2416/CIBERER/Proyect GE- dystrophy phenotypes with autosomal recessive inheritance including NAME . Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2B (LGMD2B), Miyoshi Myopathy (MM) and Distal Anterior Compartment Myopathy (DAT) . The DYSF P01.220 gene, which maps to chromosome 2p13, has 55 exons and codifies a DNA diagnostic of Duchenne-Becker muscular dystrophy in protein of about 237 kDa . Given that dysferlin is expressed in periph- Belarus eral blood monocytes in addition to skeletal muscle, we performed the S. Miasnikov1, I. Naumchik2, R. Khmel2, N. Rumyantseva2; screening of mutations in the DYSF gene by sequencing monocytes 1International Sakharov Environmental University, Minsk, Belarus, 2National cDNA . This strategy improves the isolation of the mRNA as a source centre of research and applied medicine «Mother and child», Minsk, Belarus. that is less invasive than the muscle biopsy . Duchenne-Becker muscular dystrophy (D/BMD) is X-linked recessive In parallel, we analysed dysferlin expression by immunohystochemis- muscle-wasting disease with incidence 1:3500 and 1:20000 of male try in muscle biopsies and by Western blot in peripheral blood mono- newborns respectively . The cause of this disorder is mutations of the cytes . gene DMD, located on locus Xp21 . The most frequent mutation - gross We report here an sporadic case of LGMD2B, presenting a reduced deletions in «hot spot» regions of 2-19 and 41-53 exons, which de- staining in inmunohistochemistry and Western Blot analyses using tected in 35-75% of cases in different populations . anti-dysferlin antibodies . We have performed molecular-genetic diagnostic in cohort of 52 be- The mutational screening revealed the presence of three mutations: larussian D/BMD patients . All of them had typical clinical features and 1) A nonsense mutation located in exon 34: c.3805 G>t; high level of CPK . To detect deletions of Pm/1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17, p.Glu1269X. 19, 32, 34, 41-45, 47-53 and 60 exons used both multiplex and routine 2) A missense mutation located in exon 44: c.4820 t>c ; PCR methods . 20 of 52 (38%) patients had deletions of different size p.ile1607thr. and localization . Only 7 patients had one exon deletion . The largest 3) A splice site mutation located in intron 21: c.2055+1 G>A, a muta- deletion we had found was deletion of 35 exons (region 8-44 exons) . tion not described to date . In 4 of 20 cases exon 48 was deleted . 35% of mutations localized in The independent sequencing of the two allelles will enable us to de- proximal part of gene DMD . termine the distribution of the mutations . The distribution of the three Thought, multiplex PCR is rapid and suitable method to detect gross mutations could account for the reduced expression of dysferlin in deletion, due to low level of its occurrence in Belarus, there is need in muscle biopsy and monocytes in contrast to the total absence in dys- other methods to find both duplication and point mutation within gene ferlinopathy patients . DMD . P01.223 P01.221 Genotype and phenotype studies of myotonic dystrophy type 1 molecular genetic analyses of the dystrophin gene in Hungarian (Dm1) in Hungarian patients Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy patients: Comparison of A. Herczegfalvi1, H. Piko2, H. Merkli3, R. Horvath4, V. Karcagi2; multiplex PcR, southern blot and mLPA analyses 1Bethesda Children’s Hospital, Dept. of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Na- V. Vancso1, H. Piko1, B. Nagy2, Z. Ban2, A. Herczegfalvi3, V. Karcagi1; tional Institute of Environmental Health, Dept. of Molecular Genetics and 1National Institute of Environmental Health, Dept. of Molecular Genetics and Di- Diagnostics, Budapest, Hungary, 3Medical University of Pecs, Dept. Clinic for agnostics, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis Medical School, Clinic of Obstet- Neurology, Pecs, Hungary, 4Jahn Ferenc Hospital, Dept. of Neurology, Buda- rics and Gynaecology, Laboratory of Genetics, Budapest, Hungary, 3Bethesda pest, Hungary. Children’s Hospital, Dept. of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary. Dystrophia myotonica type 1 (DM1) is a diffuse systemic disorder and Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) is a severe X- is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with a variable penetrance . linked neuromuscular disease caused by mutations in the dystrophin An unstable expansion of (CTG)n repeats in the 3’ untranslated re- gene . Deletions, rarely duplications and point mutations can occur al- gion encoding a member of the protein kinase family in 19q13 .3 is most anywhere in the gene, which makes the molecular diagnosis dif- the causative mutation for myotonic dystrophy . Healthy individuals har- ficult. Here we present a comprehensive study of a large portion of the bour 5-37 CTG repeats, whereas in affected individuals repeat expan- Hungarian DMD/BMD families using different molecular approaches . sion varies between 37 and 4000 . To examine the correlation between Deletions in the hot spots regions were identified by multiplex PCR, clinical expression and CTG trinucleotide repeat length, Southern blot whereas rare deletions and duplications were detected by Southern analyses using probe p5B1 .4 were carried out in families clinically di- blot analysis and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification agnosed with myotonic dystrophy . So far, 61 patients and 15 family (MLPA) technique in the patients . Moreover, the same techniques were members from 47 families were analysed and in 34 cases the muta- used for detecting carrier status in female relatives and in manifesting tion in DMPK gene was confirmed. The expanded CTG repeats were carriers and efficiencies of the two techniques were compared. transmitted maternally as well as paternally . In the maternally trans- Here we report the genetic results of 121 affected males and 95 female mitted cases the expanded fragment lengths were always larger than relatives. The DMD/BMD disease was confirmed in 77 males using in the paternally transmitted ones . Moreover, a clear correlation was multiplex PCR . With Southern blot analyses and later on, by MLPA established between phenotype severity and the length of the CTG ex-Clinical genetics  pansion . Longer expansions resulted in earlier onset of the symptoms . P01.226 Phenotypes varied between congenital onset, classical forms and mild charcot-marie-tooth disease 1B and phenotype-genotyping symptoms even within the same family corresponding to the size of correlation the expansion . V. P. Fedotov1, S. A. Kurbatov1, O. A. Schagina2; Additionally, we were able to offer prenatal diagnosis in three families 1VOCDC genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre where all foetuses inherited the pathogenic DMPK gene . In two foe- for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federa- tuses with maternal inheritance the estimated size of the CTG repeat tion. expansion predicted a congenital form, whereas one foetus with pater- DNA analysis of 96 CMT1-patients revealed 76 cases (79%) of nal inheritance inherited a moderate expansion size . This latter baby dup17p11 .2, (PMP22 gene), point mutation CX32 in 15 cases (16%), has been born recently . and 5 point mutations in the MPZ gene (S63F, R98C, K130R, D134E and not previously described P133S) . P01.224 In three unrelated families (15 affected subjects) mutation K130R in Normal variation of (ctG)n repeat in the Dystrophia myotonica MPZ was revealed in two families and D134E mutation in one family . Protein Kinase gene in Slovak non-Romany and Romany All patients has early manifestation of CMT disease before five years population old . Late onset of independent walking (18-24 month of birth), unsteady J. Radvansky1, A. Ficek1,2, M. Baldovic1, G. Minarik1, L. Kadasi1,2; gait, discoordination, distal paresis, muscular atrophies, proprioceptive 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2SAS, and superficial hyperesthesia of feet and hands, generalized tendon Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. areflexia, ataxia, foot deformity and nervous swelling were present in Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a neuromuscular disorder caused all patients with K130R and D134E mutations . by a CTG trinucleotide expansion in the Dystrophia Mytonica Protein In the patients with R98C and D134E mutations Dejerine-Sottas syn- Kinase gene (DMPK) . This repeat is highly polymorphic in healthy drome with hearing loss was observed . In contrast, the S63F mutation population with alleles in a range of 5 to 37 CTG repeats . The CTG ex- leads to a slowly progressive disease . Independent ambulation was pansion can vary from 50 to several thousand repeats in affected indi- possible until 40-50 years old . viduals . In many populations healthy alleles show trimodal distribution All patients have very low MNCV n . medianus 12,4 +2,4 m/s, n . tibi- with 5, 9-17 and 18-35 repeats . A correlation between the frequency alis - 8,8 +2,6 m/s, distal motor latency 12,5 +5,1 ms; 21,3 +8,7 ms, of large-sized normal alleles and the prevalence of DM1 in different and very low C - 0,27 +0,18 mV during ten years from two years old . ethnic groups was shown in several studies . We have analyzed the This suggest that abnormalities of nervous fiber myelination may be CTG repeat length in samples of healthy, unrelated individuals from congenital in origin . the Slovak Romany and non-Romany population by PCR with fluo- rescent labelled primers using fragment analysis in genetic analyzer . P01.227 We have found larger number of different alleles in the sample from A novel mutation in GDAP1 and a change in mFN2 genes in a non-Romany population than from Romanies, however the (CTG) al- family with a severe form of charcot-marie-tooth n lele size range was broader in the latter group . In both populations I. Banchs1, C. Casasnovas2, L. De Jorge1, J. Martinez-Matos2, V. Volpini1; we found trimodal distributions with the majority of chromosomes be- 1IDIBELL, L’hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge- longing to the groups (CTG) and (CTG) . Our results show lower IDIBELL, L’hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. 5 9-17 frequency of (CTG) and (CTG) and higher frequency of (CTG) Recessive form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with hoarseness 5 18-37 9-17 alleles in the Romany than in the non-Romany population . Since many (CMT2K, MIM#607831) is caused by mutations in ganglioside-induced linguistic and genetic studies place the origin of Romanies to Indian differentiation-associated in protein 1 (GDAP1) (MIM606598), located subcontinent, we decided to compare our results to the available data in chromosome 8 (8q21 .1) . Dominant axonal forms of CMT (CMT2 A2) about (CTG) allele frequencies in European and Indian populations . (MIM#609260) can be caused by mutations in the mitochondrial fusion n Our preliminary comparison showed similar distribution pattern among protein mitofusin 2 (MFN2) (MIM608507), in chromosome 1 (1p36 .2) . Slovak Romany and Indian population, and among Slovak non-Ro- We report a patient with a severe form of CMT, with mutations in both many and mixed European population . genes and the molecular findings in 9 family members. PATIENT: A 62-year-old woman with severe distal muscle weakness P01.225 since childhood . The patient is wheelchair dependent since she was in Application of western blot for analyzing of Dystrophin in iranian the thirties . Electrophysiological studies revealed a sensory and mo- patients with mild Dystrophinopathy tor neuropathy with mild demyelinating features and severe axonal J. Gharesouran, E. Darabi, K. Kahrizi, Y. Shafaghati, M. Banan, H. Najmabadi, degeneration . Analysis of GDAP1 revealed the mutation Gln95Stop E. Keyhani; in homozygous state . On the other hand, MFN2 analysis revealed Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the change Arg468His in heterozygous state . Clinical and Molecular Dystrophinopathies (Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Becker muscu- analysis of eight family members shows two members with the MFN lar dystrophy) are X-linked recessive disorders manifesting with muscle 2 change and no GDAP1 mutation, a 56-years-old male with a mild degeneration and weakness . The gene which is defective in Dystro- axonal form of neuropathy and his 18-year old daughter still without phinopathies is the largest known gene, consisting of almost 0 .1% of clinics . Three other members have the mutation in GDAP1 gene but in the human genome (2,500 Kbp) . The product of this gene in normal heterozygous state and no change in MFN2 gene . They have normal muscle, Dystrophin, is a 427 kDa rod-shaped protein . Dystrophin is an clinical and electrophysiological examinations . Duplication/deletion essential part of a large complex that links the actin cytoskeleton with and point mutations in PMP22 and MPZ were ruled out . the cell membrane and the extracellular matrix and stabilizes the myofi- bers during contractions . The value of analyzing Dystrophin on western P01.228 blots of skeletal muscle for the differential diagnosis of Xp21 muscular A case presentation: X-linked pattern of charcot-marie-tooth dystrophies is now fairly well established especially for mild forms of Disease the diseases (BMD) which immunohistochemistry techniques are not S. Akbaroghli1,2,3, M. Houshmand3; sufficient for the definite diagnosis. Here we describe a sensitive system 1Deputy for Cultural Affairs and Prevention of Welafre Organization, Tehran, based on monoclonal antibodies to Dystrophin . System has been set Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dr. Susan Akbaroghli Genetic Counselling Center, up using GAPDH protein as control that extracted from K562 cells . The Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- specificity of the antibodies was established by dot blot and experiments public of Iran. were undertaken to identify the source of Dystrophin-related protein A family with the presence of X-linked pattern of Charcot-Marie-tooth bands which were detected on blots of normal skeletal muscle . In our Disease .The proband is a woman who is coming after a consanguine- study which was the first application of western blot analysis in muscle ous marriage for genetic counseling before pregnancy and her father disorders in Iran, we examined muscle samples taken from clinically has CMT disease and DM type 2 . In the pedigree there are two male suspected to BMD and DMD, first by immunohistochemistry methods cases of CMT disease that are cousins of the proband case . and then by western blot analysis . Results show the necessity of blotting The clinical and paraclinic manifestations of the proband’s father are: techniques in diagnosis panel of mild forms of Dystrophinopathies . -A 50 years old man with muscular weakness and chronic paraparesisClinical genetics  -Paresthesia in lower extrimities ,tingling and burning sensations of Genetic Analyzer 3130 (Applied Biosystems) . the feet Duplication of chromosome 17 was found in 189 families . This is 63,4% -Sensitivity of the lower extrimities to the cold weather of all cases CMTI in Russian patients . GJB1 gene mutations caused -Gait problems of CMTI in 60 families, or 20,1% . Mutations in the P0 gene were found -Foot drop in 19 families, equaling 6,4% . Point mutation in the PMP22 gene were -Pes cavus found in 2 families, that is 0,7% . In 28 families mutations were not -Hair loss of the lower limbs found in any of these genes . Other genes, mutations of witch lead to -Tenar and hypotenar atrophy this disorder, will be analyzed in our next investigations . -Loss of deep tendon reflexes -Finger movement disorder in feet and hands P01.232 -High levels of LDH the ARG94GLN mutation in mFN2 gene can be the cause of -Chronic sensory-motor polyneuropathy in EMG and NCV . axonal charcot-marie-tooth desease with optic atrophy L. De Jorge1, I. Banchs1, C. Casasnovas2, J. Martinez-Matos2, V. Volpini1; P01.229 1IDIBELL, L’hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge- mFN2 point mutations occur in 2% of charcot-marie-tooth IDIBELL, L’hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. families - An investigation of 400 Norwegian cmt families Some mutations in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 (MFN 2) G. J. Braathen1,2,3, J. C. Sand2, A. Lobato2, H. Høyer3, M. B. Russell1,2,4; (MIM608507) have been related to the axonal form of Charcot-Ma- 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Nor- rie-Tooth (CMT) disease with optic atrophy . We report a family with way, 2Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, severe CMT disease and dominant inheritance . Electrophysiological 3Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark studies revealed a severe sensory and motor neuropathy with con- Hospital, Skien, Norway, 4Center of Research, Akershus University Hospital, served nerve conduction velocities (NCV) . One of the family members Oslo, Norway. presented a sub acute visual impairment . The ophtamological stud- Background . Mutations in mitofusin 2 (MFN2) is the most common ies revealed optic atrophy (OpA) . Cranial Magnetic Resonance stud- cause of Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2 (CMT2) . ies were normal . Molecular studies revealed the Arg94Gln mutation in Methods . Four-hundred Norwegian CMT families were screened for exon 4 of MFN2 gene . This mutation had been previously reported, point mutations in the MFN2 gene . but only associated with “pure” axonal CMT and CMT with tremor . This Results . Of the 400 families eight had mutations in the MFN2 gene . is the first family with this mutation related to CMT with OpA reported, We identified four novel point mutations located in exon 14, 15 and showing the importance of ophtalmological examinations in patients 18 (2 families) . Clinically the known point mutations caused CMT2 . with axonal CMT caused by mutations in MFN2 gene . The novel point mutations caused CMT2, distal Hereditary Motor Neu- ronopathy (dHMN), intermediate CMT and CMT1 in each of the other P01.233 families . molecular study of mFN2 gene in spanish population Conclusions . Our mutations broaden the clinical picture that can be C. Casasnovas1, I. Banchs2, L. De Jorge2, J. Martinez-Matos1, V. Volpini2; seen with mutations in the MFN2 gene . 1Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. P01.230 The axonal dominant form Charcot-Marie-Tooh type 2A (CMT2 A2) De novo point mutations in Cx32, EGR2, MFN2, MPZ, PMP22 (MIM#609260) is caused by mutations in mitochondrial fusion protein and simPLE. A population based survey of charcot-marie-tooth mitofusin 2 (MFN2) (MIM608507) . We report the molecular analysis of disorder 101 families with suspected CMT 2 . The 19 exons of the MFN2 have G. J. Braathen1,2,3, J. C. Sand2, A. Lobato2, H. Høyer3, M. B. Russell1,2,4; been amplified by polymerase chain reaction with the previously de- 1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Nor- cribed primers by Zuchner et al. (2004) Amplified DNA samples were way, 2Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, directly sequenced by applying the BigDye V3 .1 (Applied Byoystems) 3Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark and subjected to an capillary sequencer genetic analyzer . Duplication/ Hospital, Skien, Norway, 4Center of Research, Akershus University Hospital, deletion and point mutations of PMP22, connexin 32 and MPZ were Oslo, Norway. previously ruled out . Background. An analysis of de novo mutations in persons residing in The 83% of the families have been already studied . We have found 7 eastern Akershus County with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease . point mutations in 9 different families . The mutations were located in Methods. The CMT patients were recruited from the Institute of Medi- exons 4, 8, 9, 11 and 14 . The study of the promotor region reveals one cal Genetics, University of Oslo and Departments of Neurology, Neu- change of one nucleotide and two families with a deletion of 15 nucleo- rophysiology and Paediatric in eastern part of Akershus County, Nor- tides . On the other hand, we have found 18 different polymorphisms . way . The CMT patients were examined by geneticist and neurologist One of the found point mutations was not previously described . The GJB . The Cx32, EGR2, MFN2, MPZ, PMP22 and SIMPLE genes were frequencies of changes in MFN2 found in our population are similar analyzed . Paternity tests were performed . to previously described studies; these findings confirm the importance Results. We identified one de novo mutation in the MPZ gene and two of this gene in the physiopathology of the axonal type of CMT 2 A2 in de novo mutations in MFN2 . our population too . Conclusion. De novo point mutations are rare but less rare than previ- ously anticipated . P01.234 Dating the mutation Leu239Phe of the GDAP gene in cmt P01.231 Russian families Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type i in Russia A. V. Polyakov1, O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadali1, V. P. Fedotov2; T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadaly1, V. P. Fedotov2, A. V. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2VOCDC Polyakov1; genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation. 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2VOCDC Mutations in the ganglioside - induced differentiation-associated pro- genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation. tein 1 (GDAP1) gene are common a cause of the Charcot-Marie-Tooth Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy, also known as Charcot-Ma- (CMT4A) disease with autosomal recessive mode of inheritance . To rie-Tooth (CMT) disease, is a large group of genetically heterogeneous date more than twenty mutations in the GDAP1 gene have been re- hereditary disorders of distal nervous system . A group of 298 families ported in patients suffering from the demyelinating, axonal or mixed with clinical and electrophysiological CMTI phenotype was investigat- form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease . ed by us . In our study 110 patients from 72 unrelated families with CMT were Mutations analysis was performed for three genes: PMP22, GJB1 and screened for mutations by SSCP analysis with following direct se- P0 . First, the duplication in chromosome 17 (17p11 .2-p12) was inves- quencing of abnormal conformers . tigated by PCR-AFLP analysis of STR . Mutations analysis for PMP22, A c .715C>T at substitution codon 239 (Leu239Phe) was detected in GJB1 and P0 genes was performed by direct automatic sequence on nine affected subjects from six apparently unrelated families . AllelicClinical genetics 0 frequency of this mutation averaged about 7% of all investigated chro- P01.237 mosomes and 71% of chromosomes with mutations in GDAP1 gene . Rapid diagnosis of CMTIA Deletion/duplication by real-time Analysis of the GDAP1 locus for markers D8S279-D8S1776-D8S286- quantitative polymerase chain reaction D8S551-D8S548-D8S1805-D8S1705-D8S1757 demonstrated a com- S. Zare1, S. Akbari1, M. Karimipour1,2, M. Akbari1,3; mon haplotype for markers D8S286; D8S551, D8S548, and D8S1805 1Tehran Medical Genetics Labratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Mo- on the chromosomes with c .715C>T mutation . The association of the lecular Medicine Dept.Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute mutation with a common haplotype suggested a common ancestor . of Iran,Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical The date of diffusion of the mutation has been calculated by linkage Genetics,Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. disequilibrium between disease locus and these polymorphic markers . Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common form of he- The “age” of mutation c .715C>T in Russian was approximately 1000 reditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) . CMT has been clas- years . sified into demyelinating (CMT1) and axonal (CMT2) forms. Around 70% of CMTIA cases are caused by a dominantly inherited P01.235 1 .5 Mb duplication at 17p11 .2-12 encompassing the peripheral Myelin investigation of GDAP1 Gene in iranian cmt Patients protein 22 (PMP22) gene . In contrast, hereditary neuropathy with li- A. Abbasi1, M. Sadeghizadeh1, O. Ariani2, H. Tonekaboni3, M. H. Sanati4, M. ability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is caused by reciprocal deletion of Houshmand4; the same 1 .5 Mb region . In the present study, we developed a highly 1Department of Biology, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic sensitive and specific quantitative gene dosage method for detecting of Iran, 2Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Mofid Hos- the PMP22 duplication and deletion using Real time PCR .Real time pital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Siences, Tehran, Islamic Republic quantitative PCR is a sensitive, specific and reproducible method for of Iran, 4National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, diagnosing PMP22 duplication and deletion . The method is fast, and Islamic Republic of Iran. requires no post-PCR handling . Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most frequently occurring inherited peripheral neuropathy, affecting 1 in 2,500 . The disease is P01.238 characterized by distal muscle weakness and atrophy, predominantly molecular diagnosis of cmt1A and HNPP using multiplex involving the legs . CMT disease caused by mutations in the ganglio- Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA): Comparison sideinduced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) gene is a with the PFGE-southern blot analysis severe autosomal recessive neuropathy originally reported in families H. Choung; with either demyelinating CMT4A neuropathy or axonal neuropathy Samsung medical center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. with vocal cord paresis which maps to the CMT4A locus on chromo- Background: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) and he- some 8q21 .1 . GDAP1 is a 358 amino acid protein which expressed reditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) are the in both the central and peripheral nervous system . 22 Iranian families two most common peripheral neuropathies caused by a duplication or with a diagnosis of CMT disease, either axonal or demyelinating, were deletion of the 1 .5-Mb region containing PMP22 gene on 17p11 .2, re- available for genetic analysis of GDAP1 . Total genomic DNA was ex- spectively. Although pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE)-Southern tracted from all family members using standard procedure . In all cases blot (SB) analysis is considered as the reference method for molecular linkage analysis with different markers for the PMP22, MPZ, and GJB1 diagnosis of CMT1A/HNPP, several methods such as fluorescence in- genes were used to exclude mentioned gens involving . In the 8 remain- situ hybridization (FISH), short tandem repeat (STR) analysis, multi- ing families genotyping for the 3 microsatellite markers linked to the plex fluorescence PCR, and real-time PCR have been tried to avoid CMT4A locus was performed using different PCR protocols for each laborious and time-consuming PFGE-SB method . marker (D8S164, D8S286, and D8S551) . PCR products were run on Methods: We tried to evaluate newly developed multiplex ligation-me- a 12% non denaturing polyacrylamide gel and allele fragments were diated probe amplification (MLPA) method for the detection of the spe- visualised by silver staining . Our results showed the usefulness of link- cific 1.5-Mb duplication/deletion by prospectively testing 31 patients age studies in diagnosis of CMT patients.We could identify and confirm referred for differential diagnoses of CMT1A or HNPP . MLPA probe- CMT4A in 4 patients with use of these markers . The data in this study mixes contain TEKT3, PMP22, FLJ25830, BX089850 and COX10 could also be used in prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection . genes within the CMT1A/HNPP region . The results with MLPA method were compared with our current PFGE-SB method . P01.236 Results: Thirteen out of 31 patients were diagnosed as having either control population distribution and in silico functional analysis duplication (n=3) or deletion (n=9) by PFGE-SB method and all the of novel genetic variants in charcot-marie-tooth-Desease results were concordant with those by MLPA analysis . The turnaround patients time (TAT) by MLPA is estimated to be 4 days while TAT by PFGE-SB C. Concheiro Alvarez1, P. Blanco-Arias1,2, M. Zennaro1, M. Sobrido3,2, A. Car- is approximately 17 days . racedo1,3,2; Conclusions: MLPA is a sensitive and specific technique for the detec- 1Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Centro tion of duplication or deletion of PMP22 gene and its turnaround time is de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Santiago much shorter than the PFGE-Southern blotting . Therefore, MLPA could de Compostela, Spain, 3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, be a good alternative method replacing laborious PFGE-SB analysis . Santiago de Compostela, Spain. When a variation (uncertain variant, UV) is found in a disease candidate P01.239 gene, it is critical to establish whether this change is neutral or respon- subependymal heterotopia in the severe variant subtype of sible for the observed disorder . As a result of sequence mutation screen- Adams-Oliver syndrome ing of PMP22, MPZ, GDAP1, GJB1, EGR2, NEFL and LITAF in a group of B. Dallapiccola1,2, F. Brancati1, R. Mingarelli1; 47 Spanish patients with a clinical diagnosis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth dis- 1IRCCS CSS Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medi- ease we found three non-synonymous, four synonymous and five intronic cine and Pathology, La Sapienza Univerity, Rome, Italy. nucleotide substitutions not contained in dbSNP . In order to assess the We recently ascertained a 7-year-old female born from non-consan- possible pathogenic role of these 12 UVs, two approaches were used: guineous healthy parents with left talipes equinovarus, bilaterally ab- 1) Screening of 296 Caucasian controls, 200 of which are Galician indi- sent/severely hypoplastic/malformed toes with absence of nails . Her viduals without any neurological disorder . psychomotor development was severely delayed and she suffered of 2) In silico analysis to explore: seizures since the age of 3 years . At the time of examination (aged 13 • conservation across animal species (UCSC Genome Browser) years) she shows bilateral transverse reduction of digits, prominent • the impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of veins over the trunk with rare café-au-lait spots and severe mental a human protein (Polyphen) retardation with aggressive behaviour . Brain magnetic resonance scan • a potential role as a exonic splicing enhancer (ESEfinder) shows bilateral nodular foci of tissue in the subependymal region lining We present this strategy as a valuable mean to select the UVs most likely the lateral ventricles . A focal area of irregular cortical surface is also to have a biological function warranting further study by experimental present, suggesting cortical dysplasia . models . This girl fits the diagnosis of Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) and cor-Clinical genetics  roborate the existence of a clinically recognizable group of AOS pa- P01.242 tients with psychomotor delay, mental retardation, central nervous sys- New mutations and sequence variations in galician patients with tem (CNS) manifestations and seizures . Furthermore, subependymal familiar Alzheimer´s Desease heterotopia, never reported before in AOS, broadens the phenotypic M. Garcia-Murias1, A. Robles2, G. Martínez-Nieto1, M. Arias2, A. Koukoulis3, B. spectrum of CNS abnormalities to include neuronal migration defects . Quintáns4,5, P. Blanco-Arias6,5, A. Sesar2, A. Carracedo1,6,5, M. Sobrido1,5; This severe variant of AOS, whose phenotype has been recently de- 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, lineated, is likely inherited in autosomal recessive fashion . Hence, the Spain, 2Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínico, Santiago de Compostela, importance of a timely diagnosis not only to manage CNS manifesta- Spain, 3Department of Neurology, Hospital Xeral-Cíes, Vigo, Spain, 4Hospital tions but also to properly counsel the families . Clínico-SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 5Centro Para Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras CIBERER, ISCIII, Santiago de Compostela, P01.240 Spain, 6Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Aplasia cutis congenita type iii, congenital scalp defects with Mutations in presenilin 1 (PSEN1) are detected in 30-70% of familiar distal limb reduction anomalies - Adams-Olivier syndrome. Alzheimer disease (FAD) while presenilin 2 (PSEN2) and amyloid pre- J. Paprocka1, E. Jamroz1, A. Pyrkosz2, A. Jezela-Stanek3, S. Hacia4, J. Baron4, cursor protein (APP) mutations are much less frequent . We studied 61 E. Marszał1; clinical-based cases with a diagnosis of probable FAD . We sequenced 1Child Neurology Department, Silesian Medical University, Katowice 40-752, all coding exons of PSEN1 and PSEN2, as well as exons 16 and 17 Poland, 2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Silesian Medical Uni- of APP on an ABI3730 sequencer . Sequence analysis was performed versity, Katowice 40-752, Poland, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Memorial with the Staden package. A novel L424V mutation was identified in Children’s Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 4Student’s Association at the Child exon 12 of PSEN1 in a patient with very young onset dementia . An- Neurology Department, Silesian Medical University, Katowice 40-752, Poland. other new mutation, I408T, was identified in exon 11 of PSEN1 in a Aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) are the heterogeneous group of dis- family . In two other cases of FAD missense mutations were detected in orders with various clinical manifestations . Adams-Oliver syndrome PSEN2: A415T and R435Q, both in exon 12 . Five patients showed in- (AOS, MIM 100300), a rare congenital disorder, belongs to the type III tronic changes of unknown significance not reported in the searchable by Sybert classification of ACC, and is characterized by aplasia cutis databases if human polymorphisms. We identified the single nucleo- congenita of the scalp and variable degrees of terminal transverse limb tide substitution c .338+39G>A in intron 4 of PSEN1, a 6 bp deletion in defects . Other associated anomalies include vascular defects: cutis intron 17 of APP and three intronic variants in PSEN2: c .119-31G>A marmorata, dilated scalp veins, small eyes, hypoplastic optic nerve, (intron 4), c .887-19A>C (intron 8), c .1191+57T>A (intron 11) . A syn- submucous cleft palate, cardiovascular and brain malformations (corti- onymous change (S236S) in PSEN2 was present in two individuals . All cal malformations- polymicrogyria, encephalocoele, hypoplasia of the new mutations and sequence variations were screened in a panel of left arteria cerebri media) . 186 Galician control individuals without neurological disorders . Glob- Adams-Oliver syndrome is a genetic defect that causes a vasculopa- ally mutations were detected in 6 .6% of the cases (18% if we consider thy and leads to a variety of phenotypes . Inheritance of Adams-Olivier both missense mutations and sequence variations of unknown signifi- syndrome is autosomal dominant but there are also reports of possible cance) . This low frequency of mutations may be due to not very restric- autosomal recessive mode of inheritance . tive referring criteria . Alternatively, other genes may explain most FAD The authors present a 27-month-old-boy with phenotype of Adams-Ol- in our region . ivier syndrome and Peter’s anomaly (central leukomata with variable iridocorneal and keratolenticular adhesions and cataract), refractory P01.243 epilepsy and psychomotor retardation . The molecular investigation is Left Ventricular Outflow Tract Obstructions (LVOTO): family data ongoing in order to identify the genetic cause of AOS . and NOTCH mutations W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse, R. M. F. Berger, Y. J. Vos, R. M. W. Hofstra; P01.241 University Medical Center, Groningen, The Netherlands. manifestation of X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy in Left ventricular outflow tract obstructions (LVOTO) are often familial. heterozygous carriers Early detection of (latent) LVOTO or increased familial risk can prevent S. V. Mikhaylova1, G. E. Rudenskaya2, N. Y. Kalinchenko3, O. V. Shekhter2; unexpected cardiac death . To analyse the percentage of familial cases 1Russian Children’s Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre all new and known patients with left sided anomalies seen after april 1st for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Endocrinological Re- 2006 by the department of pediatric cardiology (170) were offered ge- search Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. netic counselling . Thirty-one patients refused genetic counseling, the X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD, MIM 300100) has several phe- others were seen by the same clinical geneticist . In 44 an aortic valve notypes, clinical manifestation in women-heterozygous carriers among stenosis was diagnosed, in 21 a bicuspid aortic valve without stenosis, them . About 15_20% of carriers develop neurological signs, typically in 28 a hypoplastic left heart, in 67 an aortic coarctation and in 10 other lower spastic paraparesis resembling adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) left sided anomalies . In 17 patients the family history combined with without adrenal insufficiency. After 40 yrs this proportion amounts ultrasound of first degree relatives revealed a LVOTO and in another 50% . Though, ALD manifestation is women is often misdiagnosed . In 19 probands a relative with yet another congenital heart defect was our sample of 50 unrelated families with verified ALD there were two found . families with evident manifestation in women . Low proportion of these The first mutations in NOTCH1 were published in 2005 by Garg et cases may be partly due to the young age of most mothers in the al . in two families with bicuspid aortic valve and other heart defects, sample . In one family, 7-year-old proband had childhood cerebral ALD, and so far two small series showed mutations in approximately 4% of in his younger brother presymptomatic stage of disease was found the patients. In our patient group, sequencing has been finished in 40 out . Their 26-year-old maternal uncle showed typical presentations of patients, and 3 mutations have been found . AMN, 52-year-old grandmother had progressive spastic paraparesis We conclude that LVOTO is often familial and most pedigrees are since 35_40 yrs . Prior to ALD discovering in the proband they had di- compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete pen- agnosis of Strumpell’s disease despite evident adrenal insufficiency in etrance . NOTCH1 mutations are found in a small percentage of famil- the uncle . In 3-year-old proband from another family ALD manifested ial and non-familial cases . by adrenal insufficiency as early as in 2.5 yrs, brain MRI proved child- hood cerebral form . His 32-year-old mother and her monozygotic twin P01.244 since 27 yrs suffered spastic paraparesis with bladder disturbances Asymptomatic neurocutaneous melanosis: A case report and and normal MRI, their previous diagnosis was multiple sclerosis . Such review of literature cases along with reported earlier [Krenn et al, 2001; O’Neill et al, 2001; N. O. Dávalos1,2, V. M. Anguiano-Alvarez3, G. H. Galicia-Hernandez3, R. Shaw-Smith et al, 2004] point that women suspicious for Strumpell’s E´Vega3,4, D. A. Guzmán-Sánchez5, M. Gonzalez-Cruz6, M. E. Sánchez-Castel- disease or familial multiple sclerosis should be tested for ALD if pedi- lanos7, J. C. Salas-Alanis3; gree permits X-linked inheritance. Both families, particularly the first 1Instituto de Genética Humana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Gudala- one, also support the known fact of diffferent ALD phenotypes intrafa- jara, Mexico, 2Hospital Valentin Gomez Farias, Servicio de Genética, ISSSTE. milial co-existence . Guadalajara, Jalisco, México., Guadalajara, Mexico, 3Instituto de Genética Hu-Clinical genetics  mana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 4Doctorado other abnormalities, external female genitalia and dysgenetic testes de Genética Humana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Jalisco, México., were detected . He was screened for subtelomeric aberrations but no Guadalajara, Mexico, 5Hospital México Americano, Guadalajara, Jalisco. rearrangements were identified. Observed genital anomalies, together México., Guadalajara, Mexico, 6Hospital Valentin Gomez Farias, Servicio de with the distinct facial appearance and the presence of Haemoglobin H Neuropediatría, ISSSTE. Guadalajara, Jalisco, México., Guadalajara, Mexico, inclusions in the red blood cells, led to a diagnosis of ATR-X syndrome . 7Instituto Dermatológico de Jalisco Dr. José Barba Rubio, Zapopan, Jalisco, Further molecular study revealed a novel mutation in ATRX (c .G590>T, México., Guadalajara, Mexico. p .Cys197Phe), coding for a change from a highly conserved cysteine Neurocutaneous melanosis (NCM) is a rare congenital syndrome to a phenylalanine residue. The same mutation was identified in the characterized by the presence of Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevi mother, so we can speculate that her elder child was also affected with (GCMN), either multiple Smaller Congenital Melanocytic Nevi (SCMN), ATR-X syndrome . or both . NCM has characteristically been reported to manifest early in Work was supported by KBN 2P05A 161 28 and PBZ- KBN-122/ life, usually by age 2 to 2 .3 years of age and the incidence for as- P05/01-10 . ymptomatic NCM with abnormal MRI is 4 .8% . The Proposita is a 2 years-old, Hispanic female, was the product of the 5th, full-term and P01.247 uncomplicated pregnancy; from non-consanguineous parents . She cADHERiN-11 as a possible candidate gene for autism has a history of Giant Congenital Nevi and several episodes of hy- A. Crepel1, H. Peeters1, J. R. Vermeesch1, J. Steyaert2, D. Walleghem3, K. drocephaly . Clinically, she has Psychomotor delayed; macrocephaly, Devriendt1; hydrocephalus; hemangiomas, multiple congenital pigmented nevi 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Dept. Child Psychiatry, Leuven, and a nevus approximately 38 x 30 cm . that covers the lumbosacral Belgium, 3University Center for Child and Youth Psychiatry, Antwerp, Belgium. area, lower abdomen and both thighs . This nevus is dark brown and Background: black colored, with irregular borders; and is covered by thin hair in Positional cloning of chromosomal translocation breakpoints in autism some areas . Face, neck, arms, chest, upper back and abdomen are patients is a valuable strategy towards the identification of candidate covered with multiple satellite melancoytic nevi, which measure 1 to 5 genes, especially in isolated autism, and when the aberration is de cm . in their largest diameter . Palms and soles are not affected . The CT novo and family history is negative for autism .(1) scan showed dilatation of all ventricles; MRI with gadolinium reported Objectives: severe hydrocephalus and there were non-hyperintensity regions . We We describe a nondysmorphic patient with autism and full scale IQ concluded that the patient has NCM associated to GCMN and numer- of 76, who carries a complex translocation involving chromosomes ous congenital melanocytic nevi . 3,5,16 and a pericentromeric inversion on chromosome 4 . Methods: P01.245 1Mb BAC array-CHG was performed to uncover possible submicro- A deficit of ATP-ase subunit 8 : with contribution for two new scopic imbalances. The breakpoints were finemapped with FISH. cases Results: M. Stancheva1, B. Radeva1, E. Naumova2; On array-CGH, a ~1Mb microdeletion encompassing the clone NON- 1University Children Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Central laboratory of Clinical SC8G10 was detected . Only 1 gene, cadherin-11 (CDH11) was locat- Immunology, UMBAL”Alexandrovska”’, Sofia, Bulgaria. ed in this region . Of the remaining 6 breakpoints, one disrupted the In two consanguinous children ,brother and sister, was reported a AK13094 gene, another was near GFOD and RANBP10 . rare mitochondrial disorder, still not described in literature, caused by Conclusions: mutation of the gene MT-ATP8: base change T8412C with aminoacid In this patient with a complex chromosomal aberration, the CDH11 change : methionin-threonin which lead to dolichocephaly, protruding gene was found to be heterozygously deleted . Cdh11 is expressed in metopic sutura, muscle hypotonia , ataxia and mental retardation .The the lymbic system and hippocampus in mice and may play a role in the EEG showed diffuse changes of teta type .The CAT showed atrophy organisation of central synapses .(2) Interestingly, there is evidence that of the brain of the first child.The investigation of the mother showed altered synaptogenesis is implicated in the pathogenesis of autism . the same mutation which will help the prenatal diagnosis .A treatment For instance, the cell adhesion molecules NLGN-3 and -4 are impli- was started with high doses of vit .B1, B6, B12, L-carnitine, coenzyme cated in autism through their role in the establishment of functional Q10 with the aim to stimulate the enzyme processes and compensa- presynaptic terminals in contacting axons .(3) Thus, CHD11 represents tory to increase the ATP by alternative metabolic pathways .The clinical both a positional and functional candidate gene for autism . Mutation investigation continues . screening in a larger cohort of autism patients is ongoing . (1) Castermans (2003) J Med Genet 40(5) 352-6 P01.246 (2) Manabe (2000) J Mol Neurosci 15(6) 534-46 X-linked α thalassaemia/mental retardation syndrome - a case (3) Persico (2006) Trends Neurosci 29(7) 349-58 with gonadal dysgenesis, caused by a novel mutation in AtRX gene P01.248 A. Jezela-Stanek1, C. Fisher2, M. Szarras-Czpnik3, R. J. Gibbons2, M. Krajew- FMR1 gene: prevalence of premutation and intermediate/grey ska-Walasek1; zone alleles in an autistic Basque sample 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, I. Arrieta Saez1, O. Peñagarikano2, M. Télez1, M. Barasoain1, I. Huerta1, J. Warsaw, Poland, 2MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Ramírez1, B. Criado3, P. Flores4, A. González5; Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3De- 1Dpto Genetica, Antropología Fisica y Fisiologia animal Facultad de Ciencia y partment of Endocrinology, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Tecnología, Bilbao, Spain, 2Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, Poland. United States, 3High School Da Maia, CESPU, Porto, Portugal, 4Dpto de enfer- X-linked α thalassaemia/mental retardation (ATR-X) syndrome is one mería, Escuela de Enfermería, Bilbao, Spain, 5Dpto Medicina Interna, Facultad of the genetic conditions that results in X-linked mental retardation . Its de Medicina, Bilbao, Spain. principal features are: learning difficulties, microcephaly with charac- Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is associated with an unstable CGG re- teristic facial features (hypertelorism, nose with flat bridge and trian- peat sequence in the 5’ untranslated region of the first exon of the gular, upturned tip, full, everted lower lip) and α thalassaemia. Other FMR1 gene . The location of this gene coincides with a Fragile Site known traits of ATR-X are genital abnormalities, the severity of which (FS) FRAXA . The CGG sequence is polymorphic with respect to size varies from cryptorchidism to ambiguous genitalia . We present a fam- and purity of the repeat . Although only the full mutation (>200 CGG) is ily referred to the genetic service with suspicion of Smith-Lemli-Opitz associated with clinical expression of FXS, premutation (55-200 CGG) (SLO) syndrome after the birth of a child with facial dysmorphism, atrio- and intermediate/grey zone allele carriers (35-54 CGG) have been ventricular defect and ambiguous genitalia . Unfortunately, he died be- also associated to distinctive phenotypes, one of these are mental re- fore diagnostics . In a subsequent pregnancy, chromosomal analysis tardation and/or autism . Autism is a behavioral disorder of early onset showed the foetus had a normal male karyotype (46, XY) and SLO marked by social and cognitive deficiencies. Our Previous studies of syndrome was also excluded . However, at birth the baby exhibited the chromosomal fragility in autistic and normal individuals show higher same spectrum of clinical features as in the previous child . Amongst frequency of FS and FRAXA full mutation in autistic individuals . TheClinical genetics  aim of this study was to analyze a sample of autistic patient without feld-Rieger anomaly and leukoencephalopathy and stroke . Our data FRAXA full mutation to know the correlation of premutation and inter- confirm that mutations in the COL4A1 gene can be responsible for mediate/grey zone size FMR1 alleles and autism . The results show ARA in humans, as suggested by previous studies in Col4a1-mutated that the prevalence of premutation alleles is 2/10 in patients, however mice . we did not found intermediate/grey zone alleles . Beside the overall repeat size and the AGG interspersion pattern suggest instability . P01.251 De novo balanced chromosomal translocation (2;10)(q11.2;q24) P01.249 associated with dysmorphic features and mental retardation. Autosomal dominant Alport syndrome: molecular analysis of the case report. COLA gene and clinical outcome D. Locmele1, B. Lace1,2, D. Bauze1, G. Kalnberza1, A. Dzalbs1; E. Marcocci1, V. Uliana1, M. Silengo2, M. Zerial3, F. Bergesio4, A. Amoroso5, M. 1Children Clinical University Hospital, Medical Genetic Clinic, Riga, Latvia, Pennesi6, D. Giachino7, C. Rosatelli8, C. Dresch Martinhago9, M. Carmellini10, F. 2Rigas Stradins University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga, Mari1, M. Bruttini1, I. Longo1, A. Renieri1; Latvia. 1Medical Genetics, Department Molecular Biology, University of Siena, Italy, We report a clinical case of a reciprocal translocation between the long 2Clinical Genetic Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University of Turin, Italy, 3De- arms of the 2nd and 10th chromosomes observed in a 12 years old male partment of Paeditrics, M. Bufalini Hospital, Cesena, Italy, 4Nephrology and with dysmorphic features, mental retardation and compulsive - obses- Dialysis Units, Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Florence, Italy, 5Transplantation sive behaviour . Immunology, San Giovanni Battista Hospital, Torino, Italy, 6Department of From anamnesis: boy was born from uncomplicated 1st pregnancy Paeditrics, IRRCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 7Department of Clinical and from nonconsanguinous marriage . Delivery on 40th week of gestation, Biological Sciences, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Turin, Orbas- birth weight 3450g, height 58cm. At the age of 6 months he had first sano, Italy, 8Department of Biomedical Sciences and Biotechnology, University episode of seizures after injury of the head . Seizures repeated two of Cagliari, Italy, 9Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, Uni- times till 12 months of age, later they have never been observed . Mo- versity of São Paulo, Brazil, 10UOC Chirurgia dei Trapianti, Azienda Ospedaliera tor and speech development were normal. Behavioural problems first Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. noticed at 4 years of age . Alport syndrome is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous ne- Psychiatric findings: marked hyperactive behaviour, always in mo- phropathy characterized by irregular thinning, thickening, and splitting tion, restless, enthusiastic, frequently clownish, mincing, dyslalia and of the glomerular basement membrane often associated with hearing echolalia, might be aggressiveness to others and to himself, moderate loss and ocular symptoms . While the X-linked and the autosomal re- mental retardation . cessive forms are well known, the autosomal dominant form is not well Dysmorphic features: downslanting palpebral fissures, facial asym- acknowledged . We have investigated 37 patients with a clinical and metry, left eyelid ptosis, hypotelorism, esotropia, and irregular tooth molecular diagnosis of autosomal ATS belonging to 8 different families . placement . The mean age of patients was 38 .7 years ranging from 6 to 76 years . There was performed a conventional GTG karyotyping . Result: 46,XY, Only 9 out of 37 (24 .3%) patients reached the ESRD, at the mean age t(2;10)(q11.2;q24). Chromosomal breakpoint was confirmed with FISH of 51 .2 years . Four patients (13 .8%) had hearing loss and none ocu- (Kreatech MYCN (2p24) & LAF (2q11)) analysis . lar changes . DHPLC analysis revealed 8 novel private COL4A4 gene It still remains a question of discussion if balanced translocation could mutations: 3 frameshift, 3 missense and 2 splice-site mutations . These be associated with dysmorphic features and mental retardation . To data indicate autosomal dominant Alport syndrome as a disease with evaluate possibility of certain genes loss in breakpoint regions, further a low risk of ocular and hearing anomalies but with a significant risk to SNPs analysis of regions is in progress . develop renal insufficiency although at an older age than autosomal recessive and X-linked forms . P01.252 These clinical features make difficult differential diagnosis with the Bardet Bidl syndrome Analysis Among iranian Families benign familial hematuria due to heterozygous mutations of COL4A4 . M. Dehghan Manshadi, M. Rostami, T. Majidizadeh, K. Banihashemi, M. On the other hand, we are unable to demonstrate a genotype-pheno- Houshmand.; type correlation with the type and the site of the COL4A4 mutations . A Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. correct diagnosis and prognosis is based on a comprehensive clinical Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is characterized by cone-rod dystrophy, investigation in as many family members as possible . truncal obesity, postaxial polydactyly, cognitive impairment, male hy- pogonadotrophic hypogonadism, complex female genitourinary mal- P01.250 formations, and renal dysfunction .Birth weight is usually normal, but cOL4A1 mutation in Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly with significant weight gain begins within the first year and becomes a life- leukoencephalopathy and stroke long issue for most individuals. A majority of individuals have signifi- I. Coupry1, I. Sibon2, I. Orignac1, I. Burgelin1, J. Orgogozo2, D. Lacombe3,1, B. cant learning difficulties, but only a minority has severe impairment on Arveiler1,3, C. Goizet1,3; IQ testing . Renal disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality . 1Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, Bordeaux, France, 2Fédération des In our own study the initial diagnosis of Bardet-Biedl syndrome is es- Neurosciences Cliniques, Bordeaux, France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, tablished by clinical findings in our specialists’ thorough exam. Bordeaux, France. Twelve genes are known to be associated with Bardet-Biedl syn- INTRODUCTION : Axenfeld-Rieger anomalies (ARA), refer to a wide drome: BBS1, BBS2, ARL6/BBS3, BBS4, BBS5, MKKS/BBS6, BBS7, variety of abnormalities of the anterior segment of the eye that belong TTC8/BBS8, B1/BBS9, BBS10, TRIM32/BBS11, and BBS12 . Indirect to the heterogenous family of the anterior segment dysgenesis . ARA molecular diagnosis using Bardet-Biedle markers facilitate prenatal di- appears to be genetically heterogeneous: it has been associated with agnosis of Bardet-Bidel children . mutations in three genes: PITX2 (on chromosome 4q25), FOXC1 (also During the period of 2007 all referred patients to our lab have under- named FKHL7) (6p25), and PAX6 (11p13) . gone molecular genetics analysis . Five molecular markers: D11S913, SUBJECTS AND METHODS : Five members of a three-generation D16S408, D3S1254, D15S131, D4S402 are used for covering the family affected by vascular leukoencephalopathy and ARA, were clini- analysis according to the previous surveys . caly and geneticaly investigated . The primary results showed that in all families’ segregation of alleles RESULTS : Diffuse leukoencephalopathy associated with ocular mal- are according to mandelian inheritance and affected chromosomes formations of the Axenfeld-Rieger type was observed in the 5 affected are distinguishable from unaffected ones . The patients’ molecular individuals . Genetic linkage analyses directed toward three loci associ- genetics profile has been completed through PCR amplifications and ated with hereditary vasculopathies and on the four loci known to be Electrophoresis in PAGE gel and the final linkage analysis showed that associated with ARA showed a possible association with the two loci BBS4, BBS7 were the most associated gene with the Bardet-Bidel in 11p13(PAX6) and 13q34 (COL4A1) . Direct sequencing of the COL4A1 Iranian families . gene led to the identification of a novel missense mutation p.G720D, which cosegregates with the disease . CONCLUSION : We delineate a novel association between the Axen-Clinical genetics  P01.253 P01.255 The first case of Berardinelli-Seip congenital lypodystrophy Expansion and diversity of the phenotype and results of reported in Lithuania molecular studies in patients with blepharocheilodontic L. Cimbalistienė1, V. Černiauskienė2, V. Kučinskas1; syndrome 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics of Vilnius University, Vilnius, A. Maat-Kievit1, J. Hoogeboom1, M. Whiteford2, A. de Klein1; Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Children’s Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania. 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Fergu- Berardinelli-Seip congenital lypodystrophy (BSCL) syndrome is a ex- son-Smith Centre for Medical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom. tremely rare autosomal recessive disorder, with estimated prevalence Blepharocheilodontic (BCD) syndrome is one of the at least 400 oro- of 1 in 10 million population . Two genes are known to be associated facial clefting syndromes known, first described by Elschnig in 1912 with BSLC: AGPAT and BSCL2 . Individuals with mutations in BSCL2 and recognised as a syndrome and named by Gorlin in 1996 . It is a include whites of varying ethnicities originated mostly from Europe and rare, but possibly underdiagnosed, autosomal dominant condition with Middle East, and with muations in AGPAT2 typically originate from variable expressivity in which the main clinical features are orofacial sub-Saharan Africa and Maghreb . clefts, ectodermal defects and ocular abnormalities . The ectodermal case report. Our presented patient, male, was the first child of non defects are mainly oligodontia, delayed dentition, conical crown form, consanquineous parents Lithuanian origin . BSCL syndrome was di- hair abnormalities (pili torti, sparse hair, eyebrows and eyelashes) and agnosed one month after birth by the phenotypic characteristics hypo/dysplastic nails . The ocular abnormalities comprise ectropion of of the syndrome . At the age of the 9 years patient had total loss of the lower eyelid, distichiasis of the upper eyelid, euryblepharon and subcutaneous fat, muscular hypertrophy, long extremities, acrome- lagophthalmos . Other dysmorphic features have been described in galic appearance, dry and curly hair, umbilical hernia, hyperhidrosis, BCD patients, like hypertelorism, ptosis, broad forehead with high distinct acanthosis nigricans, marked hepatosplenomegaly, divergent frontal hairline, dysplastic ears, clinodactyly and syndactyly . Also an- alternant strabismus, hypermethropia, slight mental retardation . Pa- kyloblepharon, hypothyroidism, dermoid cysts and membranous im- tient’s pubertal status was stage 2 according to Tanner’s charts, the perforate anus were suggested to be part of the spectrum . bone age was of 14 years . His blood pressure was slightly increased, While BCD and lagophthalmos syndrome are a continuum, as sug- he had increased fasting glucose, dyslipidemia, mild proteinuria, gested by Gorlin, BCD syndrome shows clinical overlap with ectro- marked hyperinsulinemia, increased hepatic enzymes, signs of left dactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-cleft lip/palate (EEC) syndrome, anky- ventricular hypertrophy . Liver biopsy showed steatohepatitis of low loblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate (AEC) or Hay Wells activity and hepatic fibrosis. Mutation analysis revealed that our pa- syndrome and van der Woude/popliteal pterygium syndrome . A gene tient was compound heterozygous for two mutations of BSCL2 gene for BCD syndrome has not yet been identified and might be involved in [c .458C>A]+[c .412C>T] (testing was performed in Belgium, Loverval, neural crest and/or branchial arch development . Human Genetic Centre). The results confirmed the clinical diagnosis of The variable clinical features of two families comprising nine patients BSCL and allowed assignment to type 2 . To our knowledge this is the and three other sporadic patients with BCD syndrome will be present- first report of Berardinelli-Seip syndrome in Lithuania. ed and compared to the patients described before . It will be discussed if the phenotype can be expanded with neural tube defects . Also the P01.254 results of molecular studies in these patients will be shown . Biallelic BRCA2 -the first Greek Cypriot Family reported V. C. Anastasiadou1, E. S Aristidou1, A. Kotti2, T. Delikurt1, D. Georgiou3, A. P01.256 Hadjisavvas4, K. Kyriacou4; A three generation Serbian family with C263T mutation in MPZ 1Clinical Genetics Service, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, gene Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Service, Makarios Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, M. P. Keckarevic-Markovic1, J. Dackovic2, J. Mladenovic3, M. Kecmanovic1, D. 3Department of Cytogenetics, Makarios Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4De- Keckarevic1, V. Milic-Rasic3, S. Romac1; partment of Electron Microscopy and Molecular Pathology, Cyprus Institute of 1Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Neurology, Belgrade, Serbia, Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. 3Institute of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Belgrade, Serbia. MM was born with multiple congenital anomalies, affecting mainly her The myelin protein zero (MPZ) gene encodes an integral membrane growth, limbs, digits and kidneys . She also had short stature, micro- protein with immunoglobulin-like extracellular domain . MPZ is ex- cephaly and dysmorphic facial features . Her right thumb was ectopic pressed only in peripheral nerves, and is localized in compact myelin . whereas her left thumb was absent . Fanconi anemia (FA) was sug- Mutations in MPZ gene are the common cause of peripheral neuropa- gested . thies . Depending on the location and type of the mutation, MPZ is as- Chromosomal examination revealed anomalies (end to end fusion, sociated or with demyelinating either with axonal phenotypes . Mostly, deletions and chromatid breaks) also compatible with the clinical diag- mutations that lie in extracellular domain of MPZ and affect tertiary nosis of FA . MM was diagnosed with metastatic neuroblastoma at six structure of the protein important for myelin sheet formation lead to de- months of age and passed away a month later . myelinating neuropathies, and mutations affecting myelin-axon com- Parents had three miscarriages. At the 24th week of their fifth pregnan- munication induce axonal degeneration . cy (in vitro fertilization) fetus was found to be microcephalic and were Here we present a three generation family with C263T mutation that referred back for genetic counselling . Based on family history of breast affects extracellular domain of MPZ . cancer both parents were tested for BRCA mutations and found to be Clinical features are listed in a table: positive for the BRCA2 mutation 8984DelG which has been reported Age at onset of Motor nerve conduction as a founder mutation among Greek Cypriots . DNA stored from MM Patient Age (years) Gender symptoms of velocity (MNCV) for was tested and found homozygous for BRCA2 alleles . The FA pheno- weakness (years) median nerve (m/s) type related to biallelic BRCA2 is associated with high spontaneous II1 65 F Unknown Not done II2 47 F >40 22 chromosome aberration rate , less frequent bone marrow suppression III1 40 M 11-20 35 .7 and a different spectrum of childhood cancers . Cancer risk for children III2 38 F 6-10 17 .6 III3 20 F 11-20 22 with biallelic BRCA2 mutations may be very high. This is the first fam- IV1 7 F / 18 .5 ily diagnosed among Greek Cypriots with biallelic BRCA2 mutations manifesting breast cancer and FA . Mutations causing peripheral neuropathies show intra- and interfamilial variability. In presented family MNCVs are severely reduced, except for the only male patient, whose MNCV is 35.7 m/s and could fit even in a group of axonal neuropathies. There is no extensive intrafamilial variability in this family, but, the only male patient displays milder symptoms then other, female patients. Although, there were no previously reported association between MPZ gene muta- tions, sex and the severity of the disease, cases like this should be recognized in order to remind us that our knowledge of biology of myelin sheet and peripheral nervous system is limited and, probably, more complex then we assume.Clinical genetics  P01.257 patients evaluated in Iasi Medical Genetics Centre in 2000-2004 . The s248F mutation in cHNRA4 gene has a pathogenic role in most patients (47 .2%) had CLP (19 .8% bilateral) or a CP (47 .2%); only autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy 5 .66% had CL . We look at other anomalies associated with CL/P, as- A. Zuniga, E. Pineda, I. Pitarch, A. Guerrero; sociations which have a high power to suggest the diagnosis . We used Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. diagnosis algorithms and POSSUM, OMD databases .The 52 .83% (56 Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE, OMIM patients) had CL/P associated with syndromes that include anomalies 600513) has long been misdiagnosed as nocturnal paroxysmal dysto- involving multiple organs . Only 47 .17% were non-syndromic . Base on nia, parasomnias, or psychiatric disturbances . It is characterized by evocative signs the syndromes diagnosed in our selected cohort were: clusters of brief nocturnal motor seizures, which originate in the frontal oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (6), velocardiofacial syndrome (6), cortex . The results of interictal electroencephalogram are usually nor- chromosomal anomalies (5), amniotic bands (3), Smith Lemli Opitz (3), mal, as are computed tomographic scans and magnetic resonance im- EEC (3), holoprozencephaly (2), fetal alcohool (2), Aarskog (2), other ages . Seizures are usually well controlled by carbamazepine; however, rare syndromes (18) . For accurate assessment, correct diagnosis, and the recurrence risk after drug withdrawal often persists for life . This management, the patients should be dealt with in a team approach . syndrome is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder with a pen- CL/P are frequent associated with others anomalies which emphasize etrance of 70% to 80% . Mutations in the alfa-4 subunit of the neuronal the importance of plurimalformative syndromes identification. Clinical nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene (CHRNA4) has been described in proper diagnosis is essential to initiate genetic test, the correct man- several families as responsible of ADNFLE . agement and genetic counselling . We have studied a family with ADNFLE from the east of Spain . The clinical appearance of the disease in this family was very similar to pre- P01.260 viously described cases in which mutations in exon 5 of the CHRNA4 Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome confirmed by mutation in gene were found . So, the exon 5 of the CHRNA4 gene was ampli- PTEN gene fied between nucleotides 535 and 825 and polymerase chain reaction R. Zordania, A. Lehtmets, H. Põder, K. Joost; products were purified and sequenced directly. We have identified in Tallinn` Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. three affected members of family a identify a C-to-T transition in the Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba (BRRS) and Cowden (CS) syndromes are CHRNA4 gene, resulting in a Ser-248-to-Phe (S248F) substitution in autosomal dominant allelic multiple hamartoma syndromes, both in the sixth amino acid position of the transmembrane domain 2 (M2) . 60-80% cases due to germline mutations in tumor supressor PTEN Some authors have suggested that the mutation caused reduced re- gene . Clinical signs in childhood have many similarities, early diagno- ceptor function . These data support the hypothesis that the phenotypic sis using molecular genetic analysis is important as syndromes give expression of autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy is increased risk for different tumors . caused by mutations in the CHRNA4 gene . We describe a family, where both young parents of our index patient were treated due to tumors- mother had bladder carcinoma, treated P01.258 during pregnancy and father was treated due to embryonal testicular Further delineation of the partial trisomy 3q phenotype carcinoma . D. Mueller1, W. Mueller2, F. Fresser1, G. Utermann1, D. Kotzot1; Proband is the first and only child in the family. His birth anthropom- 1Division for Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, etry (4020g/52cm, OFC 41cm) was above 97th centile. During the first Reutte, Austria. two years of his life he had psychomotor developmental problems, Partial trisomy 3q is characterized by postnatal growth retardation, mi- hypotonia, seizures with EEG changes, autistic features, unilateral hy- crocephaly, developmental delay, and distinct facial dysmorphisms . drocele and macrocephaly . Metabolic workshop excluded metabolic Here, we report on a 3 years and 7 months old girl with minor dysmor- disorders . phic features (high frontal hairline, down-slanting palpebral fissures, At the age of three years three lipomas were (histologically telecanthus, epicanthus, bulbous nasal tip, long philtrum, tapering proved)diagnosed- two subcutaneous and one pancreatic . The patient fingers, and short 5th fingers) and language accentuated develop- had different skin symptoms, no pigmentation of the glans penis . He ment delay due to partial trisomy 3q and partial monosomy 4p born to had macrocephaly and mild mental retardation and some autistic fea- healthy parents (mother 20 years, father 33 years) . After an unremark- tures and speech problems . able pregnancy, she was spontaneously delivered at term . Weight was Mutation analysis of PTEN gene was performed by Dr .D .O .Robinsin 3920g (>90th percentile), length was 51cm (50-75th percentile), and (Salisbury Health Care NHS Trust) . The patient is carring a C>A substi- OFC was 36 .5cm (>90th percentile) . At the age of 39 months height tution at base 144, in exon 2 of the PTEN gene . This mutation impairs was 100cm (50-75th percentile), weight was 17 .3kg (90-97th percen- the function of PTEN and is the cause of the patient`s symptoms . tile), and OFC was 52cm (97th percentile) . conclusion: clinical, pedigree data and results of moleculargenetic GTG-banding and FISH with subtelomeric probes (Total Telomer Probe investigations of the patient having Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syn- Panel, Vysis®) and a probe specific for the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome drome are presented. This is the first case of this syndrome in Estonia critical region (WHSCR) were performed according to standard pro- confirmed PTEN gene mutation . cedures and revealed a de novo trisomy 3q27->qtel and monosomy 4p16->ptel with a breackpoint distal to the WHSCR and proximal to P01.261 the subtelomeric 4p probe (karyotype: 46,XX,der(4)t(3;4)(q27;p16) .ish Report of cockayne syndrome from iranian families der(4)(t(3;4)(D3S4560+;D4S3359-,WHSC1+CEP4+)) . For a more ex- F. Afroozan, N. Almadani, Y. Shafeghati, M. H. Kariminejad; act breakpoint determination SNP-array analysis is underway . Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Re- In accordance with the cytogenetic results the girl shows no clinical public of Iran. features of WHS, but facial dysmorphisms clearly resembling partial Cocakyne Syndrome is an autosomal recessive multisystemic trisomy 3q . The lack of postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, and condition,characterized by usually senile-like changes beginning inin- malformations in our patient will help to improve genotype-phenotype fancy . correlation in partial trisomy 3q . Retinal degeneration,Impaired hearing and photosensitivity of thin- skin . P01.259 The disease is known to be genetically heterogeneous for which 3dif- Optimizing clinical diagnosis for some genetic syndromes with ferent Loci have been identified on chromosomes 10,12,13.We have cleft lip and/or palate (Iasi Medical Genetics Center’s experience) studied five Iranian families,each with one affected child(threemale,two E. Braha, M. Volosciuc, C. Rusu, M. Covic; female) .three of these cases are results of cansanguineous marrige University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. and the parents of the two cases are offspring of unrelated Clefts of the lip (CL) and/or palate (CP) are among the most common couples .Their features and radiology were compatible with Cockayne birth defects and require multidisciplinary approach for diagnosis and Syndrome . treatment . The purpose of this report is to optimizing the clinical diag- The opthalmologist showed salt&pepper retinal pigmentation for two nosis of some genetic syndromes for the patients with CL/P . We se- ofthe affected children and optic atrophy for other three cases . lected 106 patients (58 boys and 48 girls) with CL/P from the 8615 total Assayes of DNA repair are performed on skin fibroblasts.The most-Clinical genetics  consistent finding in Cockayne Syndrome,fibroblasts,marked sensi- P01.264 tivity to UV radiation,deficient recovery or RNA syntesis following UV importance of early track down of congenital cardiac damage(and impaired repair of) activity transcribed genes,or transcrip- malformations tion couple repair . D. Iacob1, M. Boia1, R. E. Iacob2, A. Manea1, M. Dima1; PND of CS has been reported by analysis of UV light sensitivity and 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Ro- DNA repair in fetal cells obtained by CV or Amniocentesis . mania, 2Clinical emergency Hospital Arad - Pediatric Surgery and Orthopedics Department, Arad, Romania. P01.262 Introduction: Congenital malformations are the main cause of death in complete androgen insensitivity syndrome within a large the first year of life; therefore, early identification of etiology and right turkish family from southeast of Anatolia therapeutic decision are vital problems in pediatric services . G. Cankus1, G. Ogur2, E. Ozturk3, C. Kilicarslan1, O. Balat3, S. Pehlivan1; Objectives: genetic consult and family investigation; examination, in- 1Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, vestigation and selection of cases which require special methods of Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- diagnosis, interdisciplinary consult, adaptation of European pattern for ment of Medical Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3Gaziantep University, Faculty of the anomalies management . Medicine, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Gaziantep, Turkey. Material and method: The study includes 187 children with age of Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) due to inactivating 0-1 year, consulted, hospitalized and investigated in Premature and mutations of the androgen receptor (AR) is an androgen receptor func- Neonatology Department of Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children tion disorder . Here, we present a large family with 6 children out of ‘L . Turcanu’ Timisoara between 2001 and 2006 . Case distribution by which 4 was CAIS affected . Cytogenetic analysis of the two healthy etiology shows a clear prevalence of genetic determination: chromo- sibs revealed one brother (46,XY), one sister (46,XX) and four affected somal 45 cases (24%), monogenic 17 cases (9%), and polygenic 86 sisters with a normal male karyotype: 46,XY . The mother, the father and cases (46%), in comparison with epigenetic etiology 39 cases (21%) . 5 sisters were tested with STR markers from X and Y chromosomes to The study of chromosomal anomalies case distribution with cardiac evaluate the origin of X chromosomes in affected versus non-affected involvement shows an increased frequency of Down syndrome cases siblings . AMEL, XE1 (DXS6803), XE3(DXS6809), XHPRT(DXS6854), and cardiac disorders (50%) . Cardiac pathology associated to some X22 (DXS8377) markers were used for the X chromosome and SRY, monogenic syndromes is obvious in Holt-Oram syndrome, Marfan syn- AMEL, YE4 markers were used for the Y chromosome . In all affected drome, Bourneville tuberoses sclerosis, Hurler syndrome and Carpen- CAIS sisters, an X pattern similar to one of the two X chromosomes ter syndrome; the distribution is similar to the one reported in similar from the mother was observed and the Y markers correlated well with studies and correlated with the incidence of these diseases in general the father’s Y markers as expected . The unaffected sister did not pos- population . sess the relevant X haplotype; thus, she was presumed not to be Conclusion: Congenital cardiac diseases represent pathology difficult a carrier . Lately this unaffected girl is reported to have two healthy to quantify . daughters . These patients and their families are confronted with dramatic situ- Key words: Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome, large family, ations because of diagnosis delay, absence of therapeutic response STR markers, PCR . and, mostly, of lack of sanitary and social support . P01.263 P01.265 Evaluation and management of patients with complex Preventive effect of periconceptional folic acid supplementation chromosomal abnormalities on the risk of congenital heart defects: A registry based case- C. Rusu, M. Gramescu, V. Gorduza, A. Sireteanu, I. Ivanov, M. Covic; control study in the Netherlands University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania. H. E. K. De Walle; We present 5 cases, apparently simple, but with complex chromosom- Eurocat registration Northern Netherlands, Groningen, The Netherlands. al abnormalities on the karyotype, in order to discuss the importance Evidence is emerging that multivitamins containing periconceptional of the cytogenetic evaluation for the management of the case and the folic acid supplementation protects against the occurrence of congeni- genetic counselling offered to the family . tal heart defects (CHD) . Postulating that folic acid is responsible for the Case 1: male, 7 years old, first child of an apparently healthy, young, reduction in CHD risk we used data from a large surveillance for birth unrelated couple, who had also a miscarriage . The mother was preg- defects (EUROCAT- Northern Netherlands registry from 1981 to 2006) nant again . Physical examination: typical aspect of Down syndrome . to perform a case-control study to investigate the effect of periconcep- Karyotype: 46,XY,-13,+rob(13;21)/47,XXY,-13,+rob(13,21) . Mother: tional folic acid supplementation on CHD risk . carrier of the robertsonian translocation, as well as the fetus . The cases consisted of mothers who delivered infants with isolated Case 2: male, 6 month old, third child of an young, unrelated couple . or complex heart defects, without any syndrome or genetic abnormal- The mother has been diagnosed with syphilis during the pregnancy . ity (N=613, years 1996-2005) .The control group consisted of mothers Physical examination: mild aspect of Down syndrome . Karyotype:47 who gave birth to children with a known chromosomal or genetic de- ,XY,t(1;2)(p32-pter;q37-qter),-3,-21,+der(3)rcp(3;21)(p11 .1;q22 .2),+de fect or infants with other congenital malformations (N=2385) . In both r(21)rcp(3;21)(p11 .1;q22 .2),+21 . Parents: normal karyotype . the case and control group, mothers of children with oral cleft, urinary Case 3: female, 7 years old, first child of an apparently healthy, young, tract, limb reduction and neural tube defects were excluded, because unrelated couple, that has also a healthy son . Physical examination: the risk of these defects are probably reduced by maternal folic acid mild aspect of Turner syndrome . Karyotype: 44,X,der(13;14) . Father: supplementation . Potential confounding factors of periconceptional fo- carrier of the robertsonian translocation . lic acid use included; maternal body mass index, education, maternal Case 4: male, 5 years old, first child of an apparently healthy, young, age at delivery of index baby, smoking behaviour and alcohol use dur- unrelated couple, that has also a healthy son . Physical examination: ing pregnancy were explored . typical aspect of trisomy 8 . Karyotype: 47,XY,+8/47,XY,+8q/46,XY/ Adequate use of periconceptional folic acid supplements revealed an 45,X . Parents: normal karyotype . odds ratio of 0 .81 (95%CI 0 .67-0 .96) for all types of CHD . Subgroup Case 5: female, evaluated duet o fertility problems . Karyotype: analysis showed an odds ratio of 0 .60 (95%CI 0 .42-0 .86) for isolated 45,X,inv9/47,XXX,inv9 . ventricular septal defects . Periconceptional folic acid supplements ap- The mechanism that led to the complex chromosomal abnormality, as pear to reduce the prevalence of CHD with approximately 20% . Con- well as the clinical picture, the management and genetic counselling sidering the relatively high prevalence of CHD worldwide the findings are discussed for all cases . of this study are important for public health . In conclusion, we present 5 cases of complex chromosomal rearrange- ments to illustrate particular situations (apparently simple cases, but with complex karyotype) and to discuss genetic counselling in these situations .Clinical genetics  P01.266 high-resolution karyotype, and 4) Magnetic Resonance Imaging . All clinical characterization and NiPBL mutation analysis of 42 these facts will lead us to a genetic counselling in the best conditions . Portuguese patients with cornelia de Lange syndrome C. Dias1, E. Costa2, J. Oliveira2, J. Silva1, M. Martins1, A. M. Fortuna1, A. B. P01.268 Sousa3, J. P. Basto1, I. Soares-Silva2, T. Kay4, H. Santos5, A. Medeira3, I. Cor- New case of cranio-Lenticulo-sutural Dysplasia - a recently deiro3, T. Lourenço4, L. Nunes4, R. Santos2, M. Reis-Lima1; described genetic syndrome with late-closing fontanels 1Unidade de Genética Médica, Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto S. A. Boyadjiev Boyd1, C. Nauta1, E. Zackai2, J. Kim1; Magalhães, INSA, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de 1Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães, INSA, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Sacramento, CA, United States, 2Division of Human Genetics, The Children’s Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Serviço de Gené- Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. tica Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Genomed, Instituto de We delineated Cranio-lenticulo-sutural dysplasia (CLSD; Boyadjiev- Medicina Molecular, Lisboa, Portugal. Jabs syndrome) as a new autosomal-recessive syndrome in a con- Cornelia de Lange Syndrome [CdLS (MIM#122470)] is a rare multi- sanguineous family where five males and one female have similar system disorder (prevalence1:10 .000) characterized by psychomo- craniofacial features (large and late-closing fontanels, hypertelorism), tor developmental and growth delay, distinctive facial dysmorphism, early onset cataracts, and mild generalized skeletal dysplasia . Linkage microcephaly and limb anomalies . Mutations in the NIPBL [5p13 .1 analysis mapped the locus to chromosome 14q13-q21 and a F382L (MIM*608667)] gene that encodes for delangin, a protein involved in causative mutation was identified in SEC23A . Detailed molecular and sister chromatid cohesion, have been described in 27-56% of patients . biochemical analysis of wild type and mutant SEC23A, an integral A smaller number of patients have been found to have mutations in member of the COPII-mediated ER-to-Golgi trafficking pathway, led to two other genes SMC1A [Xp11 .2 (MIM*300040)] and SMC3 [10q25 better characterization of intracellular trafficking in health and disease. (MIM*606062)] thought to be involved in chromatin cohesion . A zebrafish morpholino model recapitulated the human phenotype. We present data on 42 Portuguese patients with Cornelia de Lange Recently, an unrelated individual with clinical features consistent with Syndrome, observed by Clinical Geneticists according to the same CLSD was identified. Molecular analysis of SEC23A identified a novel clinical protocol, including prenatal and birth history, development, heterozygous SEC23A mutation involving a highly conserved residue . physical features and multisystem involvement . According to their This missense mutation was inherited from the unaffected father and phenotype patients were classified as mild, moderate or severe. The was not present in 400 control chromosomes . No mutations were entire coding region (exons 2 to 47) and exon-intron junctions of the found in the maternal alleles and SEC23A real-time PCR analysis NIPBL gene was sequenced . Population screening was carried out for showed normal expression of the alleles . Biochemical characteriza- undocumented variants . In mutation positive cases sequence analysis tion by in vitro COPII budding assay is in progress . Our data suggest was extended to the parents . Ongoing sequencing of NIPBL to date that CLSD may be more common than previously thought and should revealed the presence of heterozygous mutations in 11 patients from be considered in the evaluation of patients with late-closing fontanels . 10 unrelated families, 7 of which are novel . Two individuals with a Alternative inheritance patterns may exist for this syndrome . nonsense mutation in NIPBL are siblings with a mild phenotype, pro- viding further evidence that CdLS familial cases may remain under P01.269 diagnosed . We highlight the importance of a thorough clinical assess- A 340 kb de novo 16p13.3 microduplication encompassing only ment in order to recognize milder phenotypes of CdLS . We discuss 5 genes phenotype-genotype correlation and it’s implication in terms of clini- S. Gimelli1, A. Bottani1, I. Bouchardy1, D. Martinet2, J. Beckmann2, S. Antonara- cal prognosis and the importance of molecular diagnosis for genetic kis1, M. A. Morris1, F. Béna1; counselling . 1Service of Medical Genetics, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneve, Switzer- land, 2Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois P01.267 (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. clinical-epidemiological study of the congenital anomalies of the We describe an 8-year-old female who was shown by MLPA to have corpus callosum a de novo interstitial duplication of the Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome I. Ejarque1,2, E. Bermejo1,3, J. Mendioroz1,3, E. ECEMC working group.4; region . Characterization by array CGH (Agilent) revealed a 340 kb 1ECEMC (Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations), Institute duplication of 16p13 .3 containing only 5 genes, one of them being of Health Carlos III., Madrid, Spain, 2Dpt of Clinical Analysis. Universitary CREBBP . Hospital La Fe., Valencia, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red The patient was born at term after an uneventful pregnancy . de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII., Madrid, Spain, 4ECEMC working Dysmorphic facial features and a left hip dysplasia, initially treated by group, Several cities of Spain., Spain. cast and later by a Pavlik harness, were noted . Aged 19 months, global The corpus callosum is the largest interhemispheric commisure of eu- psychomotor delay was noted (sitting at 11 months, but no speech terius mammals . We’ve studied the Epidemiology of the Congenital or walking), as well as dysmorphic facial features, with round face, Anomalies of the Corpus Callosum (CACC) throughout the ECEMC erythematous cheeks, short hypoplastic nose, long convex philtrum, [Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations] database . microstomia, and low-set small ears . Pelvis X-rays showed changes ECEMC is a hospital-based case-control study covering, in 2005, in the left femoral head, atypical for classical congenital hip dysplasia . 22,96% of total of newborns in Spain . Here we present the results of Based on these findings, the hypothesis of some form of chondrodys- the epidemiological study of some clinical and etiological characteris- plasia punctata was raised, but could not be substantiated radiologi- tics of infants with CACC registered by ECEMC programme . cally. Follow-up confirmed the mild global learning disability with nor- The ECEMC calculated a frequency of 1 .08/10,000 births for the mal growth parameters, apart from a leg-length discrepancy, the left CACC. Non-specified type of agenesia was the most frequent group being 2 cm shorter . and total agenesia the most infrequent . Taking into account the clinical The rarity of published patients with comparable duplications make features, the isolated cases represented only 6% of total newborns; genotype-phenotype correlations difficult. Given a previous report the syndromic ones accounted for 29%, and multiply malformed (sev- of a duplication 16p13 in a patient with chondrodysplasia punctata eral congenital defects without an identified etiologic link) represented (Hunter, 1985), we hypothesise that overexpression of gene(s) in the 65% . If we correlate the clinical and the anatomopathologic types, the microduplication is responsible for abnormal bone development lead- most frequent among the isolated cases was non-specified agenesia. ing to teratological hip dysplasia . Given the known role of CREBBP in Correlating the anatomopathology and the genetic aetiology, 48,21% skeletal and mental development, this gene represents an excellent of them had a chromosomal origin . It has been described an associa- candidate . tion of CACC with several chromosomic alterations: del(5p), del(1qter), del(18q), del(6p25), dup(3q) and del(10q) . In order to carry out a right follow-up of the cases with CACC, whether prenatal or postnatal, the most important points to take into account are: 1) detailed ultrasound of Central Nervous System, 2) precise familial anamnesis including three generations, 3) foetal or neonatalClinical genetics  P01.270 P01.272 Genetic study of chromosome 5 aberrations Neonatal outcome of 937 children born after transfer of L. A. Hosny, S. Hammad, M. Shihab; cryopreserved embryos obtained by icsi and iVF and National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. comparison with data of fresh cycles This work presents clinical picture of 12 cases having chromosome 5 F. Belva1, E. Van den Abbeel2, M. Camus2, P. Devroey2, J. Van der Elst2, I. aberrations . Liebaers1, M. Bonduelle1; Material & Methods:- 6 children, a couple seeking premarietal genetic 1Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussel, Belgium, 2Centre for Reproductive counselling and 5 couples seeking advice for, intrauterine and neona- Medicine, UZ Brussel, Brussel, Belgium. tal deaths .Chromosomal study of the children, their parents and the Background To evaluate the safety of cryopreservation in combination couples was per formed with IVF or ICSI, prenatal diagnosis and neonatal outcome were inves- Results & discussion: 5p- in 4 children diagnosed as cri du chat tigated in children conceived from frozen-thawed ICSI embryos (cryo syndrome,three with normal karyotype of both parents . in the ICSI) and frozen-thawed IVF embryos (cryo IVF) . Data were also com- fourth child , the mother was a balanced translocation carrier pared with earlier published results from fresh ICSI and IVF embryos . t(5;22)(P14;P11 .2) , sister was unbalanced carrier t(5;22)(P14;P11 .2) Methods Questionnaire data and results of physical examination at , 5p+ and the aunt had 5p- . Fifth child had 46 , xy , del (5)P15 .2 , inv 2 months of age of 547 cryo ICSI children and 390 cryo IVF children (9)(P11;q12) showing features of both cri du chat and Goldenhar syn- were also compared with those of infants born after transfer of fresh dromes . The sixth child had 5p+ and his father was a balanced trans- embryos . location carrier t(3;5)(P22;P15) . 5 paracentric inversion was found in Results Birth characteristics were comparable for cryo ICSI and cryo the mother in a couple ,the other 5 couples showed chromosome 5 IVF . Cryo singletons showed a trend towards higher mean birthweight balanced translocation . compared to fresh singletons, in ICSI and IVF, reaching significance In one couple, the father was a balanced carrier t(5;7)(P15;P15) hav- when all cryo (ICSI plus IVF) singletons were considered . Low birth- ing a normal son with a balanced translocation and daughter with weight rate according to multiplicity was comparable between fresh multiple congenital anomalies and a normal karyotype . The present and cryo, in ICSI and IVF . Comparable rates of de-novo chromosomal study illustrates that chromosome 5 inversion or balanced transloca- anomalies (3 .2%) were found in cryo ICSI fetuses/children versus the tion in one of the parents results in chromosome 5 aberrations in the fresh ICSI group (1 .7%) (Relative Risk 1 .93; 95% CI 0 .93-3 .99) . Major offspring leading to intrauterine and neonatal deaths as well as genetic malformations were more frequently observed at birth in cryo ICSI live- syndromes . borns (6 .4%) than in cryo IVF liveborns (3 .1%) (RR 2 .08; 95% CI 1 .09- CONCLUSION:-Cytogenetic study of parents of children with chromo- 3 .95) and fresh ICSI liveborns (3 .4%) (RR 1 .89; 95% CI 1 .30-2 .76) . some 5 aberrations , couples seeking premarietal genetic counseling Conclusion In cryo ICSI versus cryo IVF, prenatal and neonatal out- or having repeated abortions, intrauterine and neonatal deaths is of come results were comparable besides a higher major malformation considerable value to give a proper genetic counseling for next gen- rate in cryo ICSI . In the total cryo group versus the total fresh group, erations . we found a higher mean birthweight in singletons and a higher major malformation rate in liveborns . P01.271 Expanding the mutational spectrum of cRLF1 in crisponi P01.273 syndrome. Autosomal Recessive cutis Laxa syndrome revisited L. Crisponi1, A. Meloni1, F. Chiappe1,2, G. Zampino3, I. Okur4, S. Danda5, G. E. Morava1, U. Kornak2, D. Lefeber1, Z. Urban3, S. Mundlos2, R. Wevers1; Crisponi6, F. Rutsch7; 1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Institute for Medical Genetics, 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Charité Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Wahington University, Ricerche, Monserrato, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, StLouis, MO, United States. 3Departments of Paediatrics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 4Gazi University The clinical spectrum of the autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndromes Medical School, Department of Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Ankara, is highly heterogeneous, both with respect to organ involvement and Turkey, 5Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Gastrointestinal Sciences, Chris- severity . One of the major diagnostic criteria for cutis laxa is to detect tian Medical College, Vellore, India, 6Casa di cura Sant’ Anna, Cagliari, Italy, abnormal elastin fibers in skin biopsy. In several other, clinically simi- 7Department of General Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, lar autosomal recessive syndromes, however, the classic histological Germany. anomalies are not present, and the clinical diagnosis remains uncer- Crisponi syndrome (CS) is a severe autosomal recessive disorder tain . In some children with cutis laxa mutations have been demonstrat- manifesting in infancy, characterized by contractions of facial muscles, ed in the elastin and fibulin genes, but the underlying genetic etiology dysmorphic features, camptodactyly, feeding and respiratory difficul- is still unknown in the majority of patients . Recently, mutations were ties . Characteristic hyperthermic crisis frequently lead to death within discovered in the ATP6V020 gene in several consanguineous families the first months of life. Surviving patients usually develop a severe with autosomal recessive cutis laxa . This genetic defect is associated progressive kyphoscoliosis requiring corset therapy or corrective sur- with abnormal glycosylation in the Golgi apparatus, leading to a distinct gery . We have also observed paradoxical sweating after exposure to combined N- and O-linked glycosylation disorder . Interestingly, similar low ambient temperature in some affected adolescents . We found that mutations were also confirmed in patients with wrinkly skin syndrome, mutations in the CRLF1 gene are associated with CS, showing allel- without the presence of severe skin symptoms with elastin deficiency. ism with Cold Induced Sweating syndrome type 1 (CISS1) . We are These findings suggest that the cutis laxa and wrinkly skin syndromes currently expanding the mutational analysis of CRLF1 gene on more are phenotypic variants of the same disorder . The variable presence cases, which have been referred to our group . Up to now we found of protein glycosylation disorders in patients with diverse phenotype in four different novel mutations; two missense mutations in an Italian the wrinkled skin-cutis laxa spectrum necessitates revisiting the defini- patient, c .[338A>T;341T>C], p .[N113I;L114P]; one nonsense mutation tion of clinical diagnostic criteria in order to offer adequate prognosis in a Turkish patient, c .829C>T, p .R277X; the deletion of the entire exon assessment and counselling . Hereby we describe the spectrum of 1 in an Indian patient . All these mutations are present on both alleles in clinical features of the various forms of ARCL syndrome . Based on the the patients . CS and CISS1 belong to a group of conditions with over- recently unravelled novel disease entity we review the genetic aspects lapping phenotypes, also including Cold-Induced Sweating syndrome including genotype-phenotype relations and suggest a practical diag- type 2 (CISS2) and Stüve-Wiedemann syndrome (SWS)/Schwartz- nostic approach . Jampel syndrome type 2 (SJS2), all caused by mutations of genes in the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor (CNTFR) pathway . We are P01.274 currently characterizing in details the clinical phenotype of all the pa- Unusual malformative association in Dandy-Walker syndrome tients collected with CS and CISS1 to establish a genotype/phenotype C. Jurca, M. Bembea, C. Skrypnyk, K. Kozma, A. Jurca, S. Bembea, S. correlation . These studies may yield valuable information for prospec- Costea; tive investigations of sweating disorders, thermoregulatory alterations Clinical Municipal Hospital “dr. G. Curteanu”, Oradea, Romania. and bone development . INTRODUCTION . Dandy-Walker syndrome (DWS) or Dandy-Walker complex (DWC) is a rare congenital anomaly (1:25000 live births)Clinical genetics  characterized by vermis agenesis or hypoplasia, cystic dilation of the reported only once, also in a patient with unusual mucocutaneous find- 4th ventricle and a large posterior fossa. The syndrome is defined by ings and deafness. Our patient confirms the pathogenic nature of this the presence of these three signs . There are three closely associated mutation, delineating associated clinical manifestations . It also points types of DWS: DWS malformation, DWS mega cisterna magna and out at the broad and overlapping nature of ectoderm derived tissue DWS variant . OBJECTIVE . Presentation and discussion of three cas- changes due to the autosomal dominant GJB2 mutations . es with different morphological and clinical forms of DWS . In all three cases, diagnosis was reached by incorporation of clinical (macroceph- P01.277 aly, seizures) and imaging (X-ray, CT, MRI) data . RESULTS . Patient X-linked deafness type 3 (DFN3) phenotype associated with a #1 was diagnosed with Dandy-Walker malformation; he has a sister paracentric inversion with Fraser syndrome . Patient #2 was diagnosed with a posterior fossa J. J. MacKenzie1,2, K. McKenzie1,2, K. K. Brown3, C. C. Morton3,4, K. J. Har- arachnoid cyst, left-sided Claude-Bernard-Horner syndrome, congeni- rison1,2; tal heart disease (coarctation of the aorta, mitral stenosis) and gas- 1Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 2Kingston General Hospital, troesophageal reflux. Patient #3 was diagnosed with Dandy-Walker Kingston, ON, Canada, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, variant in a rare association with neurofibromatosis. CONCLUSIONS. 4Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. DWS is a malformative association of the central nervous system with We report a 7 year old male with severe sensorineural hearing loss variable phenotype; it is frequently associated with other anomalies diagnosed at 8 months . His features included a round face, hyper- and an uncommon familial genetic load . telorism, epicanthic folds and a broad nasal root . Initial developmental concerns resolved once he was in an appropriate educational pro- P01.275 gram . Sequencing for GJB2 and GJB6, Fragile X testing, echocardio- De morsier syndrome - case presentation gram, and abdominal ultrasound were normal . An ECG revealed an M. Boia, A. Manea, E. S. Boia, I. Cioata, D. Iacob, M. Dima; incomplete RBBB . The CT scan revealed a large fundus of the internal University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania. auditory canals and absence of the bony partition between the fundus Introduction: De Morsier syndrome is an extremely rare affection in and the adjacent cochlear turns with a widened modiolus bilaterally . medical practice, its diagnosis in the neonate period is exceptional . It is Therefore, he was at risk for a fistulous communication between the characterized by association of structural and functional anomalies of subarachnoid space and inner ear resulting in a perilymphatic gusher nervous system and endocrine glands (especially hypothalamus and upon stapes manipulation. These findings are consistent with those hypophysis) . The lesions of nervous system can involve optical nerves described in persons with DFN3 hereditary deafness . His karyotype with optical nerve atrophy and agenesis of corpus callosum and cavum was 46,inv(X)(q13q24),Y .ish inv(X)(XIST+) . Successive FISH ex- septum pellucidum . periments refined the breakpoints to inv(X)(q21.1q22.3). The Xq21.1 Material and method: The presented patient is a girl with age of 6 breakpoint was narrowed to a 25 kb region about 450 kb centromeric month, female gender, held in our Clinics’ evidence for prematurity, ex- to the DFN3 gene, POU3F4. Other DFN3 patients lacking mutations treme hypotonia, agenesis of corpus callosum , nystagmus, eye disor- within POU3F4 have been reported. Ten had deletions centromeric to ders . The clinical - biological evolution was poor, with low level regard- POU3F4, one had an inversion and deletion centromeric to POU3F4 ing stature and weight and major delay in psyhomotor acquisitions . and one had a duplication centromeric to POU3F4 and an inversion Results: Several investigations and biological explorations were done: including POU3F4 . In the present case there were no detectabale cranial ultrasonography - which shows agenesis of corpus callosum , deletions or duplications near the Xq21 .1 breakpoint . Thus, we hy- stationary hydrocephaly ; MRI: agenesis of corpus callosum, increased pothesize that the hearing loss phenotype in this patient is caused ventricles dimensions . by dysregulation of POU3F4 due to separation from cis-acting regula- Oftalmological examination and eye ultrasound shows optical nerve tory elements . The patient’s asymptomatic mother had a karyotype of atrophy . The presence of the early puberty signs (pubic hair ) and 46,X,inv(X)(q13q24)[19]/45,X[11] . statural deficit are signs of endocrine disorders without being major modifications of hormonal doses. P01.278 Conclusions: Extremely rare affection in pediatric medical practice . Polymorphisms in the glucocorticoid receptor in children with Positive diagnosis is established based on association of major clinical difficult bronchial asthma signs: eye manifestations (optical atrophy, nystagmus) early puberty, M. V. Zhdanova, V. S. Tikhoniva, A. N. Voitovich, M. A. Bogdanova, G. A. agenesis of corpus callosum , confirmed by specific investigations: Novik, D. S. Korostovcev, V. I. Larionova; cranial ultrasonography , MRI, specific blood tests.. Saint-Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed- eration. P01.276 Objective . We investigated allele and genotype frequencies of the BclI F142L mutation in GJB2 gene in a patient with uncommon skin and Tth111I polymorphisms in the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) gene disorder and deafness among children with difficult bronchial asthma. I. Barisic1, I. Sansovic1, S. Murat-Susic2, R. L. Alford3, G. Minarik4, F. Barisic5; Patients and methods . Our study group consisted of 59 children (43 1Children’s University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Der- boys and 16 girls) in age of 2-17 suffering from difficult asthma and matology, Clinical Hospital Centre Salata, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Bobby R. Alford control group consisted of 151 healthy children (78 boys and 73 girls) Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery , Baylor College of, in age of 4-17 . The BclI and Tth111I polymorphisms were detected Huston, TX, United States, 4Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, by PCR-RFLP using the primers and methods previously described Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Health Care Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. (Fleury I . et al ., 2003; Van Rossum EFC . et al ., 2004) . Data were com- Dominant mutations in the human GJB2 gene, which encodes con- pared through Chi-square test . nexin 26 (Cx26) can cause non-syndromic hearing loss, but can also Results . Table 1 . Genotype frequencies in asthma patients and con- manifest with various skin disorders including palmoplantar kerato- trols sis (PPK), Vohwinkel syndrome, Bart-Pumphrey syndrome (BPS) Study group (59) Control group (151) and keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome . We present a girl Genotypes boys girls boys girls with congenital hearing impairment, plantar keratosis, extensive skin 43 (72,9%) 16 (27 .1%) 78 (51,7%) 73 (48,3%) changes in form of follicular inflammatory papules, and erythematous, BclI-CC 39,5 % 37,5 % 32% 34,2% often scaly patches affecting whole body, including scalp and face . BclI-CG 48,8 % 50 % 51,3% 52,1% BclI-GG 11,6 % 12,5 % 16,7% 13,7% In addition, she had extensive mucosal involvement including oral Tth111I-CC 36,6 % 37,5 % 47 .4% 49 .3% and esophageal mucosa and perigenital region . Her hair was sparse Tth111I-CT 56 % 50 % 43 .6% 39 .7% and thin, she had submucosal cleft palate, and hypodontia . No other Tth111I-TT 7,3 % 12,5 % 9 .0% 11 .0% abnormalities were observed . Laboratory studies excluded immune/ Conclusion. Allele and genotype distributions of BclI and Tth111I polymorphisms of autoimmune deficiencies. Karyotype and FISH for 22q11.2 microdele- the GR gene were similar in asthma patients and controls and previously reported tion were normal . Sequencing of the coding region of the GJB2 gene populations. There were no significant differences in allele and genotype frequencies revealed a de novo heterozygous F142L mutation located in the third in groups of children with different sex. transmembrane domain of the Cx26 gene . This mutation has beenClinical genetics 00 P01.279 cific (tel) DNA-probes for chromosome 8. FISH characterization of the Dilated cardiomyopathy with hearing loss - a new form? abnormal chromosome with wcp 8 and tel 8p probes was estimated E. V. Zaklyazminskaya1, A. Revishvili2, T. Nikolaishvili2, A. Polyakov1; as duplication of a short-arm segment 8p23: 46,XX, add(8)(p23) . ish 1Center of Molecular Genetics, Odintsovo, Russian Federation, 2Bakulev’s dup(8)(p23)(wcp8+,pter+) (ISCN 2005) . Euchromatic abnormality of no Scientific Center for Cardiac Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. phenotypic consequence such as euchromatic duplication in terminal Background: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a myocardial disorder region p23 .1-p23 .3 of chromosome 8 is known as chromosome vari- characterized by ventricular dilatation, and impaired systolic function ant . Variant chromosomes being normal chromosomes behave nor- leading to heart failure and death . To date 12 genes and 10 chromo- mally at meiosis and show 1:1 segregation . A person carrying a variant somal loci have been associated with this condition, but only autoso- chromosome has no increased risk for having abnormal offspring . Nor- mal-dominant DCM, 1J (MIM: #605362) caused by mutations in EYA4 mal results of maternal serum biochemical screening and high quality gene is also associated with sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) . ultrasound scanning during the pregnancy had allowed to avoid an Methods: Clinical examination of parents and four children was per- invasive procedure . After 40 weeks of pregnancy there was born male formed, including ECG, Holter, Echo-CG; blood and urine biochemis- newborn without any clinical signs of chromosomal pathology . try, and tandem mass-spectrometry (to exclude mitochondrial diseas- es) . The phenotype of a deceased sibling was obtained from hospital P01.282 and out-patient information . Genetic testing was performed by direct DYscERNE: An electronic Dysmorphology Diagnostic system sequencing of coding and adjacent intronic areas of the EYA4 gene . (DDs) Results: An Uygur family with DCM was investigated . The proband S. Gardner1, P. Griffiths1, K. Strong1, R. Day1, D. Donnai1, B. Kerr1, H. Brunner2, and the oldest brother had progressive SNHL, complete A-V block, B. Dallapiccola3, K. Devriendt4, M. Krajewska-Walasek5, N. Philip6, J. Clayton- DCM, and died due to heart failure at the age of 14 y .o . and 9 y .o ., Smith1; respectively . Two younger brothers had incomplete A-V block, LBBB, 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2UMC St Radbound, and SNHL at the age 6 y .o . and 11 y .o . All symptoms became more Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4KU pronounced with age . A sister (9 y . o .) has normal hearing but A-B Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5IP-CZD, Warsaw, Poland, 6Hopitaux de Marseille, block(I) and incomplete LBBB. Both parents are healthy. We didn’t find Marseille, France. any mutations of EYA4 gene . Unfortunately, the small size of the fam- Over 2,500 rare and difficult to diagnose conditions presenting with ily and unclear phenotype of the 9 y .o . girl precludes informative link- patterns of birth defects have been identified. The rarity of these dys- age analysis . Pedigree analysis reveals recessive inheritance of DCM, morphic conditions means that even in Centres of Expertise, experi- conduction defects and SNHL (autosomal or X-linked) in this Uygur ence may be limited resulting in delayed or uncertain diagnosis . Mak- family . We propose that this family has a novel genetic form of DCM . ing a correct diagnosis is the cornerstone of patient management, en- abling clinicians to locate other patients with the same condition, share P01.280 clinical experience and increase individual and collective knowledge Novel tyrosine Hydroxylase Gene mutation in three turkish about rare conditions . siblings With Dopamine-Responsive Dystonia One of the main aims of the DYSCERNE project (www .dyscerne .org) E. Karaca, S. Basaran Yılmaz, G. Yesil, A. Yuksel; is to develop an electronic Dysmorphology Diagnostic System (DDS) Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genet- which will link existing European Centres of Expertise to form a power- ics, Istanbul, Turkey. ful diagnostic resource for rare dysmorphic conditions . Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a rare, autosomal dominant (GTP- The DDS will allow clinicians to submit difficult to diagnose cases, for cyclohydroxylase gene mutation) or rarely recessive (tyrosine hy- evaluation by an international panel of experts . A diagnostic report in- droxylase gene mutation) inherited disorder . Both enzymes take part cluding suggested management plans for the patient will be prepared in dopamine synthesis. Their deficiencies cause the dopamine level from the consensus of expert opinions and sent to the submitting clini- reduction. The first clinical symptoms occur in the childhood cian . Case histories will be stored in an archive which will be reviewed We report here three siblings who were borned to first cousins; with a periodically . novel recessive mutation in Tyrosine hydroxylase gene that results in An on-line educational tool for the description of dysmorphic features dopa- responsive dystonia . Older brothers were monozygotic twins . will also be developed which will increase diagnostic skills in the evalu- They are now at the age of 46/12 and 19/12 years . All of them have de- ation of rare dysmorphic diseases . velopment delay and also motor dysfunction . They displayed extrapy- The DDS will facilitate rapid and equitable access for clinicians from all ramidal signs in early infancy. The clinical diagnoses were confirmed EU countries to expert opinions . It will increase capacity and accuracy by mutation analyses of Tyrosine hydroxylase gene which detected of diagnoses and decrease time from presentation to diagnosis . This a novel mutation of P492R (1475 C>G) in the homozygotic state . Af- will facilitate definition and classification of rare dysmorphic conditions ter diagnosis, L-DOPA treatment was started, however clinical picture and promote further clinical research into these complex disorders . did not change . Therefore selegiline (selective MAO-B inhibitor) was added to therapy . Low dose L-DOPA and selegiline markedly improved P01.283 clinical picture . clinical Variability in Acro-(cardio)-Facial-syndrome Here we are presenting the clinical features and outcomes of the L- A. Kariminejad1, B. Bozorgmehr1, M. A. Sedighi Gila2, N. Almadani1, M. H. DOPA/Selegiline treatment in three siblings with Dopa-responsive dys- Kariminejad1; tonia results from a novel recessive mutation in Tyrosine hydroxylase 1Kariminejad & Najmabadi Genetic and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic gene, reviewing of the literature . Republic of Iran, 2Department of Andrology, Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P01.281 In 1987 Richieri-Costa and Orquizas described a Brazilian patient born Familial duplication 8p without phenotypic effect to consanguineous parents with ectrodactyly, cleft lip/palate and con- E. G. Okuneva, N. V. Shilova, N. Y. Kuzina, T. V. Zolotukhina; genital heart defect . Four additional cases with ectrodactyly, genital Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. anomalies, congenital heart defect and cleft lip/palate or high arched We report a family where 3 members have rearrangement of chromo- palate have been published [Giannotti et al ., 1995; Guion-Almeida et some 8 with normal phenotype . A proband 14-year-old girl was tested al ., 2000; and Mingarelli et al ., 2005] . because of hypogonadism . G-banded chromosome studies were car- Giannotti et al . [1995] reported on a brother and sister with cleft palate, ried out and showed karyotype 46, XX, der (8) . Her father’s karyotype cardiac defect, genital anomalies and ectrodactyly, suggesting the ac- was normal - 46, XY, but mother and 28-year-old sister had the same ronym CCGE standing for cleft palate, cardiac defect, genital anoma- chromosome 8 rearrangement without any clinical signs . The elder lies and ectrodactyly . An autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance sister’s 3-year-old daughter had normal phenotype . was suggested considering these pedigrees . Guion-Almeida reported Later at the age of 18 the proband was tested again during pregnancy . on a 4-month-old infant with ectrodactyly, clefting ear anomaly, CHD, An abnormal chromosome 8 with additional material of unknown origin cortical atrophy of the brain and growth retardation, with possible acro- on the terminal region of short arm was tested. To identify this finding cardio-facial Syndrome (ACFS) . FISH analysis was performed using painting (wcp) and telomere spe- We report on a 25-year-old man with ectrodactyly and genital anoma-Clinical genetics 0 lies whose parents are first cousins. Their second child died 4 days base currently reports >5000 diseases: 44% of them are designated after birth with severe limb defects and imperforate anus . Our patient by eponyms . may represent clinical variability of the acro-cardio-facial syndrome . If We wondered how eponyms are perceived among clinical geneticists our case has the ACF syndrome, it would be the mildest form of this in Italy . By administering a questionnaire on the use of eponyms, we condition . wanted to explore also the attitude of clinical geneticists towards no- menclature and its regulation . The home-made, Likert-type question- P01.284 naire consisted of 10 items exploring the attitude towards eponyms Unusual pattern of inheritance and orodental changes in the through the following domains: role of historical aspects, value in Ellis-van creveld syndrome learning, use in clinical practice, facilitation of scientific discussion, M. I. Mostafa, S. A. Temtamy, M. A. El-Gammal, I. M. Mazen; convenience . Two additional items pertained to the need for rules in National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. nomenclature . Scores were modelled as discrete variables and anal- Ellis-van Creveld (EVC) syndrome (chondroectodermal dysplasia, ysed by descriptive statistics . mesoectodermal dysplasia, OMIM 225500) is an autosomal recessive We collected 102 (84%) fully filled-in questionnaires. The median val- skeletal dysplasia characterized by short limbs, short ribs, postaxial ue of the total score modelling the attitude towards eponyms was close polydactyly and dysplastic nails and teeth . Oral manifestations tend to to neutrality, with a trend in favour of eponyms . When the participants be pathognomonic such as multiple broad labial frenula and congenital were asked to state a radical position (keep or abolish), 73% answered missing teeth . to prefer keeping use of eponyms. We found a marginally significant In this study we report 3 Egyptian families with six cases of EVC syn- correlation between attitude in favour of eponyms and both age and drome . years of practice . Regardless their position with respect to eponyms, An unusual pattern of inheritance with father to son or to daughter the vast majority stated that the use of nomenclatures should be ruled transmission was observed in 2 consanguineous families thus dem- by guidelines. Our findings provided a surprising impression of interest onstrating quasidominant inheritance, probably for the first time in the in the subject and underscored the need for recommendations . literature . A new consistent orodental anomaly found in all our cases was bifid tip of the tongue. We emphasize study of orodental anoma- P01.287 lies in future cases for accurate diagnosis of Ellis-van Creveld syn- molecular diagnosis of familial mediterranean fever in drome and its probable differential diagnosis from Weyers Acrodental Armenians dysostosis . T. F. Sarkisian, H. S. Hajrapetyan, G. R. Shahsuvaryan, A. A. Beglaryan, A. R. Egiazaryan; P01.285 Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis: A propos of a boy with Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited, recessively trans- an unusual pattern of genital anomalies mitted inflammatory condition usually occurred in populations from A. P. Marques-de-Faria, G. Guerra-Júnior, S. G. Moraes, A. Maciel-Guerra; Mediterranean decent . The prevalence of heterozygous carriers of one State University of Campinas (UNICAMP) School of Medicine, Campinas, of the mutations of MEFV gene is as high as 1 in 5 healthy individuals Brazil. in Armenians . Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis (ECCL) is a sporadic, con- Genetic testing of this rare Mendelian disorder (MIM no 249100) is effi- genital neurocutaneous disorder, characterized by cerebral, ocular cient for early diagnosis, especially for atypic cases . Certain mutations and cutaneous abnormalies, including asymmetrical cerebral atrophy, have significant correlation with renal amyloidosis, the most severe intracranial and spinal lipomas, mental retardation and/or epilepsy, possible manifestation of FMF . Also genetic testing is very important epibulbar dermoids or choristomas, alopecia, facial skin-tags, cranio- for colchicine therapy correction . facial lipomas and a peculiar hairless fatty tissue nevus of the scalp, Twelve MEFV mutations are identified in more than 8000 FMF patients designated as psiloliparus . The pathogenesis remains undetermined; (heterozygotes, homozygotes and compound heterozygotes) in com- one hypothesis is a lethal autosomal dominant mutation only surviving parison with healthy individuals has revealed the most frequent muta- in a mosaic state . There is a considerable overlap with other neuroec- tions and genotypes . Every week we have 35-50 new cases . We have todermal disorders, as oculocutaneous syndrome (OCCS), Goldenhar revealed that FMF is caused by presense of single mutation in 18 .6% syndrome, and epidermal nevus syndrome . Recently, some clinical of heterozygote carriers . features of ECCL and OCCS were reviewed and diagnostic criteria Our results confirm that the MEFV gene analysis provides the objec- were established . Herein, we describe a male infant whose clinical tive diagnostic criterion for FMF (characterisation of the two MEFV signs suggest ECCL . Besides the main features, he also had a com- mutated alleles in more than 90% of the patients) . Molecular testing pound odontoma, already reported but not frequent in ECCL and in is also used to screen the MEFV gene for mutations in patients with similar conditions . However, the pattern of genital anomalies has not a clinical suspicion of FMF . We also demonstrated the unfavourable been reported so far . It includes asymmetrical penoscrotal transposi- prognostic value of the M694V homozygous genotype, and provided tion, ectopic left hypoplasic hemiscrotum, and a pedunculated perineal the first molecular evidence for incomplete penetrance and pseudo- mass, whose aspect suggested a rudimentar accessory scrotum; the dominant transmission of the disease . Overall, these data, which con- phallus had a normal length with an increase of subcutaneous tissue in firm the involvement of the MEFV gene in the development of FMF, prepucial region . This phenotype is quite rare and has been described should be essential in clinical practice, leading to new ways of manag- in association with perineal lipoma or lipoblastoma, which probably ment and treatment of FMF patients . arose in the perineum and divided the moving labioscrotal swelling into three parts, during early fetal life . The same mechanism is proposed P01.288 in present case, considering that in ECCL there are a few reports of midline Facial Defects with Hypertelorism: investigation of lipomas, lipomatous mass and/or skin-tags located outside the cranio- neuropsychological aspects and 22q11.2 deletion by FisH facial region, including in genital area . M. Simioni, S. D. A. Giffoni, É. L. Freitas, T. P. Vieira, I. E. Guimarães, S. M. Ciasca, I. Lopes-Cendes, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; P01.286 Faculdade de Ciências Médicas - UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. „stat rosa pristina nomine, nomina nuda tenemus“: a survey on Midline facial defects with hypertelorism (MFDH) are a group of rare attitude of italian clinical geneticists towards eponyms and heterogeneous condition involving anomalies of frontonasal pro- E. Di Maria1,2, R. Tenconi3; cess . In some patients it is associated with structural and functional 1Dept. of Neuroscience, Ophthalmology and Genetics, University of Genova, anomalies of the central nervous system . These CNS abnormalities Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory of Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Clinical have similarity with those found in patients with 22q11 .2 deletion syn- Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. dromes . In addition, there are some isolated reports of MFDH in which An eponym is a person after whom a discovery, invention, etc ., is 22q11 .2 deletion were detected . Furthermore, even in the absence of named . Eponyms are widely used in all clinical disciplines . Recently, a anatomical abnormalities detected by neuroimaging, functional dis- provocative editorial published in British Medical Journal argued that abilities could be present in patients with MFDH, which would be better their use should be abandoned . The London Dysmorphology Data- investigated by neuropsychological assessment . Therefore, the mainClinical genetics 0 objectives of our study were to characterize the neuropsychological mately 70% of Iranian PCG patients and that the common mutations in aspects of patients with MFDH, to correlate them with neuroimaging the population are G61E, R368H, R390H, and R469W . findings and to investigate the 22q11.2 deletion in these patients. Neu- We report here the observation of highly variable expression of pri- ropsychological evaluation was performed using the Luria Nebraska mary congenital glaucoma in two individuals who are identical twins . Battery and WISC for children and WAIS for adults; the 22q11 .2 dele- Both carried the G61E mutation in the homozygous sate . The identical tion was investigated by FISH . Heterogeneous results on neuropsy- twin status of the individuals was confirmed using several microsatel- chological evaluation involved difficulties cognitive domains such as lite markers . picture arrangement, expressive language, comprehension, arithme- tic, digit span and motors ability . These abnormalities are similar, in P01.291 part, to those reported in deletion of 22q11 .2 region, which was not Cloning & Expression of Human rFVII in Insect Cells detected in all cases . In conclusion, we found a relationship between N. Masroori, M. Habibi Roudkenar PhD; neuropsychological and radiological CNS alterations in MFDH . As the Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 22q11 .2 region is recognized as critical for embryonary development Hemophilia is the one of the most prevalent genetic disorders . It is of midline, in view of the clinical-genetic heterogeneity and the speci- inherited as sex-linked pattern . Obtaining factor from plasma or by re- fied of the probe used, the involvement of 22q11.2 region in the etiol- combinant technology, in high dose is one of the major challenges ogy of MFDH needs to be further investigated . for treatment of Hemophilia . However 25% of these patients naturally raised antibody against factor VIII . Viral contamination and availability P01.289 in very low dose is another challenge to obtain factor VIII from plasma . Associated malformations in patients with gastroschisis and Administration of Recombinant factor VII for patients who raised an- omphalocele tibody against FVIII can be one of the solution for mention problem . C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. Roth; Isolation, cloning and expression of recombinant FVII by Gateway Genetique medicale, Strasbourg, France. technology was the aim of this study . Factor VII gene was isolated from The etiology of gastroschisis and omphalocele (exomphalos) is unclear HepG cell line and cloned to TOPO vector by TOPO cloning method . 2 and their pathogenesis is controversial . However, the reported types The construct was ligated to Baculovirus destination vector by LR re- and frequency of malformations associated with omphalocele and gas- combination using getaway technology and the recombinant virus was troschisis vary between studies . The purpose of this investigation was transfected to, insect cell line, SF9 . Expression of recombinant FVII to assess, in a geographically defined population, the prevalences at was detected by SDS-PAGE, ELISA and western blot analysis . birth of associated malformations in patients with omphalocele and gas- troschisis which were ascertained between 1979 and 2003 in 334,262 P01.292 consecutive births . Of the 86 patients with omphalocele, 64 (74 .4%) A prenatally detected case of congenital hepatoblastoma had associated malformations including chromosomal abnormalities H. Ergin1, B. Yildirim2, E. Dagdeviren1, B. Yagci3, F. Ozen4, N. Sen Turk5, S. E. (25 cases,29 .0%); non chromosomal recognized syndromes including Duzcan5; Beckwith-Wiedemann, Goltz, Marshall-Smith, Meckel-Gruber, Oto-pa- 1Department of Pediatrics, Pamukkale University Faculty of Medicine, Denizli, lato-digital type II, CHARGE, and fetal valproate; sequences, including Turkey, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pamukkale University ectopia cordis, body stalk anomaly, exstrophy of bladder, exstrophy Faculty of Medicine, Denizli, Turkey, 3Department of Radiology, Pamukkale of cloaca, and OEIS; malformation complex including Pentalogy of University Faculty of Medicine, Denizli, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatrics, Ege Cantrell, and patients with non syndromic multiple congenital anoma- Hospital, Denizli, Turkey, 5Department of Pathology, Pamukkale University lies (MCA) (26 cases, 30 .2%) . Malformations of the musculoskeletal Faculty of Medicine, Denizli, Turkey. system (23 .5%), the urogenital system (20 .4%), the cardiovascular Hepatoblastoma is a rare tumor of childhood . The incidence of hepa- system(15 .1%), and the central nervous system(9 .1%), were the most toblastoma in the first year of life is about one in a million. The mean common other congenital anomalies occurring in patients with ompha- time of its onset is 14 to 24 months . Forty-two congenital hepatoblas- locele and MCA . For gastroschisis, the total prevalence was 1 .79 per toma cases were reported so far . Among 42 congenital hepatoblas- 10,000. However, there was a significant increase over the study pe- toma patients, seven cases have been detected in the prenatal pe- riod in the total prevalence. The maternal age-specific prevalence was riod . Only one out of seven cases detected in the prenatal period has highest in the 15-19 year age group . Of the 60 patients with gastroschi- been diagnosed as hepatoblastoma . The etiology of hepatoblastoma sis, 10 (16 .6%) had associated malformations including one skeletal is unknown . However, it has been shown to be associated with pre- dysplasia, one amyoplasia congenita, and 7 non syndromic MCA . In maturity, low birth weight, hepatitis B, familial adenomatous polyposis, conclusion the overall prevalences of malformations associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and hemihypertrophy . In this report, omphalocele and gastroschisis are quite different and emphasizes the we report a rare case of hepatoblastoma detected before birth and need for a thorough screening of cases for other malformations . confirmed by postmortem. P01.290 P01.293 Discordance of primary congenital glaucoma in monozygotic Genotype-phenotype correlation in hereditary hemorrhagic twins telangiectasia in patients with ACVRL mutations: is c.1112dupG F. Suri1,2, S. Paylakhi3, S. Yazdani4, S. Zeinali5, M. Sajedifar6, S. Zargar1, E. mutation a milder mutation? Elahi1,2; S. Dupuis-Girod1, S. Giraud1, E. Decullier1, B. Gilbert-Dussardier2, M. Carette3, 1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, G. Plessis4, S. Riviere5, P. Magro6, G. Lesca1, P. Edery1, A. Calender1, H. Plau- Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotech- chu1; nology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3School of Biology, University College 1Hospices Civils de Lyon, LYON, France, 2Hôpital Jean Bernard, POITIERS, of Science, University of Tarbiat Modarres, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, France, 3Assistance Publique - hôpitaux de Paris, PARIS, France, 4Hôpital Côte 4Ophthalmic Research Center, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sci- de Nacre, CAEN, France, 5Hôpital Saint Eloi, Montpellier, France, 6Hôpital Bret- ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Biotechnology Department, Pastuer onneau, TOURS, France. Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Kausar Biotechnology Com- Introduction: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an au- pany, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. tosomal dominant disorder characterized by recurrent epistaxis, cu- Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies character- taneous telangiectasia, and visceral arteriovenous malformations ized by degeneration of the optic nerve, usually associated with elevat- (AVMs) that affecting lungs (PAVM), gastrointestinal tract (DAVM), liver ed intraocular pressure . It is the cause of 15% of blindness worldwide . (HAVM), and brain (CAVM) and resulting from mutations in two major Primary Congenital Glaucoma (PCG), one of the three major forms of genes: ENG (HHT1) or ACVRL1 (HHT2) . the disease, becomes apparent at birth or before the age of three and Our objective was to determine the influence of c.1112dupG mutation is a major cause of childhood blindness . Mutations in both alleles of on clinical phenotype in HHT2 patients . the cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) gene, which is the only gene thus Methods: We retrospectively compared the frequency of clinical fea- far linked to PCG, result in the disease phenotype . It has been recently tures of HHT between a subgroup of patients with mutation c .1112dupG shown that mutations in this gene are cause of disease in approxi- (group A) and those with the other ACVRL1 mutations (group B), usingClinical genetics 0 a clinical HHT database (CIROCO), build by the HHT reference centre he had cortical atrophy) . in France and used by the French-Italian Network . Study of HD-like disorders is warranted, whenever HD has been ex- Results: 351 HHT2 patients were included in 6 HHT centres in France . cluded and it is clinically indicated . Eighty three patients were in group A and 268 patients were in group B . Epistaxis were present in both groups and occurred at a younger age P01.296 in group B patients (Median = 16 vs 21 years old, p<0 .001) . Pulmo- Lifestyle factors and the age at onset of Huntington disease nary involvement appeared to be significantly more frequent in group B M. Delatycki1,2, Z. Horton1, L. Tippett3, V. Hogg3, V. Collins1,2, A. Churchyard4, patients (8 vs 18 %, p=0 .03) . Frequency of hepatic, digestive and neu- D. Velakoulis5, K. Trembath1; rological AVM were not significantly different in both group but hepatic 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Genetic Health AVM were more severe in group B . Indeed, no hepatic transplantation Services Victoria, Parkville, Australia, 3The University of Auckland, Auckland, were performed in group A (0 versus 5%, p= 0 .04) . New Zealand, 4Monash Medical Centre, Clayton, Australia, 5Royal Melbourne Conclusion: This study pointed out major differences between clinical Hospital, Parkville, Australia. expression of ACVRL1 mutation c .1112dupG, which appeared to be Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative milder, than other ACVRL1 mutation phenotypes . disorder due to an expanded CAG repeat in the IT15 gene . Transgenic HD mouse model studies have shown that raising mice in an enriched P01.294 environment delays the onset of symptoms, leading us to consider Holoprosencephaly mutations in the Dutch population whether pre-morbid lifestyle affects age-at-onset in humans . Subjects A. D. Paulussen, D. Tserpelis, S. Spierts, H. J. Smeets, J. Herbergs; with symptomatic HD were interviewed using a questionnaire to as- Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. certain pre-morbid lifestyle during three life stages (teens, 20s/30s, Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common severe malformation of the 40s/50s). Recorded activities were classified as physical, intellectual brain that involves abnormal formation and septation of the developing or passive, and activity scores generated . Surveys were matched with central nervous system . The prevalence is 1:250 during early embryo- the subject’s age-at-onset and CAG repeat length . genesis, but the live born prevalence is only 1:16000 . The etiology Preliminary analysis (n=92) showed a mean age-at-onset of 44 .9 of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can include both a terato- years (range 21-76), with a strong inverse correlation to CAG repeat genic and/or genetic basis . We studied four genes known to be in- length (r=-0 .728, p<0 .001) . Linear regression indicated a negative as- volved in HPE, namely SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF by sequence and sociation between average pre-morbid leisure-time passivity and age- MLPA analysis . A series of in total 72 sporadic and familial HPE cases at-onset (b=-0 .744, R2=0.109, p=0.001) that remained significant when with a variable clinical spectrum has been analysed . We detected 17 adjusted for CAG repeat length (b=-0 .333, R2=0 .55, p=0 .048) . This as- pathogenic mutations (24%) in total, of which 2 in SHH, 6 in ZIC2 and sociation was most apparent for passivity during the teens and in men . 9 in SIX3 . Only one mutation (Alanine-tract expansion in ZIC2) was Comparison of the mean age-at-onset in groups below and above the reported previously and detected twice in this population, all others median passivity score showed a difference of 6 .0 years (95%CI=1 .2 were novel . Two mutations were complete gene deletions (one SIX3, to 10.7). No significant relationship was demonstrated between aver- one ZIC2 deletion) of which the deletion sizes were further character- age intellectual or average physical leisure-time activity and age-at- ized using the 250K nsp I Affymetrix SNP array . The familial muta- onset or CAG repeat length . Data from over 150 interviews in Australia tions displayed great phenotypic heterogeneity of the disease, which and New Zealand will be presented . makes it difficult to establish genotype-phenotype correlations. This Passivity in leisure-time is associated with age-at-onset of HD, and phenotypic variability may be due both to environmental factors and CAG repeat length, suggesting that passivity contributes to earlier on- to potential modifier genes. HPE development is probably a multihit set of symptoms, or is a preclinical manifestation of HD, more apparent process , which implicates more genes; illustrating the importance of in those with larger CAG repeat lengths . further identification of new genes. P01.297 P01.295 Familial autosomal dominant hyperinsulinism due to SUR Huntington disease and Huntington-like phenotype: 10 years of (ABCC) mutation local molecular diagnostic experience G. Morin1, E. Gailly1, C. Bellanné-Chantelot2, F. Moreau3, M. Mathieu1, A. C. Santos1, J. Cerqueira1, P. Magalhães1, M. Costa2, L. Jardim3, C. Costa4, C. Léké3; Vitor5, P. Coutinho6, P. Maciel2, J. Sequeiros1,7; 1Unité de Génétique Clinique, Amiens, France, 2UF de Génétique des Maladies 1IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, 2ICVS - Insti- Métaboliques - Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 3Unité de tuto de Investigação em Ciências da Vida e Saúde, Braga, Portugal, 3Hospital Néonatologie, Amiens, France. Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Hospital Fernando Fonseca, Familial congenital hyperinsulinism is responsible of prolonged hy- Amadora, Portugal, 5Hospital São Sebastião, Sta Maria da Feira, Portugal, poglycemia, secondary to mutations of genes involved in the regula- 6Hospital São Sebastião, Sta Maria da Feira, Portugal, 7ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. tion pathway of insulin secretion by β Langerhans cells. Most of the CGPP/IBMC, is the reference laboratory for HD in Portugal: we per- cases are in relation with recessive mutations of two genes, located in formed 965 HD tests over the past ten years: 693 requests for confir- 11p15 .1, named SUR1 (ABCC8) and KIR6.2 (KCNJ11), and coding for mation/exclusion of a clinical diagnosis, 258 presymptomatic and 14 two subunits of the same potassium channel . prenatal tests . Dominant mutations of SUR1 (ABCC8) were only published in two Only 58% of all diagnostic requests were confirmed; from those ex- families reported by Thornton (1998 and 2003) and Huopio (2000 and cluded, we selected 200 patients and studied them for HD-Like genes: 2003) . In these families, the hypoglycaemia was sensible to diazoxide . an eight extra octapeptide repeats in the PRNP gene (HDL1); a CTG/ In the family reported by Huopio, the eventuality of transformation in CAG repeat in the junctophilin (JPH3) gene (HDL2); a CAG expansion diabetes with age was noticed . in two SCA genes - ATN1 (DRPLA) and TBP (HDL4/SCA17); as well We report the observation of a female newborn presenting with severe as other included in the differential diagnosis of HD: neuroferritinopa- hypoglycaemia at 36 hours of life, requiring continuous gastric nutrition thy (FTL gene) and benign hereditary chorea (TITF1 mutations) . at the beginning, but compatible with a normal breath feeding when Expansion of CAG repeats in ATN1 and the insertion on PRNP were diazoxide was started . Her father had similar symptoms in childhood, excluded in all cases . One family (mother and son with chorea since improved by diazoxide . In the two patients, a missense heterozygous childhood, myoclonus, falls and dysarthria) carried a nonsense mu- mutation of SUR1 (ABCC8) was discovered (2143G>A - V715M) . tation in TITF1 . A FTL mutation was detected in one Gypsy family Screening of other genes involved in familial dominant hyperinsulinism (mother asymptomatic and son with mild non-progressive mental re- was negative (HNF4, KIR6.2) . The mutation was not present in the two tardation, and gait disturbances by age 13; both had with pallidal in- paternal grand-parents of the index case . volvement on MRI) . We found also a CAG expansion in TBP (a patient with behavioural disturbances, epilepsy, aphasia, imbalance, and gait ataxia) . Finally, we found a 47 CTG/CAG expansion in the JPH3 gene, in a Brazilian patient (onset at age 44 years of bradipsychism, mutism, dysarthria, cognitive deterioration and chorea, as well as ataxic gait;Clinical genetics 0 P01.298 P01.300 Hyperphosphatasia with seizures, neurologic deficit and Prevalence and phenotypic characteristics associated characteristic facial features: Five new cases of mabry with myBPc3 mutations in patients with hypertrophic syndrome cardiomyopathy M. D. Thompson1, M. M. Nezarati2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach3, P. Meinecke4, R. M. Hermida-Prieto, M. I. Rodríguez-García, M. Ortiz, R. Barriales, X. Fernan- Mendoza-Londono5, A. Munnich6, D. E. C. Cole7; dez, L. Cazón, I. Alvariño, A. Castro-Beiras, L. Monserrat; 1Dept of Lab Medicine & Pathobiology, Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Instituto de Ciencias de la Salud, La Coruña, Spain. 2Dept of Genetics, North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3In- Background: Mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) and stitut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Germany, Lübeck, Germany, myosin-binding protein C (MyBPC3) genes are the most frequent 4Abteilung Medizinische Genetik, Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, causes of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) . MyBPC3 mutations Germany, 5Dept of Pediatrics, Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Hôpital have been associated with later diagnosis and less hypertrophy than Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Dept of Lab Medicine and Pathobiol- MYH7 mutations . Our objectives were to compare the prevalence of ogy & Dept of Pediatrics, Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. mutations and the phenotypic characteristics associated with both In 1970, Mabry et al . described multiple cases of persistent hyper- genes in our patients with HCM . phosphatasia associated with developmental delay and seizures in a Methods: SSCP analysis and sequencing of fragments with abnormal single consanguineous family (OMIM#239300) . The nosology of this MyBPC3 gene mobility were carried out in 130 consecutive index pa- condition, however, is uncertain. We report five new cases that help tients with HCM previously studied for the MHY7 gene (10% mutated) . delineate this disorder and provide further evidence favouring autoso- The phenotypes of patients with and without mutations in both genes mal recessive inheritance, with sib recurrence in one instance (French were compared . non-consanguinous parents), and consanguinity (Lebanese parents) Results: We identified 16 MyBPC3 different mutations (8 of them nov- in another. Common to all five children is the Mabry triad of tonic-clonic el) in 20 patients (15 .4%) . Age at diagnosis was similar in MyBPC3 vs . seizures (usually beginning around one year of age), moderate to se- MYH7 patients (46 .2 vs . 46 .0, p ns) . More than 50% (11) of MyBPC3 vere developmental delay, and persistently elevated alkaline phospha- mutated patients were diagnosed before 50 years of age, 35% (7) < tase activity, without any indication of liver or metabolic bone disease . 40 and 15% (3) < 30 . MyBPC3 patients had lower maximal thickness The degree of hyperphosphatasia varies considerably amongst cases (25 .15 vs . 30 .45 mm, p=0 .045) than those with mutations in MYH7, but (~1 .3 to 20 times the upper age-adjusted reference limit) . In addition, higher than non-mutated patients (22 .17 mm, p=0 .034) . Thirty percent all five display a common facial dysmorphism, characterized by hyper- of MyBPC3 patients had a maximal wall thickness ≥ 28 mm (2 of them telorism, broad nasal bridge, and tented mouth . The three singleton with a thickness >40 mm were younger than 45 years old) . cases also have brachytelephalangy, but there is no evidence of skel- Conclusions: MyBPC3 mutations were present in 15 .4% of our fami- etal anomalies in the two siblings. In the family first described by Mabry lies . Patients with MyBPC3 gene mutations were not older at diagnosis et al ., at least one affected was noted to have intracellular inclusions than patients with MYH7 mutations . MyBPC3 mutations may appear in on biopsy of rectal mucosa but not liver . In three of our cases, inclu- young patients with severe hypertrophy . sions have been observed in cultured cells, but the cells are not uni- formly perturbed and characterization is still in progress . We are aware P01.301 of additional cases in the literature which suggest a wider phenotypic Espectrum of mutations in myBPc3 gene in 130 families with spectrum, but they are consistent with an autosomal recessive con- hypertrofic cardiomyopathy dition characterized by hyperphosphatasia, seizures, and neurologic M. I. Rodríguez-García, L. Monserrat, L. Cazón, M. Ortiz, I. Alvariño, R. Bar- deficit - a disorder we call Mabry syndrome. riales, X. Fernández, A. Castro-Beiras, M. Hermida-Prieto; Instituto Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud, A Coruña, Spain. P01.299 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), an autosomal-dominant disorder The yield of cascade screening and risk stratification for sudden and the leading cause of sudden cardiac death in the young, is caused cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mYBPc3 gene by mutations in genes encoding sarcomeric proteins . One of the most mutation carriers common genetic causes for HCM involves mutations is MYBPC3, the I. Christiaans1, E. Birnie2, I. M. van Langen1, G. J. Bonsel2, A. A. M. Wilde3; gene encoding cardiac myosin binding protein C . 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The To determine the spectrum of mutations in MyBPC3 gene, 130 index Netherlands, 2Institute of Health Policy and Management, Erasmus Medical cases were tested . Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Academic A total of 16 different mutations, including 8 novel ones, were iden- Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. tified in 20 families (15.4%): 9 missense (D75N,A216T,V471E,R49 Background: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common auto- 5W,R502Q[in 2 families], E542Q[in 3 families],T957S,R1022P[in 2 somal dominant heart disease associated with heart failure and sud- families],E1179K, 4 delections (Q327fs,K504del, K600fs,P955fs) and den cardiac death (SCD) . Disease penetrance and the risk of SCD in 3 intronic regions (IVS6+5G>A,IVS11-9G>A,IVS29+5G>A) . mutation carriers are unknown . We investigated the prevalence of a Ten of the mutations were identified on 7 of the 34 exons studied. clinical diagnosis of HCM and the presence of risk factors for SCD at Exons 16 and 17 could be “hot spots” due to the fact that 35% of the the first cardiological evaluation after presymptomatic genetic testing families presented a mutation in these exons . The average of age in in asymptomatic carriers of a MYBPC3 gene mutation . the index cases with mutation was 50 years . Four carriers relatives Methods: 235 asymptomatic mutation carriers were cardiologically weren’t diagnosed HCM but they were below mean age of diagnose, evaluated on the presence of HCM and risk factors for SCD . A com- so it is possible that they haven’t yet developed the phenotype . Be- parison was made for different types of MYBPC3 gene mutations . sides, there were 3 relatives without conclusive diagnostic of HCM that Results: A clinical diagnosis of HCM could be made in 22 .6% of car- didn’t present mutation; this could suggest mutations in other genes . riers . Disease penetrance at 65 years was incomplete for all types of In conclusion, MyBPC3 is one of the genes most commonly affected MYBPC3 gene mutations . Women were affected less often (p=0 .003) by HCM-causing mutations which leads to a relatively mild phenotype and disease penetrance was lower (p=0 .024) . 22 asymptomatic carri- with an adult age of onset . Furthermore, the existence of individuals ers had ≥ two risk factors for SCD. In nine a clinical diagnosis of HCM with HCM but without mutation in MyBPC3, suggests the presence of could be made and they were therefore at high risk for SCD . additional disease-causing mutations in other genes . Conclusion: A diagnosis of HCM can be made in almost one quarter of mutation carriers at first evaluation. Disease penetrance of HCM in P01.302 MYBPC3 gene mutation carriers is incomplete at 65 years and differs Neuroblastoma (NB) with hypothalamic dysfunction (HD): report between men and women . Risk factors were frequently present and of a series of 14 cases 4% of carriers appeared to be at high risk for SCD . Our data justify J. Amiel, L. de Pontual, A. Nougayrede, A. Munnich, S. Lyonnet; presymptomatic genetic testing in HCM families with a pathogenic mu- INSERM U-781, Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, Paris, tation and frequent cardiological evaluation on the presence of HCM France. and risk factors for SCD, even until advanced age . Neuroblastoma (NB) is a frequent paediatric tumour for which recur- rent somatic rearrangements are known . Congenital central hypoven-Clinical genetics 0 tilation syndrome (CCHS) is a broad dysautonomia with predisposition distal phalanges . On the lower limb there were diminished stability in to Hirschsprung disease and NB in 20% and 5-10% of the cases re- the knees and pes planus . The boy had a good social behaviour and spectively. The identification of the PHOX2B gene as disease causing pleasant nature . in CCHS allowed to find that PHOX2B could be mutated in some fa- Karyotype revealed an interstitial deletion involving 11q14 . By arrayC- milial and sporadic cases of NB also. In order to find genes involved in GH the deletion could be further defined to 11q13.5->11q14.3. NB predisposition, we collected syndromic NB cases . Here we report We compared our case with case reports with similar sized deletions a series of 14 patients with hypoventilation and HD . Hypothamic dys- involving the bands 11q13 and 11q14. Similar phenotypic findings in- function is characterized by obesity, hyperprolactinemia, central hypo- cluded mental retardation, normal measurements at birth, low frontal thyroidism, disordered water balance, unresponsive growth hormone hairline, dysmorphic ears, full eyelids or ptosis, small mandible, high to stimulation test, corticotrophin deficiency and abnormal puberty be arched or cleft palate and minor features of the fingers, thumbs or toes. it precocious or delayed . Up to now, all reported cases (25) have been In interstitial deletion 11q the facial gestalt and the incidence of joint sporadic . The natural history of the syndrome is striking : rapid onset limitations is similar to Williams-Beuren syndrome, whereas in con- obesity due to hyperphagia is the first symptom, followed by hypoven- trast to Williams-Beuren syndrome the retardation in speech is more tilation with a mean delay of 1 .5 year . Neurocognitive deceleration and pronounced and there is in general no heart defect, growth retardation mood disorders are frequently noted . The outcome remains poor in or microcephaly . this group of patients and would benefit from early diagnosis in order to anticipate ventilation and possible metabolic disorders . Tumour pre- P01.305 disposition is as high as 4/14 (29%) in this series . Finally, we report a A novel case of partial trisomy 2p in a 2-year old girl familial case with recurrence in siblings and discuss a paraneoplastic S. Unlubay1, O. Cogulu2, B. Durmaz2, A. Alpman1, F. Ozkinay2; syndrome an autoimmune disorder and a monogenic condition . 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, IZMIR, Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, IZMIR, P01.303 Turkey. Neonatal data on 530 children born after icsi using testicular The characteristics of partial duplication of the short arm of chromo- spermatozoa some 2 have been documented in different reports . The clinical phe- F. De Schrijver1, H. Tournaye2, I. Liebaers1, P. Devroey2, P. Haentjens1, M. notype of trisomy 2p includes growth and psychomotor retardation, Bonduelle1; microcephaly, prominent forehead, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, 1center for medical genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2center for reproductive medi- ptosis, strabismus, myopia, apparently low set and abnormal ears, cine, Brussels, Belgium. flat nasal bridge, narrow high palate, micrognathia, sternal abnor- INTRODUCTION: We analysed pregnancy outcome and neonatal malities, epileptic seizures, kyphoscoliosis, congenital heart disease, data of children born from a consecutive cohort of ICSI cycles per- genital hypoplasia, long widely spaced fingers and toes and hypotonia. formed with testicular spermatozoa . Here, we report on a new case of inv dup 2p in a 2 year-old girl . She MATERIAL & METHODS : Questionnaire data and results of physi- was born to no non-consanguineous parents after an uncomplicated cal examinations on 530 ICSI children from azoospermic fathers from pregnancy . The birth weight was 2 .800 kg . The physical examination whom testicular spermatozoa were obtained (period 1994-2007) were revealed generalized hypotonia, pectus excavatum, frontal bossing, compared with control data from 2889 ICSI children . All children were flat nasal bridge, hypertelorism, low-set and large ears, microgna- examined by a geneticist during their first year of life. thia, syndactyly in the 2-3-4 toes . She also had severe growth and A subanalysis of outcome parameters was performed in relation to the psychomotor retardation. At 6 months, she had the first epileptic sei- cause of azoospermia . zure and three more seizures occurred afterwards . The EEG showed RESULTS: Of the 657 pregnancies obtained after ICSI using testicular abnormal discharges . She also had recurrent respiratory infections . spermatozoa, 426 (63 .1%) were ongoing after 20 weeks leading to Her thorax CT scan showed subsegmental atelectasis in the posterior the birth of 530 liveborn children: 331 singletons, 178 twins and 21 lobes and areas of bronchiolitis obliterans. Gastroesophageal reflux triplets . Mean birthweight, length and head circumference as well as was determined in the scintigraphy . The cranial MRI was normal . The prematurity, low birthweight and perinatal mortality in singletons and karyotype revealed a partial trisomy of chromosome 2p and was noted twins did not differ from the ICSI control group . No increase in major as 46,XX,inv dup(2)(p23p25 .2) . The parents had normal karyotypes . malformations was observed in liveborn TESE children (4 .90%) when According to the clinical picture and the karyotype, the patient was compared to the control ICSI group . Prenatal (126) and postnatal (72) considered to be a novel case of partial trisomy 2p and fluorescence in karyotype analysis revealed 2 .02% de novo abnormalities and 0 .51% situ hybridization (FISH) and array comperative genomic hybridisation inherited abnormalities compared to 0 .45% de novo anomalies (OR (aCGH) studies were planned for revealing the exact breakpoints . 4 .57; 95%CI 1 .68-12 .38) in the general newborn population . Further subanalysis in relation to the cause of azoospermia did not P01.306 reveal any differences in neonatal outcome parameters and major clinicopathological study of a infantile systemic Hyalinosis case malformations rate . with a novel mutation in the CMG gene CONCLUSIONS: Neonatal outcome and major malformations rate B. Demeer1, M. M.Viprey-Thouvard2, M. Ramirez3, N. Bednarek2, M. Doco- were similar in TESE children compared with a control cohort of ICSI Fenzy1, M. Abely2, J. Martignetti3, D. Gaillard1; children but more de novo chromosomal anomalies were found com- 1Department of Genetics, Reims Hospital, reims, France, 2Department of Pe- pared to the general newborn population . diatrics, American Memorial Hospital, reims, France, 3Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, NY, United States. P01.304 Infantile Systemic Hyalinosis (ISH) is an autosomal recessive disorder, A case with interstitial deletion of 11q belonging to the wide and heterogeneous group of genetic fibroma- D. Niedrist1, M. Riegel1, A. Baumer1, P. Miny2, A. Schinzel1; tosis, characterized by widespread deposition of hyaline material in 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, the skin, gastrointestinal tract, muscles and glands . Mutations in the Switzerland, 2Division of Medical Genetics, University Children’s Hospital, Ba- capillary morphogenesis gene-2 (CMG2), coding for a transmenbrane sel, Switzerland. protein with important roles in cell-cell adhesion and cell-extracellular We report on a 12 year-old boy with mental retardation (EQ 45), cleft matrix interactions, have been shown to cause ISH . We report on a palate, umbilical and unilateral inguinal hernia and discrete dysmor- patient with a severe form of ISH, confirmed by clinical and histological phic features: low frontal hairline, red hair with multiple whorls and findings, who also displayed clear evidence of early muscle involve- unusual growth pattern, flat occiput, low set ears with poorly formed ment, and enteropathy . Novel mutation of CMG2 gene has been found helices, narrow auditory canals, full eyelids, up-slanting palpebral fis- and review of the litterature will be made . sures, prominent lips, small mandible, narrow sloping shoulders, dis- crete pectus excavatum, inverted nipples and abnormal distribution of fat tissue over the proximal forearms . On the upper limb there were proximal placement of thumbs, restricted flexion in all metacarpo-pha- langeal joints, prominent finger pads and short and broad nails andClinical genetics 0 P01.307 P01.309 maternal uniparental isodisomy 20 : clinical report misdiagnosis in patients with Joubert syndrome C. Vincent-Delorme1,2, E. Pipiras3, S. Drunat4, C. Dupont3, A. Delahaye3, I. C. Marzocchi1, K. Ludwig1, L. Salviati1, S. Sartori2, R. Tenconi1; Guilhoto5, S. Manouvrier6, B. Benzacken3; 1Servizio di Genetica Clinica, Padova, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Pediatria, Padova, 1UF de génétique CH Arras.Service de Génétique clinique CHRU Lille, Arras, Italy. France, 2Centre de référence maladies rares pour les syndromes malformatifs We report a 18 month-old boy born to a Moroccan non-consanguine- et anomalies de développement Nord de France, Lille, France, 3UF de cyto- ous couple referred to our center for the presence of a Dandy-Walker- génétique Service HEC-BDR Hôpital Jean Verdier AP-HP, Bondy, France, 4UF Malformation (DWM) with hydrocephalus and intracranial hyperten- de Biologie moléculaire Département de Génétique Hôpital Robert Debré AP- sion, mental retardation, and cranio-facial dysmorphisms . HP, Paris, France, 5Service de Médecine Néonatale CH Arras, Arras, France, About a year after the birth of the proband, a second pregnancy of the 6Service de Génétique clinique CHRU Lille. Centre de référence maladies rares couple was terminated at 20 weeks of gestation after ultrasound detec- pour les syndromes malformatifs et anomalies du développement Nord de tion of DWM, cleft-lip and -palate and nasal root hypoplasia France, Lille, France. The initial diagnosis of DWM in the proband and in the fetus was put We report on a young child, presenting with intractable feeding difficul- into question . A control MRI performed after placement of a ventriculo- ties, and severe post-natal growth retardation required enteral tube peritoneal shunt at twenty months of age showed the classical “molar feeding, tooth sign”, allowing us to hypothesise the diagnosis of Joubert syn- He was the second child, from non-consanguinous Caucasian healthy drome . parents, born at 39 weeks of gestation and delivery was uneventful . Genetic testing is currently being performed . Birth measurements were normal . These results indicate that in the presence of intracranial hyperten- Nucal translucency was detected during first trimester of pregnancy sion it might be difficult to diagnose the underlying brain malformation. and prenatal investigation in amniotic fluid was performed. Therefore the recurrence of DWM, especially if diagnosed only by fetal Chromosome studies using standard R banding showed a tiny marker brain ultrasound, should take to rule out Joubert syndrome . in all cells; parents refused complementary investigations . Prenatal ultrason examination revealed moderate pyelectasy . Post-na- P01.310 tal examination showed posterior urethral valves . Novel mutation in the keratin 3 gene in an asymptomatic Post-natal cytogenetic analysis revealed that the marker was from family with meesmann corneal dystrophy suggests genotype- chromosome 20 and contained only centromere and pericentromeric phenotype correlation segments . M. Oldak1, J. P. Szaflik2, A. Pollak3, R. B. Maksym1, M. Udziela2, R. Płoski4, J. The combination of cytogenetic findings and severe feeding difficulties Szaflik2; made we speculate that it could be a maternal UPD 20 confirmed by 1Department of Histology and Embryology, Center of Biostructure Research, molecular analysis . Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Phenotype, in our case, is less severe (specially mental retardation) Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Institute of Physiology and Pa- than those of the paternal 20q13 .2-q13 .3 deletions, even though major thology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Center chararteristic are present . of Biostructure Research, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland. At 3 years, measurements are- 5SD for length and weight, and -0,5SD Meesmann corneal dystrophy (MCD, OMIM #122100) is a dominantly for OFC . He says only a few words and walks with help . inherited disorder characterized by fragility of the anterior corneal epi- This report demonstrates interpretation’s difficulties when excedentary thelium and intraepithelial microcysts formation . Although the disease marker is found and allows us to be careful, and to look for UPD for is generally mild and affected individuals are often asymptomatic, some markers derived from imprinted chromosomes . suffer from recurrent erosions leading to lacrimation, photophobia and deterioration in visual acuity . MCD is caused by mutations in keratin P01.308 3 (KRT3) or 12 (KRT12) genes encoding cornea-specific cytoskeletal Hypomelanosis of ito - report of two patients proteins . Seventeen mutations in KRT12 and only two in KRT3 have M. P. Martins, R. P. Leite, M. Souto, E. Ribeiro; been described so far . In this study we report on a three-generation Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. Polish family with MCD . Epithelial lesions characteristic for MCD were Hypomelanosis of Ito syndrome (HI - MIM* 300337), is characterized visualized with slit-lamp examination and confirmed by in vivo confo- by the presence of whirled hypochromic skin lesions often associated cal microscopy . In the proband a direct sequencing of the PCR ampli- with systemic manifestations . fied coding regions of KRT3 and KRT12 revealed a novel 1493A>T To date, epidemiological data on HI are limited . It appears to be the heterozygous missense mutation in exon 7 of KRT3, which predicts third most common neurocutaneous disease, second only to neurofi- the substitution of glutamic acid for valine at codon 498 (E498V) . By bromatosis and tuberous sclerosis . Approximately three fourths of the a PCR-RFLP test the mutation was demonstrated to segregate with patients with typical skin lesions have systemic manifestations . Typi- disease (four affected members, three non-affected) and to be absent cal skin lesions are initially demonstrated during the first year of life in 100 controls from Polish population indicating that it is not a com- in as many as 70% of patients; they are noticeable at birth in 54% of mon polymorphism . Location of the E498V mutation emphasizes the patients . Prognosis depends on the patient’s manifestations and com- functional relevance of the highly conserved boundary motifs at the plications of the disease . Patients with chromosomal anomalies are at C-terminus of the alpha-helical rod domain in KRT3 . risk for tumors . We report two children, a 6 years female and a 5 years old male, with P01.311 typical HI lesions and systemic nondermatological abnormalities (eg, A molecular diagnostic service for lacrimoauriculodentodigital mental retardation and epilepsy) . Blood karyotyping was normal on (LADD) syndrome both; skin biopsy revealed normal fibroblast karyotype in the girl and T. Lester1, L. J. Williams1, J. N. Berg2, D. Goudie2, H. Lord1, A. O. M. Wilkie3, mosaicism for chromosome abnormality in the boy . A. Seller1; Despite recent advances, the genetic substrate for HI syndrome is far 1Clinical Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Churchill Hospital, Headington, Ox- from homogenous and is not completely understood . Although sev- ford, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United eral chromosomal abnormalities have been reported in HI the etiol- Kingdom, 3Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, ogy remains elusive . The pattern of chromosomal aberrations and the Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom. polymorphic nature of this disease have led some to believe that HI Lacrimoauriculodentodigital (LADD) syndrome (Levy-Hollister syn- syndrome is a descriptive term rather than a true syndrome . drome) is a rare autosomal dominant condition characterised by mul- Most cases are a de novo occurrence although very rare cases of tiple congenital abnormalities mainly affecting the lacrimal glands and familial HI following a dominant pattern have been described in the ducts, salivary glands and ducts, ears, teeth and distal limb segments . literature . In addition there may be mild facial dysmorphism, malformation of the kidney and respiratory system and abnormal genitalia . The phenotype of LADD syndrome is highly variable and can range from congenital renal disease causing death in the neonatal period, to aplasia of theClinical genetics 0 lacrimal and salivary glands (ALSG) only . This variability in phenotype not reveal this sequence alteration, indicating that this mutation is not has been seen within families with the same mutation . a common variation . Genetic screening of additional genes mutated in LADD syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder caused by laminophatic or lipodistrophyc disorders (ZMPSTE24, PPARγ BSCL2) heterozygous mutations in the FGF10, FGFR2 and FGFR3 genes . showed a wild type sequence . This study extend the large phenotypic As the Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory already offers FGFR2 spectrum of laminophaties and may lead us better understanding mo- and FGFR3 gene testing as part of the Craniofacial service, testing for lecular basis of this group of disease . LADD syndrome was introduced in 2007 . Testing is done using bi-directional sequencing of the coding region P01.314 and exon/ intron boundaries of the FGF10 gene, and bi-directional se- Serendipitous detection of ENG haploinsufficiency in a girl with quencing of exon 16 of the FGFR2 gene and exon 13 of the FGFR3 nail-patella syndrome and a 9q33.3-q34.11 microdeletion gene . This screening strategy is expected to pick up all known point E. Lapi1, E. Andreucci1, R. Ciccone2, S. Guarducci1, U. Ricci1, O. Zuffardi3, M. mutations in FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGF10, but not exonic deletions . An Genuardi4; exonic deletion of FGF10 has been reported . 1AOU Meyer, Florence, Italy, 2Institute of General Biology and Medical Genetics Three cases have been analysed to date . The presented case has a - University of Pavia - Italy, Pavia, Italy, 3Institute of General Biology and Medi- maternally inherited c .1942G>A (p .A648T) mutation in FGFR2 exon cal Genetics - IRCCS San Matteo Hospital - University of Pavia - Italy, Pavia, 16 . Both mother and son have classical facial features, cup-shaped Italy, 4AOU Meyer - University of Florence, Florence, Italy. ears, variable nail dysplasia and lacrimal duct obstruction . The pro- We describe the first case of a microdeletion syndrome with concurrent band also had unilateral renal agenesis . loss of the LMX1B and ENG genes on 9q33 .3-q34 .11 . The proposita, first-born of healthy non-consanguineous parents, was born at term P01.312 of a pregnancy complicated by hypertensive gestosis and IUGR . She Limb Body Wall complex in a monochorial mono-amniotic twin had a severe psychomotor delay and, during infancy, myoclonic epi- M. M. G. Biervliet1, J. van den Ende2, N. Van der Aa2; lepsy and generalized seizures . Nail-patella syndrome was diagnosed 1Center of Medical Genetics, Atwerp, Belgium, 2Center of Medical Genetics, upon physical and radiological examination . She had occasional Antwerp, Belgium. nose-bleeding episodes since the age of 6 years . No ocular neither The limb-body wall complex (LBWC) or body stalk anomaly is a vari- renal function alteration have been detected until the current age of able group of congenital defects characterized by a combination of 14 years . Precocious puberty was blocked with triptorelin treatment anterior body wall defects, limb defects and/or encephalocoele or ex- until the age of 12 yrs: regular menses began six months after therapy encephaly . There are often additional structural defects such as uro- withdrawal . genital anomalies and abnormalities of the cloaca . aCGH was performed to look for a common cause of the phenotypic Three pathogenic mechanisms have been proposed for this anomaly manifestations . A de novo 1 .7 Mb deletion in 9q33 .3-q34 .11 was de- : a mechanical origin by early amnion rupture, a vascular disruption tected . Microsatellite analysis revealed that the deletion was of mater- during embryonal development and an embryonic origin due to an mu- nal origin . The deleted region includes the LMX1B and ENG genes . tation in a developmental gene . Deletion of LMX1B is responsible for manifestations of the nail-patella We report of a monochorial mono-amniotic twin pregnancy with ul- syndrome displayed by the patient. ENG haploisufficiency causes he- trasound abnormalities seen in the 13-th week . The pregnancy was reditary hemorrhagic teleangectasia (HHT) . At present, the only clini- terminated. Post mortem examination on the first foetus showed only cal manifestation of HHT present in the patient is nose bleeding . one kidney, a megabladder and anal atresia . The second foetus had This observation underscores the predictive power of aCGH . This a severe hydrops, anal atresia, a large abdominal wall defect and ab- technique does not only allow to clarify the origin of existing clinical sence of the external genitalia . manifestations but may also lead to the identification of haploisuffi- In our case we presume that the body stalk anomaly in both foetuses ciency for genes causing adult-onset conditions with implementation results from a mutation in a developmental gene . of appropriate surveillance . This case supports the hypothesis of a possible embryonal origin of limb-body wall complex . P01.315 Discordant monozygotic twins suggests that macrocephaly- P01.313 capillary malformation is a post-zygotic event Novel LMNA mutation seen in a patient with leanness, severe D. J. P. Lederer1,2, O. Battisti3, C. Verellen-Dumoulin1; insulin resistance and facial dismorphisms 1Center For Human Genetic, IPG, Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium, 2UCL-Saint- F. Lombardi1, M. R. D’Apice1, S. Latini1, M. D’Adamo2, P. Sbraccia2, S. Servi- Luc, Bruxelles, Belgium, 3Clinique Saint-Vincent, Rocourt, Belgium. dei3, G. Novelli1,4; Macrocephaly-Capillary Malformation (M-CM) is the new name for 1Departments of Biopathology and Diagnostic Imaging, University of Rome Tor Macrocephaly-cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita . Vergata, Rome, Italy, 2Departments of Internal Medicine University of Rome Tor We describe a 17 month old girl with M-CM . She has a healthy mono- Vergata, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University, Rome, zygotic twin. She is the fourth of five girls from second degree consan- Italy, 4University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United guineous Turkish parents . States. The proband was born at 35 weeks of gestation by caesarean-section Here we describe a novel LMNA gene mutation in a 27-year-old wom- for foetal distress . Birth weight was 2,47 kg (P50), birth length 46 cm an with a complex disorder characterized by extreme leanness, severe (P25) and occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) 35,5 cm (>P90) . Dur- insulin resistance, mixed calcific valvulopathy involving both mitral and ing the neonatal period profound hypoglycaemias were noted . Clinical aortic valves, slight facial dismorphism, low femoral bone mass . The examination shows: frontal bossing, nasal and frontal angiomata, stra- patient is the 2nd child of non consanguineous parents . Physical ex- bism of right eye (inconstant), hypertelorism, right epicanthus, ogival amination showed: extreme leanness (BMI 15 .6 kg/m2), especially at palate, abnormal palmar crease, gap between first and second toes, the legs, craniofacial dismorphisms with sharp nose, small chin and axial and peripheral hypotonia, cutis marmorata, thick subcutaneous small mouth, narrow palate and tongue hypoplasia, micrognathia and tissue . She has psychomotor retardation and macrocephaly . The ce- slight dental overcrowding; she has subtle and sparse hair . Surprisingly, rebral MRI at 7 months showed cerebellar tonsillar herniation with hy- whole body DEXA scan showed normal total fat mass (25 .8%) and dis- drocephaly and signs of cerebral hypertension . She had ventricular tribution, whereas MRI showed no alteration of both subcutaneous and shunting at 11 months of age with improvement of macrocephaly and visceral adipose tissue depots . Metabolic alterations includes hyperi- psychomotor retardation . Thermoregulation trouble appeared after sulinemia both basal and 2 hours after OGTT (respectively 57 .2 and one year of age with usual temperature between 38-39°C . 982 .4 µUI/ml), insulin resistance assessed by glucose clamp (M=2 .3 The caryotype and X-inactivation pattern are normal . Twin zygosity mg/kg/min) . LMNA sequencing evidenced a novel heterozygous mis- testing performed on buccal smear DNA proved monozygosity . sense mutation in exon 4 that replaces well-conserved residue glutam- There are about 100 published cases of M-CM. Detailed clinical find- ic acid at position 262 to lysine (p.E262K, c.784 G→A). Her parents ings and cerebral imaging of our case are similar to those reported were negative for the same mutation, suggesting that this mutation has before . Thermoregulation trouble has never been described in M-CM . de novo origin . Sequence analysis of 100 healthy normal controls did All the cases of M-CM are sporadic . Our patient is a unique case of M-Clinical genetics 0 CM in monozygotic twins where only one is affected, suggesting that level was 3 .56 microME/ml (normal range 0 .1-3 .5), FT-9 .2 picomol/l 4 M-CM is due to a post-zygotic event . (normal range 9-28) . Cytogenetic testing revealed the proband to be a carrier of 46,XY,add(8)(q24 .3) while his parents had normal karyotype P01.316 in the blood . For uncovering the origin of the additional region on chro- study of the aortic risk associated with FBN mutations from mosome 8, a multi-tissue screening for the presence of mosaicism for an international study of 1013 patients with marfan syndrome or the abnormal cell line is advisable . related type I fibrillinopathy L. Faivre1, G. Collod-Beroud2, B. Loeys3, A. Child4, C. Binquet5, E. Gautier5, B. P01.318 Callaewert3, E. Arbustini6, K. Mayer7, M. Arslan-Kirchner8, C. Beroud9, M. Claus- Microcephalia vera : cognitive profile and neuroradiological tres9, C. Bonithon-Kopp5, L. Ades10, J. De Backer3, P. Coucke3, U. Francke11, A. presentation of 9 children with AsPm gene mutations De Paepe3, C. Boileau12, G. Jondeau13; L. Titomanlio1, S. Passemard1, M. Elmaleh2, K. Hernandez3, T. Billette de 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2INSERM, U827, Montpellier, Villemeur4, L. Burglen5, A. Afenjar5, S. Odent6, B. Isidor7, O. Boesflug Tanguy8, France, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 44 Department of Car- A. Megarbane9, J. Alessandri10, G. Andria11, M. Abramowicz12, B. Gerard13, A. diological Sciences, St. George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Centre Verloes13; d’investigation clinique – épidémiologie clinique/essais cliniques, Dijon, France, 1INSERM U676, Paris, France, 2Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Paris, Fran- 6Molecular Diagnostic Unit, Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 7Center for ce, 3Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 4Service de Neuropédiatrie, Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 8Institut für Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France, 5Service de Génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, Humangenetik, Hannover, Germany, 9Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 6CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 7Service de Génétique, CHU Hôpital Arnault de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 10Marfan Research Group, de Nantes, Nantes, France, 8CHU de Clermont Ferrand, Clermont Ferrand, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sidney, Australia, 11Departments of Ge- France, 9Service de Génétique, Université Saint Joseph, Beyrouth, Lebanon, netics and Pediatrics, Stanford, CA, United States, 12Laboratoire de Génétique 10Service de Pédiatrie, CHR Saint Denis de la Réunion, Saint Denis de la Réu- moléculaire, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 13Centre de Référence nion, France, 11Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università Federico II, Naples, Italy, Maladie de Marfan, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France. 12Service de Génétique, Université Libre, Bruxelles, Belgium, 13Service de Gé- In order to better describe the aortic risk associated with mutations nétique, R. Debré Hospital, Paris, France. in the FBN1 gene, we took advantage of a series of 1013 genotyped Primary microcephaly (MIM 251200) is a neurodevelopmental condi- probants carrying Marfan syndrome or another type I fibrillinopathy, tion in which there is a global reduction in cerebral cortex volume . Ab- recruited for a genotype-phenotype correlation study . At 40 years normal neuronal and glial proliferation lead to microcephalia vera (MV) of age, the cumulative probability of presenting an ascending aortic and microcephaly with simplified gyral pattern (MSG). Patients affect- dilatation (AAD) was 75% (95%-CI=72%-78%), 26% (95%-CI=22%- ed by MV or MSG show mental retardation . The MCPH5 locus for MV 31%) for ascending aortic dissection and 41% (95%-CI=36%-46%) patients on 1q31 corresponds to the ASPM gene, a human ortholog of for cardiac surgery . The cumulative probability of presenting AAD the Drosophila melanogaster ‘abnormal spindle’ gene (asp), identifiied was higher in males than in females (80% [95%-CI=76%-83%] at 40 my homozygocyty mapping and found responsible of roughly ½ of the years of age in males versus 70% [95%-CI=65%-75%] in females; MV cases in all ethnic backgrounds . p=0 .0036) . An higher risk of aortic surgery was also observed in males We report on clinical-genetical results from a multicentric european (46% [95%-CI=39%-52%] versus 34% [95%-CI=27%-42%] in females study on MV . Nine out of 70 patients with a diagnosis of MV or MSG ; p=0 .0002) . The study of the paediatric cohort (n=320) showed that (based on clinical and neuroradiological studies) showed mutations in aortic complications remained an exception, with a 1% risk of aortic the coding sequence of ASPM . Patients’ IQ ranged from 35 to 70 . One dissection and a 5% risk of aortic surgery at 10 years of age . Adult third of them had MSG, one an unilateral polymicrogyria . We observed patients diagnosed during childhood had a higher risk of developing that MR was more severe in patients who presented a more severe AAD (81% [95%-CI=73%-88%] at 40 years of age) than patients diag- microcephaly and a MSG rather than MV . Furthermore, memory was nosed in adulthood (65% [95%-CI=60%-69%], p<0 .0001) . They also better preserved than attention or fine motor functions. MV and MSG had a higher risk of aortic surgery (64% [95%-CI=52%-77%] at 40 represent the phenotypical spectrum of ASPM gene mutations . years of age compared to 35% [95%-CI=30%-40%], p<0 .0001) . The search for clinical factors associated with the occurrence of ascend- P01.319 ing aortic dilatation over time revealed that patients with mitral valve multiple minor congenital defects associated with autism prolapse (HR=5 .86; IC-95%=3 .08-11 .18) or ectopia lentis (HR=2 .17; spectrum disorders IC-95%=1 .55-3 .05) had a higher risk of developing AAD . D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, E. Sirbu3; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, P01.317 2University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania, 3West University of Timişoara, Ti- case report: a boy with mild mental retardation, hypogenitalism misoara, Romania. and karyotype 46,XY,add(8)(q24.3) de novo Autism spectrum disorders represent a wide spectrum of conditions N. A. Gladkova1, M. O. Mkheidze2, M. V. Prozorova1; characterized by abnormalities of social interactions and communica- 1Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, tion, severely restricted interests and highly repetitive behavior . They 2Medical Academy for postgraduate study, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. have multiple genetic and nongenetic causes . In order to ascertain We report on 27-month-old boy with abnormal karyotype . He was the cause and the onset of the disorder, establishing a positive cor- born premature at 35-36 weeks of the fifth gestation as the first child relation with some markers would be useful . Minor congenital defects of healthy non-consanguineous parents . At birth, the mother was 31 result from either genetic or environmental causes that act during years old and the father was 59 years old . They both had a profession- pregnancy and are an indirect measure of abnormal embryo and fe- al contact with industrial hazards. Being married first time, the mother tal development . The purpose of the study was to see if patients with had three miscarriages . In her second marriage, she had a pregnancy autism spectrum disorders have more minor congenital defects than ended as spontaneous abortion at six weeks of gestation. The fifth healthy individuals and if so, if this finding correlates with the history pregnancy was complicated with anemia, pyelonephritis, threatened of the patients . The incidence and media of minor congenital defects miscarriage at 12 weeks of gestation . Results of prenatal ultrasound were determined in 76 patients with autism spectrum disorders and and biochemical screening were normal . The proband presented with in unrelated control subjects matched by age and sex . The frequency a birthweight of 2350g, length of 44 cm, at 12 months his weight was of minor anomalies was not significantly different in the two groups, 10200g, length 81cm . Findings at 27 months included mild mental re- 14 .47% in autistic children and teenagers, compared to 14 .80% in tardation, speech and developmental delay, asthenic stature, telecan- healthy controls . The mean number of minor congenital anomalies thus, strabismus alternating, flat nasal bridge, geographical tongue, was significantly higher in the autistic group, 3±0.70 minor defects/pa- unilateral simian crease, broad hallux, flat-valgus feet, moderate hy- tient, compared to 1 .43±0 .36 minor defects/patient in controls . None of potonia and hyperflexibility of the distal parts of the hands and feet, the control subjects had three or more minor anomalies . These results diastasis of rectum abdominal muscles, small testes (<1 ml), hypoplas- support the idea that minor defects, especially multiple ones, may rep- tic penis . The chorionic gonadotrophin test showed testosterone in- resent markers of early prenatal factors that contribute to the adverse creased (initial level-2 .2nmol/l, after ChG-27, normal range 8-38) . TSH outcome .Clinical genetics 0 P01.320 pineal cyst, hypoplastic hemicerebellum, asymetric lateral ventricles, Gene copy Number analysis using semi-quantitative multiplex anomalies of cranial nerves nucleii had been described . PcR-based assay on capillary electrophoresis systems We describe here 3 cases with Moebius Syndrome in two of whom S. Jankowski, E. Currie-Fraser, L. Xu; corpus callosum agenesis were detected . Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. The patients referred to our clinic with fasial asymetry and additional Deletions and duplications in genomic DNA have been implicated as dysmorphic features . Cranial MRI revealed corpus callosum agenesy pathogenic mutations in many diseases . Traditionally, detection of in two of the patients . these types of mutations is done using southern blot hybridization or To our knowledge, these are the first patients with Moebius Syndrome Fluorescence in situ hybridization, techniques which can be laborious, who are reported presenting corpus callosum agenesy . time-consuming and require high quantities of starting material . In this study we present analysis of a semi-quantitative multiplex PCR- P01.323 based method that uses relative quantitation of fluorescently-labeled MOMO syndrome without macrosomia - alternative definition of fragments . Fragments from BRCA1, BRCA2, 9p21 and MMR (MSH2) the obesity syndrome regions were tested using labeled probes from DNA that had been N. Tyshchenko1, T. Neuhann1, E. Schrock1, A. Huebner2, S. Tinschert1; isolated from blood. Amplified samples were then run on an Applied 1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Dresden, Germany, 2Children’s Hospital, Techni- Biosystems capillary electrophoresis platform and the data was ana- cal University, Dresden, Germany. lyzed in GeneMapper® software v4 .0 . After signal normalization, loci Two unrelated patients with a combination of macrosomia, macro- regions that had undergone deletions or duplications were identified cephaly, obesity and ocular abnormalities (retinal coloboma and nys- using the GeneMapper® software v4 .0 report manager feature and tagmus) were described by Moretti-Ferreira et al . (1993) . Thereafter, verified using the dye scale functionality. Our results will highlight an the new syndrome - called MOMO syndrome (Macrosomia, Obesity, easy to use, optimal workflow and analysis that can be used for both Macrocephaly, and Ocular abnormalities) - was categorized as an small and large-scale studies . overgrowth syndrome . However, since a third patient, published in 2000, was of short stature, overgrowth was discussed as non-manda- P01.321 tory for the diagnosis . A severe form of the X- linked microphthalmia with linear skin We report a further patient with proposed diagnosis MOMO syndrome . defects syndrome (mLs) in a female newborn - expansion of the At the age of 5 years and 7 months the girl presented with overweight, clinical spectrum macrocephaly and borderline short stature . She showed a prominent E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, F. Pientka2, D. Kotzot3, I. Wimplinger2, E. Griesmaier1, forehead, deep-set eyes, a flat nasal bridge, anteverted nares, a cupid K. Kutsche2; bow upper lip, low-set posteriorly rotated ears and tapering fingers. 1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute for Humangenet- She had hypotonia, recurrent febrile convulsions and developmental ics, Hamburg, Germany, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria. delay . A hand radiogram showed delayed bone age . Ophthalmological The microphthalmia with linear skin defects syndrome (MLS/MIDAS) examination revealed a choroid coloboma in her left eye . Metabolic is an X-linked disorder with male lethality, mostly associated with seg- tests and chromosomal examinations including Array-CGH analysis mental monosomy of the Xp22 region . MLS is characterized by unilat- with the 44k Operon chip were normal . On the basis of the general eral or bilateral microphthalmia and linear skin defects limited to the obesity, macrocephaly, coloboma of the choroid and mental retarda- face and neck . We report a female newborn with a severe phenotype tion the diagnosis of MOMO syndrome was made . The comparison of of MLS syndrome . She presents with the typical MLS signs, such as these four patients showed that a combination of obesity, macroceph- bilateral microphthalmia, primary persistent vitreous and sclerocornea, aly, ocular coloboma (especially coloboma of the retina or choroid) and and a linear erythematous skin defect on her cheek . Additional fea- mental retardation is specific for MOMO syndrome. Due to variability tures include agenesis of the corpus callosum, left-sided diaphragmat- of statute anomalies we propose to form the acronym “MOMO” from ic hernia, an ileal duplication cyst, imperforate anus with a rectoperi- Macrocephaly, Obesity, Mental retardation and Ocular abnormalities, neal fistula, a hamartoma at the right liver lobe, and partial duplication excluding macrosomy from the syndrome name . of the uterus . A terminal deletion of the short arm of one of her X chromosomes P01.324 was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization using various mosaic trisomy 22: report of two patients and review of the BAC clones mapping in Xp22 .3-p22 .2 . The breakpoint was localized literature in Xp22 .2 and the size of the deletion was estimated to cover ~11 Mb, M. Rio, S. Noel-Couillard, M. Le Merrer, M. de Blois, O. Raoul, V. Malan, A. including the HCCS gene . Mutations in HCCS, encoding the mitochon- Munnich, M. Vekemans; drial holocytochrome c-type synthase, have recently been identified in Department of genetic, paris, France. patients with MLS and normal karyotype . Midline defects, as imperfo- Non-mosaic trisomy 22 is commonly seen in spontaneous abortions rate anus and duplication of the uterus, have rarely been described in and is incompatible with life . Conversely, mosaic trisomy 22 is ob- patients with MLS . However, anal atresia is a frequent feature in male served in newborns and is compatible with long survival . The clinical patients with X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome carrying a mutation in presentation of mosaic trisomy 22 is variable . It includes growth retar- MID1 . We hypothesize that deletion of both MID1 and HCCS as well dation, mental retardation, limb malformation, congenital heart defect as skewed XCI might have contributed to the complex disease pheno- and dysmorphic features . Here we report two unrelated patients with type of our patient . mosaic trisomy 22 . Both patients were referred for genetic evaluation due to develop- P01.322 mental delay and failure to thrive . Patient 1 had intrauterine and post corpus callosum Agenesy in three Patients With moebius natal growth retardation, microcephaly, complex heart defect, severe syndrome developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, deafness, skin pigmenta- S. Basaran Yilmaz, E. Karaca, G. Yesil, A. Yuksel; tion anomalies, brachydactyly, short toes with syndactyly . Interestingly, Istanbul University,Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department Of Medical Genet- patient 2 had an overlapping phenotype including post natal growth ics, Istanbul, Turkey. retardation, non compaction of left ventricle, developmental delay, Moebius Syndrome is a rare dissease which is defined as congenital deafness, and skin pigmentation anomalies . Facial dysmorphism, facial palsy with impairment of ocular abduction . The facial nerve(7) hand and feet anomalies were also similar to the one observed in pa- and abducens nerve(6) are most frequently involved, but other cranial tient 1 . Routine chromosome analysis on lymphocytes showed nor- nerves may be involved as well . Other variable features include orofa- mal karyotype in both patients. Chromosome analysis of fibroblasts cial dysmorphism, limb malformations, mental retardation, external ear showed a mosaic trisomy 22: 47,XY,+22[12]/46,XY [15] in patient 1, defects . The most accepted hypothesis with regard to pathogenesis is 47,XX,+22[17]/46,XX[2]. These findings were confirmed by in situ hy- that disruption of the primitive subclavian arteries and their branches bridization . The phenotypic spectrum observed in both patients is com- before establishment of a sufficient blood supply to the brain stem pared to previously reported cases . leads to the symptoms of Moebius sequence . Up to date congenital anomalies of the posterior fossa, including Arnold-Chiari malformation,Clinical genetics 0 P01.325 P01.327 mowat-Wilson syndrome in a patient with severe eye anomalies the placenta as the main clue to the diagnosis in a patient with A. Medeira1, G. Black2, E. Seabright2, I. Cordeiro1; recurrent nonimmune hydrops fetalis 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, A. Moresco1, N. Mazzitelli2, N. Ronaldo3, D. Caceres3; 2Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United King- 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Unidad de dom. Patología. Hospital Materno Infantil Ramón Sardá, Buenos Aires, Argentina, Mowat-Wilson Syndrome (MWS) is a mental retardation syndrome 3Servicio de Neonatología. Hospital Materno Infantil Ramón Sardá, Buenos associated with distinctive facial features, frequent microcephaly and Aires, Argentina. epilepsy, and a variable spectrum of congenital anomalies, including Introduction: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis (NIHF) usually carries a poor Hirshprung disease (HSCR), corpus callosum agenesis, genitourinary prognosis and can have diverse causes . Lysosomal storage diseases and heart defects . Eye anomalies such as strabismus, microphtalmia, (LSD) are among the causes of NIHF . colobomas, have been reported in a few patients . Objective: Report a case of recurrent NIHF where the placental histol- Heterozygous mutations or deletions involving the zinc finger homeo- ogy lead to the investigation of Mucopolysaccharidosis VII (MPS VII) . box 1B gene (ZFHX1B) cause MWS Materials and methods: Histopathological examination of the placenta We report a 5 years old female patient with severe psychomotor delay, and serum beta-glucuronidase (GUSB) activity were performed . epilepsy, microcephaly, deep set eyes, left eye anophtalmia , right eye Case report: In the second pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents severe microphtalmia with retinal and optic nerve colobomas, broad fetal hydrops was detected by an ultrasound scan at 22 weeks of ges- nose with long columella , short nasolabial distance, large mouth, tation . An earlier pregnancy resulted also in an hydropic fetus . There prominent chin, large ears with fleshy uplifted lobes, septo-optic dys- was no evidence of immune hydrops, congenital infection or cardio- plasia, corpus callosum hypoplasia, HSCR, ventricular septal defect . vascular abnormalities and a normal karyotype (46,XY) was obtained . Mutation analysis of ZFHX1B gene identified a truncating mutation The pregnancy resulted in a depressed, hydropic infant, which despite c .2083C>T[p .Arg695X] . of intensive care died at 3 days of age . MWS was originally reported as a syndromic form of HSCR . It is now The histopathological examination of the placenta, presented vacou- known that it frequently occurs without HSCR and can be recognized lated Hofbauer cells, which were possitive stained with Alcian Blue and by a consistent facial phenotype associated with severe mental re- negative to PAS reaction . A normal appearence of the cytotrophoblast tardation . MWS and Goldberg-Shprintzen may overlap features but was noted. The electron microscopic reflected the empty appearence faces are distinct . Some MWS patients have an ataxic gate and smil- of the vacuoles . This features suggested a LSD with accumulation of ing personality suggesting Angelman, but the caracteristic facial fea- an acid mucopolysaccharide probably MPS- VII . The diagnosis was tures of MWS and the presence of other congenital anomalies usually confirmed GUSB activity that was neglible. distinguish these conditions . The patient that we report presents the Conclusion: The placental histopathological examination performed main manifestations described in MWS including facial phenotype . in this case of recurrent NIHF led to the suspicion of MPS-VII . The Eye anomalies have been reported in MWS, but not as severe as in diagnosis necessary had to be confirmed with the quantification of en- our patient . As far as we are aware this is the only MWS patient with zyme activity . The placental proved to be an useful tool, in order to anophtalmia . limit the diagnostic resources . The accurate diagnosis is important for adequate genetic counselling . P01.326 Recurrence of mowat-Wilson syndrome in two siblings carrying P01.328 a novel mutation in the ZEB gene Novel mutation in epithelial sodium channel alfa subunit M. Cecconi1, F. Forzano1, L. Garavelli2, M. Grasso1, E. Di Maria1,3, F. Faravelli1; (SCNN1A) in a patient with a cystic fibrosis-like syndrome. 1Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Clinical Genetics Unit, S. Maria Nuova Hospi- M. Bernal1, F. Mora1, J. F. Rodríguez-Gutiérrez1, N. Hernández-Trujillo2, J. A. tal, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3Dept. of Neuroscience, Ophthalmology and Genetics, Brieva1, A. Sampalo1, A. Nieto1; University of Genova, Genova, Italy. 1Laboratorio de Diagnostico Molecular. Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain, The eponym Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS, OMIM #235730) desig- 2Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain. nates a multisystem congenital disease caused by heterozygous mu- A six months old girl clinically diagnosed of cystic fibrosis was admitted tations in the ZEB2 gene . Molecular diagnosis has helped to delineate for molecular study of CFTR gene . No mutations were detected us- the cardinal signs (facial gestalt and delayed psychomotor develop- ing Inno-Lipa CFTR19 and CFTR17+Tn kits . A subsequent complete ment) as well as several variously associated congenital disorders . To screening using DGGE and SSCP/HD was also negative (detection date, literature describes approximately 180 patients with MWS . Only level of 97%) . In the search for an alternative diagnosis, an extremely three cases of recurrence in siblings were reported . high aldosterone and renin activity levels were found suggesting the We describe two sisters with clinical features of MWS . Antenatal scan- diagnosis of a multisystem primary type I pseudohypoaldosteronism . ning in the first sibling had revealed corpus callosum agenesis. Hypo- This is a rare autosomal recessive disease that results from mutations tonia and feeding difficulties were present in the neonatal period. The in the genes encoding epithelial sodium channel subunits (alfa, beta, psychomotor development was delayed . US scans of the heart and gamma) . Most mutations have been described in the alfa subunit gene abdomen were normal . At our evaluation (5 years of age), facial dys- (SCNN1A) . This gene was sequenced in the patient and her parents . morphisms strongly suggestive of MWS were noted . The second born A C>A substituion at position 301 resulting in a change of glutamine for had a congenital complex heart disease . The surgical interventions lysine at amino acid 101 (Q101K) was found . The patient was homozy- on heart defects were complicated by renal failure, airways infection, gous for the mutation while parents were both heterozygous . This mu- denutrition and a cardiac arrest . At our evaluation (3 yrs .), she pre- tation has not been reported to date. Residue 101 is at the first mem- sented microcephaly and facial dismorphisms, and with the sequelae brane-spanning segment of the channel inside a structural motif that of cerebral anoxia . has been shown to be essential to proper channel folding or assembly . Direct sequencing of ZEB2 revealed in both patients a novel hetero- In addition the 101Q residue is highly evolutionarily conserved . This zygous c .310C>T transition, resulting in a stop codon (p .Q104X) . The data strongly suggest that Q101K mutation affects channel function nucleotide substitution was not found in both parents, as well as in 94 and support the diagnosis of multisystem primary pseudohypoaldoste- unrelated control individuals . No evidence of somatic mosaicism was ronism in this patient . found in the parents . In light of this and previous reports, the recurrence risk provided to P01.329 families with an isolated MWS case should be frequently revisited . mulvihill-smith syndrome - case Report Genetic counselling should consider intrinsic clinical variability, risk of L. Caba, C. Rusu, A. Sireteanu, M. Covic; complications and still inaccurate empiric risk of recurrence . University of Medicine and Pharmacy - Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania. Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is a very rare autosomal dominant disorder, defined by low birth weight, dwarfism, a prematurely aged facial appear- ance, pigmented naevi, hearing impairment and mental retardation .Clinical genetics  We report a case in order to illustrate the clinical features of this P01.332 progeroid disease . The proband is a 13 years old male that presents: cytogenetic and molecular analysis of patients with Nijmegen short stature (-2 .3 SD) and microcephaly (-3 .7 SD; without bulging breakage syndrome in serbia sutures) . Clinical examination also reveals: poorly muscled build with S. S. Cirkovic1, M. Guc-Scekic1,2, S. Pasic1, D. Radivojevic1, A. Jovanovic1; lipoatrophy, thin skin with pigmented naevi, small prematurely aged 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, face with pointed chin and retrognathia, small mouth and total anodon- Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. tia (confirmed by radiologic examination). The patient has mild mental Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal recessive retardation, speech defect and hoarse voice . Family history is positive chromosome instability disorder, characterized by microcephaly, for anodontia (the mother has no teeth) . growth retardation and elevated risk of cancer . Cells cultured from We made differential diagnosis with Leopard syndrome and other NBS patients exhibit an increased cellular hypersensitivity to specific progeroid syndromes . mutagenic agents such as bleomycin (BLE) . It was shown that patients In conclusion, we present a male with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome in or- with NBS have mutations in the NBN gene, which is involved in the der to illustrate a rare disorder and to discuss the importance of clinical sensing and repair of DNA double strand breaks . Most of the known features like dwarfism, anodontia and pigmented naevi for diagnosis. NBS patients so far are of Slavic origin and share the founder NBN mutation, 657del5 . P01.330 Here we report on five Serbian children with NBS,diagnosed and Nail patella-syndrome: Phenotype and genotype correlation treated at the Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia from B. Çolak1, N. H. Elçioglu1, B. Erol2, S. Yalçin2; July 2005 to September 2007 . Cytogenetic analyses were performed 1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, on control and BLE (1μg/ml) - treated, peripheral blood cultures us- Turkey, 2Department of Orthopaedics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, ing standard procedure .Metaphases were examined for chromosome Turkey. breaks and aberrations .Three cultures were successfully established Nail patella-syndrome (OMIM: 161200) is a rare autosomal dominant revealing increased chromosome breaks (0 .27-0 .81 vs . 0 .02-0 .05 connective tissue disorder with a prevalence 1 in 50 000 . The pheno- breaks/cell) and various aberrations including chromosomes 7 and 14, type is associated with multiple deformities affecting the nails, skel- with significant difference as compared to their control counterparts. etal system, kidneys, and eyes . Skeletal features include absent or Molecular analysis for the presence of the 657del5 mutation was hypoplastic patellae, patella dislocations, scoliosis, elbow abnormali- carried out in five patients on DNA samples extracted from periph- ties, talipes and iliac horns . Inter- and intrafamilial clinical variability are eral blood,using modified PCR method and heteroduplex analysis on common in this disorder particularly for skeletal abnormalities, pres- PAGE gel .Homozygosity for the 657del5 mutation was detected in all ence and severity of nephropathy and ocular anomalies like glaucoma . analyzed NBS children . Mutations in the gene encoding the Lim Homeo Box Transcription Fac- Patients described here are the first Serbian NBS patients reported so tor-1 (LMX1B), mapped on chromosome 9 (9q34), are responsible for far . Considering that NBS patients are extremely sensitive to ionizing the clinical phenotype of NPS . No clear genotype-phenotype associa- radiation an early and precise cytogenetic and molecular diagnosis is tion have been found to date by the published cases . very important for the management of the disease in case of malig- We present here the phenotype and genotype of two different NPS nancy . Families . First family presented an isolated case and the second one a dominatly inherited three generations NPS family with multiple af- P01.333 fected family members . The main clinical symptoms were lower limbs Recurrent severe pulmonary manifestations in 6 patients with disabilities and nail dyplasia with remarkable inter- and intrafamilial nodular periventricular heterotopia associated and FLNA variablity . Neither nephropathy nor ocular problems were found in our mutation all examined cases . Molecular analysis of the LMXB1 showed a de- A. Masurel-Paulet1, C. Goizet2, E. M. Thompson3, A. Tai3, D. Kennedy3, E. novo wide deletion in intron 2 by the first family and an inherited het- Haan3, E. Landre4, N. Mejean5, A. Houzel6, N. Bahi-Buisson7, C. Thauvin-Robi- erozygous deletion in exon 3 (430delG) in the second Family . net1, F. Huet6, S. Roberston8, L. Faivre1; Genetic counseling and follow-up regarding the different manifesta- 1Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Département de tions are important for all family members who have inherited the dis- Génétique, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 3Clinical Genetics Service, ease but could have a milder phenotype and remain underdiagnosed . Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 4Service de Neurochirur- gie, Hôpital St Anne, Paris, France, 5Radiologie pédiatrique, Hôpital d’Enfants, P01.331 Dijon, France, 6Pédiatrie, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 7Neurologie pédi- clinical characterisation of NBiA patients with and without atrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 8Paediatric Genetics, mutation in PANK2 gene (PKAN) University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. M. Hempel1, T. Kmiec2, M. Hartig1, H. Prokisch3, T. Meitinger3; Nodular periventricular heterotopia is an X linked dominant neuronal 1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Memorial Children’s Health migration disorder caused by mutations in the filamin A (FLNA) gene. Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany. FLNA is an actin-binding protein and has a role in the modulation of cell Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heteroge- shape and migration . A high phenotypic diversity has been described neous group of disorders sharing the underlying and by MR imaging in association with FLNA mutations, from nodular periventricular het- detectable feature of iron accumulation in the basal ganglia . A substan- erotopia to otopalatodigital syndrome and frontometaphysal dysplasia . tial part of these patients have mutations in PANK2 (Patothenate Ki- Extra neurological features have sometimes been described in pa- nase-Assocciated Neurodegeneration, PKAN) . NBIA patients with and tients with nodular periventricular heterotopia, including patent ductus without PANK2 gene mutations share common clinical symptoms like arteriosus, coagulopathy, or Ehlers Danlos phenotype . In this study, dystonia, parkinsonism, pyramidal signs, cognitive deficits and dysar- we reported on 6 females aged 2 to 48 years, presenting with nodu- tria. Analysis of clinical symptoms of NBIA patients is often difficult be- lar periventricular heterotopia, FLNA gene mutation and notable lung cause of the small patient numbers and several different investigators manifestations . The median age of onset of lung manifestations was involved . We took advantage of a large collection of 43 NBIA patients 4 .5 months (1 .5-240) . Manifestations included recurrent early-onset characterized by a single investigator (T . K .) . Screening PLA2G6 not pneumopathies in 5/6 patients, recurrent bronchiolitis in 4/6 patients mutations were found, in 24 patients two mutations have been identi- and asthma in 4/6 patients . 5/6 patients had to be hospitalized at fied in PANK2. The eye of the tiger sign were found in the majority of least once for lung involvement, including one-year cumulative length patients (21 out of 24) with PANK2 mutation . The group of patients of hospitalisation in one child and hospitalisation in intensive care in with PANK2 mutations can be distinguished from the group without another . Long-term oxygenodependance was described in 2 patients . mutation by age of onset, loss of gait, the occurrence of generalized The symptomatology appears to improve with age . We believe that dystonia, parkinsonism, cognitive deficits, oromandibular dystonia and such lung phenotype can be a recurrent manifestation in patients with dysartria . nodular periventricular heterotopia, consequence of the mutation in the FLNA gene . This hypothesis is supported by the recent demonstration of interaction between FLNA and CFTR, the ubiquitous distribution of FLNA and its role in the cytoskeleton .Clinical genetics  P01.334 A. Schinzel12, D. Bartholdi12, W. Reardon15, L. Biesecker3, G. Black2, I. Giurgea1; Identification of a novel NOTCH1 mutation in patient with 1Département de Génétique, Institut Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale, IN- bicuspid aortic valve disease and thoracic aortic aneurysm SERM U841, Créteil, France, 2Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s M. Diegoli1, M. Grasso2, N. Marziliano2, A. Serio2, A. Pilotto2, M. Pasotti2, E. Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Genetic Disease Research Branch, Serafini2, E. Porcu2, P. Cassini2, A. Brega3, E. Arbustini2; National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United 1University of Pavia, PAVIA, Italy, 2IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, PAVIA, Italy, States, 4Department of Planning and Research, Osaka Medical Centre and 3University of Milano, MILANO, Italy. Research Institute, for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 5Department The bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) (MIM#109730) is the most common of Ophthalmology, Osaka Medical Centre and Research Institute, for Maternal congenital cardiac malformation, occurring in 1-2% of the population . and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 6Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, This condition is associated with a significantly increased risk of de- Osaka Medical Centre and Research Institute, for Maternal and Child Health, veloping thoracic aortic aneurysms and acute aortic dissection . The Osaka, Japan, 7Department of Pediatrics, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Ser- valve calcification often observed in BAV is a result of inappropriate vice Centre, Kasugai, Japan, 8Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School activation of osteoblast-specific gene expression. Recently, an asso- of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 9Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier ciation between mutations in NOTCH1 gene and aortic valve disease Régional Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France, 10Wessex Clinical Genetics Ser- has been described . NOTCH1 encodes for a transmembrane protein vice, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 11Moorfields Eye that activates a signaling pathway with an active role in cardiac em- Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 12Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Uni- bryogenesis, including aortic and pulmonary valve development . versität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 13Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre A 52-year old male was referred to our attention for suspected Mar- Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 14Département de fan Syndrome. The patient did not fulfil Ghent criteria for Marfan Syn- Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 15National Centre drome . He presented dilatation of the aortic root, the ascending aorta, for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, Dublin, and bicuspid and calcified aortic valve. Ireland. The family history was positive for autosomal dominant aneurysm of Background: OFCD syndrome is characterized by ocular defects the ascending aorta not associated with other syndromic features . (congenital cataract, microphthalmia), facial dysmorphia, congenital The candidate gene NOTCH1 was screened by DHPLC and sequenc- cardiac defects, dental irregularities (radiculomegaly, oligodontia) and ing of heteroduplex amplicons . skeletal deformities . It results from mutations in BCOR gene localized A novel c .C4104T transition predicting the missense p .Ala1343Val mu- on Xp11 .4 . All affected individuals are females and the few reported tation was identified in exon 25. mutations are either deletions or generate premature stop codons . A This result brings the attention of clinical geneticists to evaluate the single missense variant was identified within BCOR in a family with NOTCH1 gene in patients with early onset of calcific and bicuspid aor- Lenz microphthalmia syndrome . OFCD syndrome has been shown to tic valve as plausible causative gene in the light of preventive surgery encompass defects of laterality, including the heart and other viscera . for carryers of gene defects and mild to severe aortic root dilation . Methods: We analyzed BCOR gene in 26 female patients diagnosed Furthermore, this gene should be carefully evaluated in patients with with OFCD syndrome, 21 males with Lenz microphtalmia, 96 patients toracic aneurism dissection without syndromic features previously with isolated microphtalmia and 96 patients with cardiac laterality de- genotyped for TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes with negative results . fects . Results: Mutations were identified for the 26 patients with OFCD syn- P01.335 drome, and one patient with “isolated” microphtalmia . The same pre- R229Q and A284 mutations of NHPs2 gene likely cause of viously reported missense variant was identified in a boy with Lenz steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome microphthalmia syndrome. No mutation vas identified in the other pa- A. Zuniga, S. Sanchez, S. Ferrando, A. Guerrero; tients tested . We report somatic mosaicism of BCOR anomalies in two Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. families with OFCD syndrome . In both families, the mothers had 50% The idiopathic nephrotic syndrome is a clinical pathologic entity oc- mosaicism in leucocytes, and their daughters carried the mother’s mu- curring mainly in children and is characterized by massive proteinuria, tation homogeneously. In the first family the mother, her monozygotic hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, edema, and minimal glomerular twin sister and her daughter were affected . In the second family, the changes . In some instances, renal biopsy may show focal segmental daughter was affected but not her mother . glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) or diffuse mesangial proliferation . In con- Conclusion: We report 27 novel patients with OFCD syndrome and trast to 2 types of hereditary nephrotic syndrome previously identified, mutations in BCOR gene . Cataract and radiculomegaly seem to be the congenital nephrosis of the Finnish type (OMIM 256300) and diffuse two constant clinical signs in OFCD syndrome . Mosaicism in two of our mesangial sclerosis (OMIM 256370), idiopathic nephrotic syndrome families advocates cautiousness in genetic counselling . was generally regarded as a sporadic disease although a few famil- ial cases had been reported . Most patients with idiopathic nephrotic P01.337 syndrome respond to steroid therapy and show a favorable outcome . clinical heterogeneity in cases of oral clefts with multiple However, 20% are steroid-resistant, with progression to end-stage re- congenital anomalies nal failure in many cases . The nephrotic syndrome may recur after E. Preiksaitienė1, A. Matulevičienė1,2, A. Utkus1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; renal transplantation in such cases . NPHS2 mutations will be found 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius in sporadic cases of steroid-resistant idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University which represents an important cause of childhood end-stage renal dis- Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. ease . The detection of NPHS2 mutations is of clinical utility as it would The causes of oral clefts (OCs) are multiple and complex, but the first prescribe against unnecessary immunosuppressive therapy . step in the search of genetic basis should be epidemiological and A 12-year-old girl was referred to our laboratory with a diagnosis of ste- clinical data . Although cleft palate (CP) is usually regarded as distinct roid-resistant nephrotic syndrome from pediatric nephrology depart- defect from cleft lip with or without cleft palate, there is still an open ment . We have analyzed PCR amplicons of each of the eight exons of question if the latter should be considered as variants of the same NPHS2 by direct sequencing and we have found that she was carrier defect or should be divided into groups of cleft lip only (CL) and cleft lip of two mutations: R229Q and A284V . The R229Q mutation alone is in- with cleft palate (CLP) . In the retrospective study of multiple congenital sufficient to cause FSGS but the presence of a second A284V NPHS2 anomalies (MCA) of unknown origin in cases of oral clefts in Lithu- mutation on the other allele suggests that compound heterozygosity ania the incidence of anomalies associated with OCs was calculated for these sequence changes is the likely cause of disease . among all three groups: CL, CP and CLP . There were 434 associated anomalies in 143 cases of OCs with MCA . Most frequently affected P01.336 was the musculoskeletal system (31 .6%, 137 anomalies), followed by mutational spectrum of BCOR gene in Oculo-Facio-cardio- cardiovascular (21 .7%, 94), but a more detailed analysis of CL and Dental (OFcD) syndrome CLP cases revealed some differences in the incidence and type of S. Whalen1, E. Hilton2, J. Johnston3, N. Okamoto4, Y. Hatsukawa5, J. Nishio6, S. associated anomalies . Cardiovascular anomalies were the most com- Mizuno7, C. Torii8, K. Kosaki8, S. Manouvrier9, O. Boute9, R. Perveen2, C. Law10, mon associated anomalies (30 .1%), followed by musculoskeletal A. Moore11, J. Lemke12, F. Fellmann13, M. Gerard14, M. Goossens1, A. Verloes14, (23 .8%) and congenital anomalies of ear, face and neck (20 .6%) inClinical genetics  the CL group, while the most common associated anomalies in the P01.340 CLP group were musculoskeletal (32 .9%), cardiovascular anomalies Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma syndrome in two sisters (22 .7%) and anomalies of central nervous system (10 .2%) . There are G. O. Cetin1, F. Duzcan1, E. Tepeli1, F. S. Kirac2; also some differences in pairs of associated anomalies with OCs . The 1Pamukkale University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, results indicate that CL and CLP could be genetically distinct entities Denizli, Turkey, 2Pamukkale University School of Medicine, Department of and should be analyzed separately when possible . Nuclear Medicine, Denizli, Turkey. Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma Syndrome (OPPG) is an autosomal re- P01.338 cessive disorder characterized by congenital blindness and severe Phenotypic diversity of oral-facial-digital syndrome juvenile osteoporosis leading to fragility of long bones . Affected indi- E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, S. Palcevska-Kocevska, viduals often have deformed bones due to fractures . The ophthalmo- L. Kojic; logic findings may include phthisis bulbi, microphthalmia, and some Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. vitreoretinal changes . The OPPG locus is mapped to 11q12-13 and The oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFDS) are variable group of dis- mutations that cause OPPG were identified in the LRP5 gene. LRP5 orders characterized by malformations in oral cavity, face and digits is a member of low density lipoprotein receptors (LDLR) family and a on hands and feet . Nine different subgroups are described depend- component of the Wnt pathway . Here, we report two sisters diagnosed ing on the severity of the above mentioned anomalies as well as on as OPPG who were referred to genetic service with osteogenesis im- the additional anomalies of the brain, kidneys, limbs, eyes and other perfecta, bilateral congenital nystagmus and microphthalmia . . Their organs . However, overlap between groups occurs frequently in de- parents were phenotypically normal first cousins. The older sister was scribed cases . 18 years and the younger was 14 years old . They had congenital blind- Four patients with different type of oral-facial-digital syndrome (OFD) ness and both had operations due to long bone fractures resulting in have been described . The patients showed variable anomalies on oral inability to walk. Physical examination findings included microphthal- structures, tongue and digits on hands and feet . Anomalies of other mia, scleral opacity and skeletal deformities especially in the lower organs and systems were noticed, including brain (1 patient), heart (1 limbs of both sisters . Tc-99m MDP whole-body scintigraphy showed patient) and kidneys (1 patient) . The diagnosis of OFD types I, IV, and deformation and asymmetry of the lower limbs and axial bones of the VI (two patients) has been established . Severity of the disease varied older sister while the younger one had normal scintigraphic findings. in all of them . Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry measurements revealed osteopo- Minor facial anomalies, digital malformations, as well as the existence rosis of both cases. According to these findings OPPG was prediag- of additional malformations of other organs enable classification of the nosed and LRP5 gene mutation screening is planned . patients in subgroups. Although there are attempts for classification according to specific criteria, the diagnosis of the subtype is not always P01.341 easy and clear . Many doubtful cases have been reported . The similar- Overgrowth and X chromosome imbalance: study of two ity and diversity of the clinical findings of the above described cases unrelated females points out the difficulty in delineation of the subtypes of OFD syndrome M. P. Ribate1, J. del Valle2, I. Bueno3, B. Puisac1, M. Arnedo1, M. C. Gil1, J. C. because of the overlapping features between them and with related de Karam1, J. Pie1, L. A. Pérez-Jurado2, F. J. Ramos1,3; syndromes . 1University of Zaragoza Medical School, Zaragoza, Spain, 2University Pompeu i Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Clínico Universitario, Zaragoza, Spain. P01.339 In humans, partial X chromosome duplications/deletions are relatively Randomized dose comparison of pamidronate in children with rare chromosome rearrangements, described predominantly in males types iii and iV Osteogenesis imperfecta: 3 vs 6 month cycles with mental retardation and generally associated with phenotype anom- J. C. Marini1, A. A. Obafemi1,2, M. K. Abukhaled1, H. L. Cintas3, J. F. Troendle4, alies . Nevertheless affected females have also been reported although A. D. Letocha1, J. C. Reynolds5, S. Paul3; most of them do not show abnormal clinical findings, probably due 1National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD, to skewed, preferential inactivation of dup/del(X) chromosomes, and United States, 2Clinical Research Training Program-Foundation for NIH and subsequent selection against cells with an active abnormal X in carrier Pfizer Inc, grant research support, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Rehabilitation females . However, some females with dup/del(X) chromosomes and Medicine, NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Biometry and random X-inactivation also exhibit developmental anomalies . There- Mathematical Statistics Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, fore, females with two X chromosomes and an active duplicated/de- 5Nuclear Medicine, NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD, United States. leted segment are functionally disomic/monosomic for genes that are Aim: To determine whether the vertebral benefits of q3m infusion cy- normally subject to X-inactivation and functionally trisomic/disomic for cles can be attained on q6m cycles, with a lower cumulative dose . those genes that escape X inactivation . Methods: Twenty-seven children with types III and IV OI were random- Here, we report on two unrelated females with overgrowth, Sotos- ly assigned to receive 1mg/kg/3d IV pamidronate in q3 or q6 month like phenotype, mental retardation, normal sexual development and cycles . All patients had spine radiographs, L1-L4 DXA, and musculo- de novo X chromosome anomalies, both originated in the paternal X skeletal and function testing . chromosome and showed random X-inactivation . Diagnosis was con- Results: L1-L4 DEXA increased significantly after 1 year of q3m cy- firmed by array-CGH and MLPA, and completed by X-inactivation and cles, with average change in z-score =+1 .41 SD, but did not improve microsatellite studies. The first case, a 14 year-old girl with epilepsy significantly with further treatment. In the q6m group, the average carried a 20.2 Mb Xp duplication (p11.3 → p21.3). The second, a 17 change in DEXA was not significant. Repeated measures analysis of year-old female was found to have a 26 Mb Xq deletion (q24-qter) and DEXA z-scores yielded a z-score rate change of 0 .064 SD/m for q3 vs she had idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). These findings 0 .036 SD/m for q6 group (p=0 .13) . T12-L4 vertebral area and central indicate that a gross functional imbalance in the cells with functional height were determined from radiographs . Repeated measures analy- disomy/monosomy due to an active dup(Xp)/del(Xq) chromosome re- sis revealed significant improvement of q6m group average LI-L4 and spectively, may have caused the same effect on prenatal and postnatal T12-L2 vertebral height (p=0 .05, 0 .01) and area (p=0 .002, 0 .006) . The growth in both patients . rate of improvement of the q3m and q6m groups did not differ for L1-L4 area or height (p=0 .52, 0 .86) or T12-L2 area or height (p=0 .28, 0 .77) . P01.342 The OI children had no significant improvement in fracture incidence, Vitamin A deficiency in a neonate with PAGOD syndrome manual muscle testing or BAMF motor scores in either group . Note- D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, R. Gavrilova, S. Kirmani, A. N. Lteif, T. M. Olson; worthy, response to treatment was highly variable in each treatment Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. group; improvement in vertebral area did not correlate with change in PAGOD syndrome is a rare condition characterized by multiple con- DEXA z-score . genital anomalies . These include pulmonary artery and lung hypopla- Conclusions: Equivalent gains in vertebral height and area are obtained sia, agonadism, diaphragmatic abnormalities and congenital cardiac with q6m and q3m pamidronate cycles . For individual OI children, gain defects . Omphalocele, various degrees of genital anomalies, cleft pal- in DEXA does not correlate with extent of vertebral response . ate and optic nerve hypoplasia have also been described in affected patients . The etiology of this condition is still unknown . The spectrum ofClinical genetics  birth defects is similar to developmental anomalies that are observed in P01.345 an animal model with vitamin A or retinoic acid deficiency. We describe Analysis of the cAG repeat and A467t and W748s POLG an infant with hypoplastic left heart, right pulmonary artery and lung hy- mutations in iranian patients With multiple sclerosis poplasia, eventration of right hemidiaphragm, complete hypospadias H. Soltanzadeh1, M. Ataei2, M. Shaf2, M. Houshmand2, M. Nabavi3, K. Parivar4, and absent gonads . The karyotype was normal (46,XY) and FISH for M. Ariany5, M. H. Sanati2; SRY locus was present . Endocrine evaluations were suggestive of pri- 1Young researchers club. Science and Research of Islamic Azad University. mary hypogonadism . Low testosterone, AMH (anti mullerian hormone) National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic and Inhibin B values along with absence of visualized testicular tissue Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, and Mullerian structures by imaging studies, indicated a defect in early Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahed university, Tehran, Islamic Republic embryogenesis . Interestingly, the level of plasma free retinol was low, of Iran, 4Science and Research Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Repub- consistent with severe vitamin A deficiency, supporting the hypothesis lic of Iran, 5Special Medical center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. that a defect in vitamin A metabolism may have an etiological role in Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune multifactorial disease that this syndrome with multiple congenital anomalies . usually develops in susceptible young adults . A possible involvement of mitochondria in MS has been postulated because of a higher rate P01.343 transmission of the disease from mother to child than from father to Perrault syndrome: Report of Four New cases, Review and child . Also association between Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy Exclusion of candidate Genes a mitochondrial disease and MS is another evidence . Fatigue is a com- S. Marlin1,2, D. Lacombe3, L. Jonard4, N. Leboulanger4, D. Bonneau5, C. mon problem of the MS patients which is relted to the energy produc- Goiset3, T. Billette de Villemeur4, S. Cabrol4, M. Houang4, D. Feldmann4, F. tion difficulty by the mitochondria. To investigate further the relation- Denoyelle4; ship between MS and mitochondria we analysed the gene encoding 1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, paris, France, 2INSERM U587, Centre de réfé- for polymerase G (POLG) . Among the nearly 50 disease mutations in rence des surdités génétiques, Paris, France, 3Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, the gene for the catalytic subunit of POLG, The A467T mutant enzyme France, 4Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 5CHU, Angers, France. possesses only 4% of wild-type DNA polymerase activity . Sensorineural hearing impairment and ovarian dysgenesis are the Polymerase gene (pol G) is a two-subunit complex consisting of a main clinical signs of the Perrault syndrome. This syndrome was first 140-kDa catalytic and a 55-kDa accessory subunit (p55the Nterminal- described by Perrault et al in 1951. Since this first report, about 30 catalytic subunit contains a trinucleotide CAG repeat encoding a poly- cases were described . More recently, some authors have reported glutamine tract near the amino-terminus of the protein . Expansions neurologic abnormalities in Perrault syndrome, in particular progres- of similar polyglutamine-encoding CAG microsatellite repeats in other sive cerebellar ataxia and mental retardation . We present here on genes are known to cause neurodegenerative disorders . three sporadic and two familial new cases of Perrault syndrome . Only Total genomic DNA was extracted from 60 idiopathic Ms Patients and two of them present with neurological defect . We analyse the clinical 40 controls . Primers were designed to amplify the 4 hot exones and features of this five patients and review the published cases in order CAG repeat length of the gene following by sequencing . The distribu- to evaluate the frequency of the neurological defect in this syndrome . tion of the POLG CAG repeat length in the control samples matched Moreover, we exclude GBG2, POLG and FOXL2 as candidate genes the distribution reported for control samples by others . The analysis in Perrault syndrome . of our sample shows no difference between the CAG repeat length distribution of control and ms disease samples analysis of exon 7, 8, 9, P01.344 and13 of POLG gene from 60 DNA samples of MS patients showed no susceptibility markers for PFAPA disease mutation . However this does not exclude the association of the gene R. Gershoni-Baruch1,2, E. Dagan1,3, K. Ihab4, A. Mori1, N. Amar1, R. Brik4,2; in MS but it needs more investigation . Also it is necessary to test the 1Rambam Health Care Campus, Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, other exones of the gene . 2The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Department of Nursing, University of Haifa, Haifa, P01.346 Israel, 4Rambam Health Care Campus, Department of Pediatrics, Haifa, Israel. TCF deletions in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome Periodic fever syndrome (PFAPA) is characterized by aphthous sto- I. Giurgea1,2,3, C. Missirian4, S. Whalen1,2,3, T. Fredriksen1,2,3, T. Gaillon1,2,3, J. matitis, pharyngitis and cervical adenitis . The periodic fever and auto- Rankin5, M. Mathieu-Dramard6, G. Morin6, D. Martin-Coignard7, B. Chabrol8, inflammatory syndromes constitute a group of diseases characterized J. Arfi9, F. Giuliano10, J. Lambert10, L. Villard11, N. Philip12,9, M. Goossens1,2,3, A. by repeated febrile illnesses associated with various other symptoms . Moncla12,9; Except for PFAPA, the genetic basis of each of these diseases is 1INSERM U841, IMRB, département de génétique, Equipe 11, Créteil, France, known . Predominant mutations in MEFV, TNF1A and CARD15/NOD2 2Université Paris 12, Faculté de Médecine, IFR10, Créteil, France, 3AP-HP, were analyzed in 57 children diagnosed with PFAPA . Groupe Hospitalier Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, Service de biochimie et Children with PFAPA were carefully selected based on clinical signs génétique, Créteil, France, 42Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital and symptoms . All patients were recruited at the Department of Pedi- des enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, atrics, Meyer Hospital of Children, Rambam-Health Care Campus dur- Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust (Heavitree), Exeter, United Kin- ing 2006-2007 . Parents were invited to include their PFAPA diagnosed gdom, 6Département de Génétique Médicale, CHU d’Amiens - Nord, Amiens, children in the study and to sign inform consent forms as customary . France, 7Département de Génétique Médicale, CH du Mans, Le Mans, France, Clinical information was complemented during physicians-parents en- 8Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital des enfants de la Timone, Marseille, Fran- counter and a blood sample was drawn for molecular testing . PCR and ce, 9Unité INSERM U491 « Génétique Médicale & Développement », Faculté RFLPs for the predominant mutations in MEFV, TNF1A and CARD15/ de Médecine La Timone, Marseille, France, 10Service de Génétique, Hôpital NOD2 genes were performed . L’Archet 2, Nice, France, 11Faculté de Médecine La Timone, Marseille, France, The cohort consisted of 57 children with PFAPA [33 (58%) boys; 24 12Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital des enfants de la Timone, Mar- (42%) girls] . The mean age at diagnosis was 30 .64±16 .4 months, seille, France. boys were diagnosed earlier than girls (26 .18±13 .83 and 36 .41±18 .32 Background: Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a syndromic mental re- months, respectively, p=0 .05) . Predominant mutations in the MEFV tardation disorder marked by hyperventilation episodes and charac- genes were found in 16 (28 .1%) children, mutations in TNF1A were teristic dysmorphism (large beaked nose, wide mouth, fleshy lips, and found in 3 (5 .2%) children and mutations in CARD15 also in 3 (5 .2%) clubbed fingertips). PHS has been shown to be caused by de novo children . The clinical symptoms (e .g . pharangytis, aphthous stoma- heterozygous mutations of the TCF4 gene, located in 18q21 . To ex- titis, abdominal pain and cervical adenitis) were equally manifested pand the phenotypic spectrum of mutations and deletions of the TCF4 between carriers and non-carriers . gene, we studied 30 hitherto unexplored patients whose phenotype In Israeli children diagnosed with PFAPA a higher frequency of mu- overlapped with PHS . tations in MEFV gene were found compared to that observed in the Methods: The TCF4 gene was analysed by QMF-PCR, followed by general population . sequencing . Large deletions were characterised by CGH array . All pa- tients were karyotyped . Results: In three patients, 18q21 .1-q22 .2 deletions were revealed byClinical genetics  karyotyping . QMF-PCR permitted to detect one large deletion and six tion) using DHPLC and DNA sequencing . small deletions generating premature stop codons . Age at presentation varied from 1 month to 49 years (median 6 y) . The patients with small deletions had characteristic dysmorphic fea- AGT residual activity in liver biopsies is available for 34 subjects . In tures . All patients had severe developmental delay, late (after 5 years) 33 it was possible to define B6 responsiveness by comparing plasma or absent walking, no speech, and microcephaly . We found a high in- oxalate before and after oral supplementation . cidence of myopia in all patients who had undergone eye testing . We 23 different mutations were found (6 unpublished); missense muta- frequently observed a happy disposition, stereotypic movements and tions affect evolutionary conserved residues and are absent in 160 strabismus . In contrast, hyperventilation, epilepsy, constipation were chromosomes of healthy ethnically matched controls . inconstant, and none of them had Hirschsprung disease or visceral Genotype-phenotype correlations show an important role of non-ge- malformation . netic factors as diet or delayed diagnosis, and confirm in our popu- Conclusion: We report 10 novel TCF4 deletions, in patients whose lation that the most frequent mutation G170R, causing mitochondrial phenotype strongly overlapped with PHS . However, we observed phe- mistargeting, is associated with a mild phenotype (residual enzymatic notypic variations between the small deletions and the large genomic activity, late onset and responsiveness to B6) . For missense (G116R) deletions, which may lay the basis for further genotype-phenotype cor- and insdel inframe (c .283dupGAG) mutations we presume an antimor- relations at the TCF4 locus . Owing to the large number of deletions phic effect as they were found only in patients with a severe phenotype and microdeletions/insertions in TCF4 we would address to start the despite the presence of a mild mutation on the other allele . molecular study by a QMF-PCR analysis . P01.349 P01.347 Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome:case report medical and auxological outcome in seventy 2-year-old A. Laku (Babameto)1, V. Mokin1, L. Grimci2; singletons born after embryo biopsy applied in preimplantation 1University Hospital Center”Mother Theresa”, Service of Medical Genetics, Ti- genetic diagnosis or preimplantation genetic screening rana, Albania, 2University Hospital Center”Mother Theresa”, Service of Pediatric S. Desmyttere1, J. De Schepper2, J. Nekkebroeck3, A. De Vos4, M. De Rijcke1, Endocrinology, Tirana, Albania. C. Staessen1, I. Liebaers1, M. Bonduelle1; Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome or neonatal progeroid syn- 1UZBrussel, Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2UZBrussel, drome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, with few published case Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Brussels, Belgium, 3VUB, Department reports . WRS is characterized by progeroid appearance at birth, lipoat- of Developmental- and Lifespan Psychology, Brussels, Belgium, 4UZBrussel, rophy, slow growth . Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Brussels, Belgium. We report a 8 months old female, the fourth child of a healthy noncon- Introduction: Limited data are available on the growth and clinical out- sanguineous couple . The pregnancy was unremarkable . The birth was come of children born after embryo biopsy . Embryo biopsy is an in- at term with prenatal hypoplasia and aged signs present at birth . (BW vasive procedure to perform preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) 2500 g, BL 47 cm) . At age of 8 months old progeroid appearance be- or screening (PGS) . The objective was to determine if embryo biopsy came more pronounced . The patient showed growth delay (W=3,9kg; might cause prenatal and/or postnatal growth restriction and induce L=60cm,), muscle hypotrophy, psychomotor retardation and typical congenital malformations . progeroid features; senile-appearing triangular face, beak-shaped Materials and methods: In this study we compared growth and physi- nose, microstomia, micrognathia, congenital incisors, hidrocephaloid cal findings between seventy 2- year -old singletons born after PGD/ cranium, widened fontanelles and sutures, prominent veins on scalp, PGS compared to intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI) and spon- hypotrichosis, relatively large fingers and toes, wrinkled skin, lipoatro- taneous conception (SC) . Children were matched for gender, maternal phy with scleroderma-like changes of skin on the buttocks . She had educational level, mother tongue and birth order . feeding problems . Results: No differences were found regarding weight, height and head- Congenital cataract and glaucoma were revealed . Ultrasound exami- circumference standard deviation scores at birth and at age two years . nation of brain, heart and abdomen did not reveal any abnormalities . Body Mass Index standard deviation score in PGD/PGS children at age Chromosomal and biochemical analyses were normal . Clinical features two years was lower compared to SC children (p = 0 .05) . PGD/PGS of our patient were compared with published data of WR syndrome, children were more frequently born after caesarian section but had no other premature aging syndromes, nonclassified progeroid conditions. more congenital malformations, hospital admissions and surgical in- We have established “neonatal progeroid Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch terventions . Growth parameters within the PGD/PGS group of children syndrome” based on association of characteristic aging appearance born after biopsy of one or two blastomeres were comparable . present at birth, failure to thrive, deficient growth and development, hy- Conclusions: Singleton children born after embryo biopsy applied in potrichosis, signs of generalized lypoatrophy, scleroderma-like chang- PGD/PGS present a similar prenatal and early postnatal linear growth es of skin on the buttocks and congenital incisors . The parents were compared to ICSI children and SC children . PGD/PGS singletons ap- informed about the genetic risk of recurrence . pear not at higher risk for congenital malformations and surgical in- terventions . Body Mass Index standard deviation score was slightly P01.350 lower in PGD/PGS children compared to SC children . There are no A case report of proteus syndrome observable detrimental effects of the PGD/PGS procedure on children I. Chelly, F. Maazoul, L. Kraoua, I. Ouertani, M. Chaabouni, L. Ben Jemaa, R. during the first years of life. Mrad, H. Chaabouni; department of heridatary and congenital disorders, Tunis, Tunisia. P01.348 Proteus Syndrome (PS) was initially described in 1979 by Cohen and Primary hyperoxaluria in italy Hayden and assigned its name several years later in 1983 by Wie- A. Robbiano1, G. Mandrile1, M. Petrarulo2, D. Pirulli3, C. Zadro3, D. Giachino1, demann . This is a relatively recently delineated syndrome, probably M. Marangella2, A. Amoroso4, M. De Marchi1; because it is so rare and because it overlaps with a number of other 1Medical Genetics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Renal Stone Centre, asymmetric overgrowth syndromes . Mauriziano Hosp., Torino, Italy, 3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 4Dept. of The disorder primarily manifests as postnatal overgrowth, with irregu- Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino, Torino, Italy. lar, distorting and progressive overgrowth that can include many tis- Primary Hyperoxaluria (PH) is a rare autosomal recessive disease sues essentially connective tissue, bone, skin, central nervous system, with impaired hepatic detoxification of glyoxylate, due to AGT (PHI) and the eye . or GRHPR (PHII) enzyme deficiency. Oxalate overproduction in turn The overgrowth of PS is progressive and can be difficult to manage. It causes nephrolithiasis, end-stage renal failure, systemic oxalosis and can cause severe orthopaedic complications . multi-tissue damage . In responsive subjects an early biochemical and One of the most common complications in patients with PS is deep genetic diagnosis can address to treatment with vitamin B6 (the AGT venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, which can cause pre- cofactor) . In many cases liver or combined liver/kidney transplant is mature death . necessary to correct the metabolic defect . The management of this syndrome requires knowledge of the wide array In a cohort of 47 PHI and 2 PHII Italian patients we identified the patho- of manifestations and complications and a multidisciplinary approach . genic mutation of 90/94 PHI and 4/4 PHII alleles (96% mutation detec- Patients with PS have an increased risk of developing tumours .Clinical genetics  The cause of this disorder is unknown . All cases have been sporadic family to locate the gene for primary pulmonary vein stenosis . This events in the otherwise normal families . It is most likely caused by a syndrome might be underdiagnosed due to post- and prenatal lethal- somatic mutation of a gene that is lethal when occurring in the non- ity . mosaic state . We report on a sporadic case of two years old boy in which Proteus P01.353 Syndrome is diagnosis because of a large haemangioma in the right Quadrupedal Locomotion and cerebellar Hypoplasia caused hemi chest and the upper limb . He has also a macrodactyly of the left by mutations in the Very Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor thumb, hemihypertrophie . He has also a multiple soft subcutaneous (VLDLR) Gene swellings over the chest and the abdomen . S. Türkmen1, K. Hofmann1, D. Aruoba2, N. Humphrey3, S. Mundlos1,4; 1Charité Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 2Valikonogi Nisantasi, Istanbul, P01.351 Turkey, 3Centre for Philosophy of Natural and Social Science, London School Identification of PSEN1Δ9 mutation in mexican families with of Economics, London, United Kingdom, 4Max Planck Institut für Molekulare spastic paraparesis and presenil dementia Genetik, Berlin, Germany. G. Castañeda-Cisneros1,2, D. García-Cruz3, C. Moran-Moguel1, S. Gutiérrez- The cerebellum is the primary motor coordination centre of the cen- Rubio1, M. López-Cardona3, I. Dávalos-Rodríguez4, R. Rosales-Gómez1, F. tral nervous system . Lesions or congenital defects of the cerebellum Jiménez-Gil5, P. Nava-Rodríguez4, M. Macías5, J. Sánchez-Corona1; cause incoordination of the muscles resulting in irregular gait and fall- 1División de Medicina Molecular, Centro de Investigación Biomédica de Oc- ing . Recently, we reported a large family with cerebellum hypoplasia cidente, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico, 2Depar- and quadrupedal locomotion as a recessive trait, which we mapped to tamento de Neurocirugía, Hospital de Especialidades, Instituto Mexicano del chromosome 17p13 . Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico, 3Instituto de Genética Humana, Univer- We identified one additional family with the same condition and sidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 4División de Genética, Centro de mapped the underlying gene to a 14-centimorgan interval on chromo- Investigación Biomédica de Occidente, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, some 9ptel using a genome wide linkage approach . Sequencing of Guadalajara, Mexico, 5Departamento de Neurología, Hospital de Especiali- candidate genes identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the dades, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico. Very Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor (VLDLR) gene in all affected Spastic paraparesis and early-onset dementia (also known as early- individuals . The association of cerebellar hypoplasia with mutations in onset familial Alzheimer disease-3) is rare, and 26 families have been VLDLR has been reported previously in the Hutterite population and worldwide described; in most of them several mutations in PSEN1 in a family from Iran . However, quadrupedal locomation was never ob- included point mutations (exons 3, 4, 7, 8 y 12), insertions (exon 3) served indicating that environmental factors play a major role in the and deletions (exons 4, 9, 12) that have been identified. Our aim is to pathogenesis of this form of locomotion . detect the PSEN1Δ9 mutation related with high frequency and sever- ity . In Mexico there are not familial reports with this disease, therefore P01.354 it is unknown if previously described mutations are present in these Old iranian scientists conception about reproduction and families . Genetics were almost similar to modern Facts In this study we described eight families with clinical signs that corre- M. H. Kariminejad; lated with spastic paraparesis and early-onset dementia . They showed Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic an autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity . Affected of Iran. subjects per family are 2 to 6 with mean onset age of 45 .1 years and The oldest scientific hypothesis in this regards is attributed to Hip- sex ratio of 1/0 .76 . pocrates, which denotes, that “man’s water (semen) is an extract from Molecular analysis demonstrated a PSEN1Δ9 mutation in eight af- the whole body and contains all the characteristics of the man” . fected subjects and in two non-affected (33 and 36 years old), 34 .78% Aristotle believed that the semen originated from blood and gave life to and 6.06% of total amount respectively. At least it was identified in the clotted menstrual blood . In general, the scientists believed that all one affected subject out of six studied families . It was not possible to characteristics were inherited only from the father . This belief persisted conclude that PSEN1Δ9 mutation itself explains the presence of this for about 2000 years, until William Harvey, showed that there were no phenotype in Mexican families . traces of blood clots in the uterus of the pregnant hunted gazelles . C .E . Wolf in the late 17th century showed that the embryo is a product P01.352 of the fertilization of ovum by spermatozoid . It is surprising that based Primary pulmonary vein stenosis and lymphatic anomalies: a on the Zoroastrian law the right of women and men were equal in all new syndrome? respects . I. van de Laar, I. Frohn-Mulder, M. Dalinghaus, R. de Krijger, M. Husen-Eb- The Zoroastrian priests, would pass, this important position to their binge, A. M. Bertoli-Avella, M. Wessels; offspring regardless of the sex . Eight hundred years before Wolfs’ dis- Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. covery the sage Ferdowsi describes the royal characteristic of Kayk- Primary pulmonary vein stenosis is a rare congenital vascular mal- hosrow, the grand son of the kings Kaykavoos and Afrasyab: “He, the formation with a high mortality rate . It is characterized by obstruction pure bred, has inherited from two races” . of one or multiple pulmonary veins. Most patients present in the first More interesting, in the book written in the first half of the thirteenth year(s) of life with failure to thrive, dyspnoea, and recurrent pneumo- century, characteristics of the spermatozoid have been described in nias . Later pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary oedema and hae- an appealing way almost same as what we know today . Despite this moptysis develop . Most patients die during infancy since there are no brilliant history, there was a big gap in this field between our country adequate therapeutic options . So far only sporadic cases have been and the developed world . described . The aetiology of the disease is unknown and many possible In spite of a long standstill, recently, we have moved to the front line underlying pathologic mechanisms have been described . with our outstanding advancements in diagnosis, prevention and treat- We present a consanguineous Turkish family with four affected sib- ment of hereditary diseases, particularly application of embryonic cells lings (three males and one female) of healthy parents. The first child in production and restoration of body organs and cloning of “Roya- died at 16 months due to progressive pulmonary vein stenosis . The fol- na”, which with all rewarding advancements, have placed our country lowing two sibs presented prenatally with cystic hygroma and mild skin among pioneers and leaders of this caravan . oedema . Chromosome analysis was normal . At birth cardiac evalua- tion was normal but both developed severe and progressive stenosis P01.355 of the pulmonary veins in the following months of life . Both died before mitochondriopathy presenting with immune disorder the age of 8 months due to restenosis of the pulmonary veins after sur- I. Karačić1, A. Gagro2, R. Horvath3, M. Ćuk1, V. Sarnavka4, G. Tešović5, H. gical intervention . The fourth pregnancy was terminated due to cystic Lochmuller6, N. Barišić1,4, M. Novak4, S. Galić4, M. Cvitković4, M. Jelušić1,4, M. hygroma and severe hydrops . Vidović4, D. Begović1,4, L. Tambić-Bukovac4, I. Barić1,4; These data provide evidence for an autosomal recessive form of pri- 1Zagreb University School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute of Immunol- mary pulmonary vein stenosis associated with lymphatic anomalies ogy, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Mitochondrial Research Group, University of Newcastle and hydrops . We are performing genome wide linkage studies in this upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Department of Pediatrics,Clinical genetics  University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 5University Hospital for vertebra malformations. At birth, besides the findings of sirenomelia Infectious Diseases Dr. Fran Mihaljević, Zagreb, Croatia, 6Institute of Human sequence with footless, the fetus also presented bilateral anotia, an un- Genetics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United usual cleft palate, and also an unusual phallic structure on the genital Kingdom. region . The review of 7 cases occurring at the same hospital showed Due to ubiquitous nature of oxidative phosphorylation and dual genetic a high prevalence (1 .2 cases per 10,000 births) of sirenomelia, prob- origin of respiratory chain enzymes (nuclear and mitochondrial DNA) ably, due to the prenatal diagnosis . All are single cases . The maternal their deficiencies can produce any symptom in any organ. However, diseases referred by these respective mothers were hypotiroidism, de- the involvement of the immune system in mitochondriopathies is rare . pression and arterial hypertension . The main medicines used by them We report a girl aged 20 months with combined respiratory chain de- were l-thyroxine, fluoxetine, captopril, and amphetamines. Although fect and immunologic impairment that includes T-cell immunodeficien- the sonographic evaluation performed at the first trimester has been cy and autoimmune reactions. Main clinical findings were generalized made in two cases, sirenomelia was never referred at prenatal time . hypotonia, rotatory nystagmus, failure to thrive and respiratory defi- In conclusion, besides the case with a rare pattern of sirenomelia as- ciency due to persistent lung infections . In trachea a large spectrum of sociated with other no related defects, the review of seven new cases bacteria and fungi (mostly Aspergillus fumigatus) has been detected . shows the inability of sonographists to make diagnosis of sirenomelia . Cytomegalovirus infection was permanent with up to 240,000 copies of CMV DNA/ml of blood despite one year ganciclovir treatment . She had P01.358 crises with fever, tachycardia and facial blushing. Laboratory findings sirenomelia sequence: clinical, radiological and postmortem pointed to autoimmune processes (positive anticardiolipin antibodies, findings positive direct and indirect Coombs test and positive antiplatelet anti- S. Balci1, G. Altinok2; bodies, hypergammaglobulinemia) and immunodeficiency. The clini- 1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics (Emeritus cal impression of an immunodeficiency was supported by repeatedly Member), Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Department of Pathology, increased CD4/CD8 ratio (6.3; normal 0.97-2.3) with significant de- Ankara, Turkey. crease of CD8 T cells (9%) . Flow cytometric analysis of intracellular Sirenomelia is a Greco-Roman mythical creature with the tail of a fish staining of IFN-gamma and IL-4 in CD4 and CD8 T cells showed three and a human upper body . Similarly, Sirenomelia Sequence is charac- times very low IFN-gamma in CD8 T cells (0 .5-1%; reference range terised by fusion and reduction of lower extremities; renal and sacral 2-7%) . agenesis; imperforate anus; absence of rectum and bladder . It is The severely reduced activity of respiratory chain complexes I (3 .0 indeed an “orphan” malformation since it is not even recognised as U/gNCP; normal 15 .8-42 .8) and IV (53 .6 U/gNCP; normal 112-351) in a separate entity in the OMIM cataloque . Here, we report a total of skeletal muscle suggested mitochondrial etiology . Sequencing of the five cases, including a pair of twin sibs, who were classified accord- mtDNA tRNA genes did not reveal pathogenic mutations and mtDNA ing to Stocker classification as type I, VI and VII (N=1 each) and type depletion was excluded by real-time PCR suggesting a mitochondrial II (N=2) . All patients had a single umbilical artery; imperforate anus translation defect . , oligo hydramnion; Potter facies; congenital heart diseases; gastro- intestinal and genitourinary abnormalities . One of the twins had full P01.356 blown expression of Sirenomelia, whereas the other had imperforate Horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis can result from anus only (Clinical Dysmorphology 2000; 9:227) . Maternal diabetes new missens mutation in ROBO gene in Russian family was associated with Sirenomelia in one patient (Turkish Journal of V. A. Galkina, A. Kalygina, O. A. Schagina, A. V. Polyakov; Pediatrics 1996; 38: 393) . The earliest age of prenatal diagnosis was Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. fourteen weeks based on the observation of severe oligohidramnion Horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis (HGPPS) is an auto- and a single lower extremity at ultrasonography. Postmortem findings somal recessive disorder characterized by congenital absence of hori- of this case revealed a blind end of the abdominal aorta, a single femur zontal gaze, progressive scoliosis, and failure of the corticospinal and and hypoplastic fused tibiae, renal agenesis, a dysplastic kidney, a hy- somatosensory axon tracts to decussate in the medulla . The reasons poplastic bladder, genital organ agenesis, colon abnormalities, hypo- of disease are various homozygous or compound heterozygous muta- plasia of the cerebellum and the posterior fossa . Severe maternal B12 tions in the axon guidance molecule ROBO3 . and Folic Acid deficiency were present in this case. These etiological Two sisters seven and ten years old from Armenian family with short factors have not been reported previously although various teratogenic stature non-proportional because of spine deformity were examined events have frequently been associated with Sirenomelia . by us . Both of them has progressive scoliosis (the oldest sister has right-sided scoliosis and younger has left-sided one) . Now both girls P01.359 have severe thorakolumbar scoliosis . Two girls have congenital exter- sirenomelia with a de novo balanced translocation 46,XX,t(X;16) nal ophtalmoplegia, gorisontal gaze palsy, which at birth onset . (p11.3;p12.3) DNA was extracted from a blood sample from each participant using K. Kurosawa, M. Takei, N. Furuya, H. Yoshihashi, M. Yamanaka; a standard protocol, and the coding exons of ROBO3 were amplified Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. and sequenced . Sirenomelia is a rare developmental abnormality, characterized by the Two sibs with horizontal progressive external ophthalmoplegia unique fused lower limbs, and abnormalities in the caudal abdomen and pel- and scoliosis have c .290G>C (Trp97Ser) mutation in homozygous vis. Most cases are sporadic and specific causes and early pathoge- state in ROBO3 gene . Each of their parents was the heterozygotic car- netic events leading to sirenomelia are unknown . We report a single- rier of this mutation . This mutation was not previously described . ton female fetus with sirenomelia with 46,XX t(X;16)(p11 .3;p12 .3)dn . The pregnancy was electively terminated at 21 weeks gestation af- P01.357 ter prenatal ultrasound examination . The birth weight was 294g, and An unusual case of sirenomelia and a review of the casuistic of length 25 .5cm . The external genitalia was ambiguous and anal atre- the Perinatal Genetic Program, UNicAmP, Brazil sia was noted. At autopsy, anatomical findings included absence of D. P. Cavalcanti1, P. L. P. Rojas1,2; bilateral kidney and bladder, hypoplastic or absence of renal artery 1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Universidad Javeriana, Bogotá, Colombia. and inferior mesenteric artery . Unfortunately the results of karyotype Sirenomelia sequence is a rare and etiologically unknown anomaly, were revealed after autopsy . The cytogenetic analysis of breakpoints which is considered as a primary defect of the blastogenesis . The pur- was so limited . FISH experiments with BACs were employed for nar- poses of this presentation is, first, reporting a case of sirenomelia as- rowing of the breakpoint regions . On chromosome 16, the breakpoint sociated with a unique constellation of malformations, and, second, was mapped between RP11-347K10 (16p12 .3, 17 .55Mb from pter) exploring the casuistic of this anomaly in the Perinatal Genetic Pro- and RP11-167K14 (16p12 .2, 20 .87Mb from pter) . On chromosome X, gram during a twenty years period . The case reported is the product the breakpoint was mapped between RP11-245M24 (Xp11 .3, 45 .36Mb of the first gestation of young and non consanguineous parents. Fam- from pter) and RP11-416B14 (Xp11 .23, 48 .46 Mb from pter) . Abnormal ily history was unremarkable . Gestational period was also uneventful, phenotype, present in balanced translocation, was caused by dele- except for prenatal ultrasonographic evaluation that revealed bilateral tion or breakage of dosage-sensitive genes of breakpoint, or disruption renal agenesis, absence of the left lower limb and the right fibula, and of an imprinted gene . In addition, cases with balanced translocationsClinical genetics  were assumed to be at risk for UPD . To date, only one case with abnor- P01.362 mal karyotype involving maternal UPD16 was reported as body stalk screening of telomeric regions by mLPA in more than 470 anomaly [Chan et al ., 2000] . Although the parental origin of normal 16 patients with mental retardation and fetuses with malformations and der(16) remained to be determined, this case will provide insight R. L. Touraine1, A. Combes1, M. Gilet1, M. Till2, D. Sanlaville2, P. Edery2, P. into consideration of pathogenetic mechanism of sirenomelia . Jouk3, V. Herbepin-Granados1, F. Prieur1; 1CHU de Saint Etienne, Saint etienne, France, 2CHU de Lyon, Lyon, France, P01.360 3CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France. Hereditary spastic paraplegia, type 4, in Russian families Cryptic telomeric rearrangements are frequent causes of mental re- G. E. Rudenskaya, I. S. Sermyagina, A. Kalygina, S. Kazakova, A. V. tardation and/or malformation syndromes . We used for more than 2 Polyakov; years, a systematic screening of all subtelomeric regions using MLPA Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. with two commercial kits from MRC Holland . Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP), type 4, or SPG4, caused by We studied more than 470 patients, including 44 fetuses with malfor- various mutations in spastin gene (SPAST) is the most common dis- mations . Except for theses fetuses, all the patients had mental retarda- order in a heterogeneous group of autosomal dominant HSP’s . We tion, associated for most of them with some malformation or dysmor- performed a search of SPAST mutations by routine methods (SSCP phic features . In every cases, but four, standard karyotype analysis and subsequent direct sequencing of fragments with modified electro- was normal . phoretic mobility) in a sample of 26 families with autosomal dominant Only one fetus (2,5 %) is probably positive . This case is likely a 15q HSP from different Russian regions. In six families, five of Russian and deletion, but FISH analysis was not possible to confirm it. one of Tatar ethnicity, different SPAST mutations were detected . Three Among our postnatal cases, 15 anomalies, not suspected on karyo- of them, Arg431Stop, 839-840 delAG, and Asn386Ser, were already type analysis were confirmed (3,5%) and 4 suspected anomalies were reported; the remaining three, Asp555Tyr, 1107A>G, and Asn184Thr, further analyzed . were novel . One more large family showed a linkage to SPG4 locus In addition some anomalies with only one MLPA kit were identified in (lod score 1 .51) but mutation was not found . This may be due to atypi- an unaffected parent and therefore considered as polymorphism . On cal SPAST mutations (partial deletions etc) undetectable by routine the opposite, true anomalies were sometimes detected with only one methods of DNA analysis . Including this family, the proportion of SPG4 MLPA kit . in the sample is 27%, which is less than average world data (40_50%) . Unexpectedly, 5 anomalies implied M9p, including 3 «pure» subtelo- Most of our patients presented relatively late-onset “uncompicated” meric monosomies . One case was familial, inherited from the mother HSP, which is typical for SPG4 . Though, in some families additional (with border-line mental retardation) . features were reported, epilepsy among them . One of our patients had In conclusion, MLPA technique for telomeric screening is interesting very early-onset HSP and concomitant epilepsy while his mother had and not very expensive . Furthermore, some of the anomalies we de- typical SPG4 presentation . All pedigrees showed complete penetrance tected here, were almost «non-syndromic», favoring a non-specific all- though some patients, women particularly, had mild signs of the dis- telomeres screening approach in mental retardation . ease, even late in life . Another relatively frequent autosomal dominant At last, further molecular analysis, including CGH-array, of our M9pter HSP is SPG3 caused by mutations of atlastin gene (6_10%) . We plan cases is in progress to refine phenotype/genotype correlations. to perform a search of atlastin mutation in families without SPAST mu- tations . P01.363 testicular dysgenesis syndrome: more common after assisted P01.361 reproduction? Glaucoma, short stature, mental retardation and ischemic S. Funke, E. Flach, Z. Mánfai, T. Ertl; stroke: A new autosomal-recessive syndrome mapping to University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. chromosome 20q11-12 Recent reports have demonstrated a decline in human male reproduc- F. Rutsch1, C. George1, M. Frosch1, C. Becker2, G. Nürnberg2, P. Nürnberg2; tion health: increasing prevalence of cryptorchidism, hypospadias, poor 1University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Cologne Center for Ge- semen quality, rising incidence of testis cancer and growing demand nomics, Cologne, Germany. for assisted reproduction . It is supposed that these are symptoms of We report on a family with multiple affected siblings of both sexes pre- one underlying entity, the testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS) . The senting with a novel combination of anomalies including cerebrovas- rapid rise in the prevalence of TDS may be linked to endocrine disrupt- cular insults .The four affected probands were born to consanguineous ers affecting genetically susceptible individuals . Genetic aberrations Turkish parents, there are six non-affected siblings . All four probands or polymorphisms may predispose to augmented effects by environ- have a short stature . The eldest male had congenital left sided glau- mental factors . Meta-analysis of in vitro fertilization (IVF) studies re- coma, presented with a stroke at the age of 6 months and showed a vealed that hypospadias is more common after assisted reproduction severe developmental delay . He died at 40 years of age . The second (AR) . In Hungary about 2000 infants are born following IVF yearly . In proband suffered from right-sided congenital glaucoma and recurrent our study we investigated the incidence of congenital abnormalities strokes starting at the age of one year . He was wheel-chair dependent after AR . At the Department of Obstetric and Gynaecology, Medical and developed multiple joint contractions . He died of an intracranial School, University of Pécs 712 newborn infants were born after IVF hemorrhage at the age of 28 years . The third proband had bilateral between January 1st, 1999 and December 31th, 2006, 319 singletons congenital glaucoma . She is only mildly developmentally retarded, but and 178 sets of twins . The mean gestational age was 35 .6±2 .1 weeks, also developed multiple joint contractions . The youngest proband also the mean birthweight 2520±630 grams . The incidence of congenital suffers from congenital left sided glaucoma and severe developmental abnormalities in infants born after conventional IVF was compared to delay . She was never able to walk and showed precocious puberty . newborns born after intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI) . In re- At the age of 14 years, she had an ischemic stroke of the left arteria gard to major congenital abnormalities we did not find any significant cerebri media . MRI angiography showed total occlusion of the internal differences between the two groups (5 .8% vs 3 .2%, p=0 .056) . Infants carotid arteries bilaterally and of the left arteria cerebri media . Homo- born after ICSI significantly more often suffered from minor anomalies zygosity mapping in this family, using a high density SNP array, identi- [p=0 .004, OR:1,9478 (95%CI:1 .1916-3 .1841)], especially from genital fied a candidate locus of 7.3cM on chromosome 20q11-12. The familial abnormalities, hypospadias, cryptorchidism, hydrocele testis [p=0 .031, association of congenital glaucoma, mental retardation, short stature OR:2,48 (95% CI:0 .9949-6 .1594)] . Further investigations will be need- and ischemic stroke is a hitherto unreported entity . This autosomal-re- ed to confirm the supposition that children born after IVF/ICSI are at cessive syndrome is mapping to chromosome 20q11-12 . higher risk to develop TDS .Clinical genetics  P01.364 P01.367 Familial hypodontia associated with taurodontism coexistence of Unvericht-Lundborg disease and congenital E. Severin, C. Albu, D. Stanciu, D. F. Albu; deafness in one serbian family “Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. M. M. Kecmanovic1, A. Ristic2, D. Sokic2, M. Keckarevic-Markovic1, D. Keck- Tooth agenesis and taurodontism are developmental dental anoma- arevic1, S. Romac1; lies . Some studies support the hypothesis that isolated taurodontism 1Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Neurology, Belgrade, Serbia. is associated with tooth agenesis, as it shows a higher prevalence in Unverricht-Lundborg disease (ULD) is an autosomal recessive disorder families with missing teeth than in general population, and, therefore, caused by mutations in cystatine B (CSTB) gene located on chromo- may share a common genetic cause . We report a case of a mother and some 21q22 .3 . Majority of the ULD chromosomes carry expansion of her two daughters affected of tooth agenesis . Mother and daughters dodecamer repeats in promoter region of the CSTB gene . The location exhibited different clinical manifestation of missing teeth . Simultane- of TMPRSS3 gene, in which mutations cause nonsyndromic recessive ous occurrence of taurodontism and tooth agenesis was detected only deafness, is in proximity of CSTB gene, on chromosome 21q22 .3 . in mother . Evaluation included clinical, radiographic and genetic ex- Here we present a complex syndrome in one Serbian family in which aminations . The affected members of the family did not show features three out of four siblings of healthy parents have inborn deafness . Ac- of syndrome tooth agenesis. No specific correlation between missing tion and stimulus sensitive myoclonus appeared in two individuals (II- teeth and taurodontism was noted . 1 and II-3) in 12-13 year of life (individual II-1 was not available for this analysis) . Except congenital deafness, individual II-2 is otherwise P01.365 healthy, while the individual II-4 has none of two mentioned disorders . A de novo microdeletion of 774 kb including the entire tP53 Molecular diagnostics confirmed suspected ULD in sibling with pro- gene - Li-Fraumeni-plus as a contiguous gene syndrome? gressive myoclonic epilepsy and innate deafness, while the sibling with T. Schwarzbraun1, A. C. Obenauf1, A. Langmann2, U. Gruber-Sedlmayr3, K. isolated inborn deafness was heterozygote for expansion in the CSTB. Wagner1, M. R. Speicher1, P. M. Kroisel1; One could exclude coexistence of CSTB and TMPRSS3 mutations in 1Institute of Human Genetics/Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Depart- this pedigree due to assumed joint transmission . For that reason we ment of Ophthalmology/Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Department performed haplotype analysis, genotyping seven microsatellites flank- of Pediatrics/Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. ing TMPRSS3 and CSTB . Haplotype analysis showed that absence of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare genetic disorder usually char- homozygous expansion in the individual II-2 is due to a recombination acterized by familial occurrence of various malignancies with early on- event that occurred ahead of CSTB, what was the strong indication set . LFS is clinically and genetically heterogeneous . The inheritance of that homozygous mutation in the TMPRSS3 is responsible for deaf- LFS follows an autosomal dominant mode with high penetrance and ness . Following sequencing of the TMPRSS3 revealed 207delC muta- mutation rate in germ cells is very low . In most cases LFS is due to tion in fourth exon . a constitutional mutation of one copy of the TP53 tumor suppressor To our best knowledge this is the first genetically confirmed case of gene in affected family members and somatic mutations in the sec- coexistence of mentioned two mutations . ond copy of that gene in the process of malignant transformation . The TP53 gene at chromosome 17p13 .1 is the most frequent target for P01.368 genetic alterations in human cancer . central Nervous system involvement in patients with vascular Here we describe the first case of a de novo constitutional chromo- cutaneous anomalies somal microdeletion including the entire TP53 gene as well as sev- C. Mellado, M. Sahin; eral closely linked genes . The phenotype of the patient is striking and Neurology Department , Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, includes severe psychomotor retardation, a Dandy-Walker anomaly, Boston, MA, United States. Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), seizures and dysmorphic features . Vascular cutaneous anomalies could be related to an underlying sys- Chromosomal breakpoints (BP) were mapped by high resolution array temic disease and/or involve other systems . One of these could be the comparative genome hybridization (aCGH) followed by quantitative Central Neural System, leading to a various neurological complica- real type PCR analysis down to base pair level . The distal BP dis- tions . The purpose of this study is to describe brain anomalies among rupts the ACADVL gene and the proximal BP is located about 6 .5 kb individuals affected with some of these syndromes, including PHACE, upstream of the GUCY2D gene disrupting its upstream regulatory se- Macrocephaly and Cutis Marmorata Telangectasia Congenita (M- quences . SNP analysis revealed monoallelic expression of GUCY2D CMTC), Sturge Weber (SW) and Klippel Trenaunay (KT) . which would explain the LCA of the patient . More than 40 genes have We reviewed 216 clinical records of patients seen at Children’s Hos- been mapped to the 774 kb deletion interval including the FXR2 gene pital Boston, between 2000 and 2007, with the diagnoses mentioned which is an autosomal homolog of the FMR1 gene . above . Brain imaging information was obtained . In 11/11 PHACE syn- drome cases, beside vascular anomalies, neuroimaging showed hy- P01.366 poplastic corpus callosum (2), cerebellar involvement (3), asymmetric Hypogonadism and Novel craniofacial Findings in a case of ventricles (1), retro cerebellar cyst (1), moyamoya phenomenon (1) . treacher-collins syndrome with a Pathogenic mutation and a 8/10 M-CMCT cases have images, showing hemimegalencephaly (4), missense Variant in the tcOF1 Gene Chiari I malformation (4), asymmetric/large ventricles (4), white mat- C. Li; ter changes (3), cortical dysplasia (2), periventricular heterotopias (1), McMaster University Medical Centre, Hamilton, ON, Canada. brain atrophy (1), periventricular leukomalacia (1) . 36/55 SW cases A severe case of Treacher-Collins syndrome with novel findings in a have images, that showed leptomeningeal enhancement in almost all newborn boy is presented here . Craniofacial features include bilateral cases, normal brain structures (5), cerebral atrophy (18), prominent atrestic internal auditory canals, macrocephaly with remnant lobules of choroid plexus (17), calcifications (5), venous anomalies (5), white the external ears, absence of external auditory canals, missing ossi- matter anomaly (5), Chiari I malformation (1), asymmetric ventricles cles with hypoplastic middle ear cavities. The nasal cavities were filled (1), mega cisterna magna (1) . 20/140 KT cases have images that with a soft tissue mass that may represent an encephalocele . The eye showed normal brain images (9), white matter changes (5), Chiari I cavities were extremely underdeveloped . The inferior wall was absent, malformation (3), calcifications (2), venous anomalies (2), asymmet- the zygomatic arches were absent . There was severe micrognathia ric brain hemispheres (1), cerebral atrophy (1), thick corpus callosum and concurrent narrowing of the pharyngeal space, resulting in mark- (1) . edly narrowed upper airway . Moreover, the baby was found to have Brain imaging is important in these syndromes to define the pathologic widely space nipples, hypoplastic scrotum, bilateral cryptorchidism entity, help in the diagnosis, management and prognosis in children and micropenis . Molecular testing revealed a pathogenic mutation at risk . and a novel missense change . The mother carries the same missense change and is clinically and radiographically normal . The potential sig- nificance of these findings is discussed.Cytogenetics 0 P01.369 RESULTS: We identified a total of 7 subtelomeric aberrations (23,3%). three novel mutations in FRmD7 in X-linked congenital motor Four were deletions, two were duplications and one case showed one nystagmus in Russian families deletion and one duplication (See table 1) . S. Gudzenko1, V. Fedotov2, R. Zinchenko1, A. Polyakov1; Table 1 . 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- Case MLPA aberration Confirmation Origin gional Clinical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian Federation. + Wolf-Hirschhorn with P096 KIT 1 del 4p de novo X-linked congenital motor nystagmus is a common inherited oculomotor - FISH with WHSC1 probe disorder characterized by repetitive uncontrollable ocular oscillations, 2 del 20p FISH in process unknown unassociated with a number of ocular or neurological diseases with 3 del 4p + Wolf-Hirschhorn with P096 KIT de novo + FISH with WHSC1 probe onset typically at birth . The loci for X-linked CMN have been mapped 4 del 1p + FISH 1p36 de novo to Xp11 .3-p11 .4 and Xq26-q27 (NYS1) . Three more loci have been 5 dup Xq/Yq FISH in process unknown described for autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant form of del Xq/Yq, dup CMN without any gene identification. The molecular characterization 6 Xp/Yp 46,X, der(Y) de novo of NYS1 has been solved by Tarpey et al., who identified mutations in FISH in process FRMD7, a gene with unknown function . 7 dup Xp/Yp MLPA positive in mother and maternal The aim of our research was searching for FRMD7 mutations in three brother Russian families with X-linked CMN, who had already shown the link- CONCLUSIONS: The high frequency of subtelomeric aberrations detected confirmed age with Xq26-q27 locus . Sequencing analysis of all exons and intron- the important role played by these rearrangements in the aetiology of Mental retarda- exon junctions of FRMD7 was performed in affected males from these tion. De novo aberrations are likely related to the clinical presentation families. We identified three novel, previously unreported mutations in of the patient while inherited aberrations probably are not the cause FRMD7: missense mutation c . 47T>C (Phe16Ser), nonsense mutation of the patient phenotype . MLPA has demonstrated to be a very useful c . 1524G>A (Trp508Stop) and small deletion c . 1492delT . Thus the method that can be offered to all mentally retarded patients in order to results of our study confirm the role of FRMD7 in the pathogenesis of approach to genetic diagnosis . X-linked CMN . P02.002 P01.370 Unusual 17p subtelomeric micro-duplication Diagnostic and prognostic implications of nuclear and S. Garcia-Minaur1, C. Serra1,2, I. Cusco2, A. Plaja1, L. Pérez Jurado1,2; mitochondrial mutations in couples opting for ARt 1Programa de Medicina Molecular y Genetica, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelo- R. Dada, R. Kumar, M. B. Shamsi, S. Venkatesh; na, Spain, 2Unidad de Genetica, Universidad Pompeu Fabra, U-735 CIBERER, Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Dept. of Anatomy, AIl Barcelona, Spain. India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. We report a 5 ½ year-old girl with developmental delay, microcephaly, Microdeletion on the long arm of the Y chromosome and mutations cardiomyopathy and distinctive facial features . Additional brain MRI in mitochondrial genes regulating oxidative phosphorylation may se- findings include a hypoplastic corpus callosum and enlarged cisterna verely impair spermatogenesis Thus it was planned to analyze cases magna . Standard karyotype was normal . MLPA assay with commercial (n = 580) with idiopathic male infertility opted for ART by cytogenetic, probe kits to detect subtelomeric rearrangements identified a de novo Yq microdeletion and mitochondrial mutation analysis . 17p micro-duplication . Microarray analysis with a custom made chip, In cytogenetically normal cases microdeletion analysis was done using which contains 1905 BAC clones covering subtelomeric and pericen- EAA guidelines. Mitochondrial genome was amplified and sequenced tromeric regions of each chromosome and regions related to known using a set of 24 primers in 33 OAT cases . The mutations were com- syndromes, confirmed the presence of a duplication of > 6.2 Mb con- pared in blood and sperm DNA . 8 .2% and 10 .1% cases harboured fined to 17p13. Interestingly, the duplicated fragment is not continu- Yq microdeletion in blood and semen respectively . Results of mito- ous but interrupted by a 0 .45-1 .1 Mb segment that is not duplicated, chondrial mutation analysis showed G to A transition in ND4 gene at suggesting a more complex rearrangement, possibly mediated by a nucleotide position 11719 in sperm DNA of 19 cases and only in 14 balanced rearrangement in one of the parents . Although partial 17p cases from blood DNA . Though this is a non-synonymous change, the trisomy has been found in association with other rearrangements, to amino acid remains the same . The polymorphism A750G, A4769G and our knowledge only one other case has been reported with a 17p13 A8860G was found in all the semen as well blood DNA of the cases but duplication exclusively and clinical features overlapping those of our only in 12 controls . A750G, A4769G are non-synonymous changes but patient . Further studies on this child and her parents are currently un- A8860G polymorphism in ATPase 6 gene changes amino acid threo- der way and the results will be presented . nine to alanine . As majority of these infertile couples opt for ART/ICSI, it is very im- P02.003 portant to distinguish cases with Yq microdeletions and mitochondrial subtelomeric study of 109 patients with developmental delay, mutations as former are iatrogenically transmitted to the offspring dysmorphy and/or congenital anomalies of unexplained etiology through these techniques . Thus a thorough genetic analysis is a must - case presentations in all infertile couples to provide comprehensive counseling and most M. Krajewska-Walasek, A. Gutkowska, A. Marczak, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spo- adapted therapeutics . dar, A. Jezela-Stanek, M. Kugaudo, M. Bialecka, K. Chrzanowska, E. Popow- ska; P02. Cytogenetics The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Background: Subtelomeric chromosome aberrations are acknowl- P02.001 edged as one of the significant causes of mental retardation (MR). screening for subtelomeric aberrations using multiplex ligation Their prevalence is about 5 .2%, ranging from 0 to 16% (depending dependent probe amplification (MLPA) on the preselection criteria and the expertise of the examining clini- D. Gomez, M. Fernandez, L. Aparicio, F. Cuevillas, H. Vidiella, E. Cusó, J. V. cian) . Because of either their small size and/or similarity of involved Martinez, C. Mordillo; segments, these aberrations are undetectable by conventional binding Balagué Center S.A., Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. techniques . Hence, they can be screened for by other methods, most Subtelomeric rearrangements are believed to be a common cause of frequently by FISH with a complete set of subtelomeric probes or by mental retardation. New molecular techniques allow their identifica- multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). We report tion, their frequency and significance are still unknown. the diagnostic yield in a series of 109 patients with an unexplained METHODS: We screened 30 patients with idiopathic mental retarda- combination of mental retardation with dysmorphy and/or congenital tion and/or phenotypic malformations making use of the multiplex li- anomalies . gation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA, SALSA kits P036D and Methods: Patients were evaluated for subtelomeric rearrangements P070) . The parents of those patients with subtelomeric aberrations using commercially available total subtelomeric FISH (TS) . All had were also tested for the origin (see table 1) . All rearrangements were normal results of GTG-banded chromosomes at the 550-band level confirmed by FISH or by the SALSA MLPA KIT P096-MR2. and were referred for TS based on clinical indications suggestive forCytogenetics  chromosomal aberration. In some cases, for identification or confir- We report four patients including for subtelomeric screening . In all mation of detected abnormalities, specific microdeletion and telomeric the patients a high resolution G-band Karyotype and subtelomerics probes were used . screening using MLPA were performed. Result were confirmed by fluo- Results: Twelve subtelomeric chromosomal aberrations were rec- rescence in situ hibrization (FISH) . The four cases presented a “de ognized, which corresponds to a diagnostic yield of about 10% . novo” terminal deletion at or within band 2q37, ranging from cytoge- Identified rearrangements were: del(1p36); der(1)t(1;3)(q44;p2 netically visible abnormalities (patient 1 and 2) to cryptic subtelomerics 5)pat; der(1)t(1;22)(p36 .1;q11 .23)mat; del(2q37) in two cases; deletions (patient 3 and 4) . Molecular chacterization of the breakpoints del(4p); der(6)t(6;7)(q27;q36)mat and der(7)t(6;7)(q27;q36)mat; were performed by STRs . The size of the deleted segments ranged der(9)t(9;20)(pter-,pter+)pat; del(9qter); del(12pter); del(22q13) . from 2 Mb to 7 Mb . Conclusions: Since there is still limited knowledge of the phenotype of The patient 4 showed of approximately 2Mb terminal deletion . He has many subtelomeric aberrations, we believe that our study gives insight limbs abnormalities with short fourth and fifth metacarpals on the left into the etiology of mental retardation by clinical delineation of subtelo- hand and short first, third and forth metacarpals on the right hand. meric aberrations . These findings are consistent with previous observations to narrow the The work was supported in part by grant KBN 2P05A 161 28 brachydactily critical region as the terminal 3 Mb region . We observed no clear relationship between clinical features and the P02.004 size of the monosomic region; this represents a significant difficulty in telomeric submicroscopic Deletion of chromosome 1 predicting phenotype for this deletion . E. Gean1, V. Catala2, I. Plensa3, C. Garrido2, A. Garcia-Cazorla1, Y. Jordan1, D. Velasco1, P. Poo1; P02.006 1Hospital sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues. Barcelona, Spain, 2Prenatal Genetics, High resolution sNP-array and mLPA analyses of patients with Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Esplugues. Barcelona, Spain. atypical 9q34 subtelomeric deletions Submicroscopic deletion 1ptel the most common telomeric deletion E. Van Binsbergen1, T. Kleefstra2, N. Verbeek1, M. Poot1, W. Nillesen2, J. C. with an incidence of 1:5000 live births . Patients carrying this deletion Giltay1, M. Nelen1; tend to have similar phenotypes . We describe 3 patients with 1ptel 1University Medical Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Radboud University deletion . Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Case 1: Female, 3 years old, is an only child born to healthy unrelated Recently patients with deletions of the 9q34 region were proposed to parents . Pregnancy was normal . Clinical examination: dystrophic ap- have a recognizable syndrome with a combination of mental retarda- pearance . Microcephaly . Synophrys and dull face . General hirsutism tion, recognizable facial phenotype, hypotonia, brachy(micro)cephaly and severe developmental delay . and other congenital anomalies, mostly heart defects in up to 50% of Case 2: Female, 13 year old, first chills of healthy and non consan- the cases . The EHMT1 gene has been proposed as the prime candi- guineous parents . date gene to be responsible for these features . In a diagnostic survey Growth retardation and early puberty, pulmonary stenosis, sensorineu- of patients with mental retardation/multiple congenital abnormalities, ral hearing loss and moderate mental retardation . Facies was charac- HumanHap300 illumina SNP arrays and Multiplex Ligation-mediated teristic of 1ptel deletion . Probe Amplification revealed two patients with de novo deletions in Case 3: Male, 2 month old, with congenital cardiac anomaly and facial the 9q34 region which did not include the EHMT1 gene . A patient with dysmorphic features: facial hirsutism, short palpebral fissures and de- moderate mental retardation and facial dysmorphologies that are also velopmental delay . seen in the “9q34 subtelomeric deletion syndrome” showed hemizy- In all the patients FISH analysis showed deletion 1p36 .3 gosity for PNPLA7, MRPL41, WDR85, ZMYND19, ARRDC4. A second The 1qter microdeletion is often reported in the literature as a part of patient with mild hydrocephalus, a heart defect (VSD) and hypospadias complex chromosome rearrangement. No particular feature is specifi- but without mental retardation at the age of 5 years showed an inter- cally unique . Next, we describe 2 patients with isolated 1qter deletion stitial deletion with a maximal size of exon 3 up to 14 of the CACNA1B Case 1: Female, 5 years old, is an only child born to healthy unrelated gene (i .e . exon 1, 2 and 15 until 25 were not affected) . Our data (1) parents . emphasize the need for high resolution molecular cytogenetic analysis Proportioned growth retardation, congenital cardiac anomaly, pelvic to elucidate the underlying genome rearrangements in patients with horseshoe kidney, and duodenal diaphragm . Seizures . Severe devel- mental retardation or multiple congenital abnormalities (2) show that opmental delay with facial dysmorphic features . EHMT1 is not the major candidate gene in all patients with a deletion Case 2: Male, 8 year old, is an only child born to healthy unrelated in the 9q34 subtelomeric region (3) allow further analysis of genotype parents . vs phenotype in larger 9q34 deletions . Clinical features: Low birth weight . New born with hypotonia and mi- crocephaly . Cerebellar vermis hypoplasia . Right kidney agenesis . Pe- P02.007 ripheral pulmonary stenosis . Cryptorchid testes . Seizures and severe subtelomeric deletion of 1p36 detected by HR-cGH could not be mental retardation . Sterotopy . Dysmorphic features . confirmed by FISH In both cases FISH studies showed deletion 1qter . A. Escalona1, M. Santos1, A. González-Meneses2, C. Fuster1; 1Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 2Hospital Virgen del P02.005 Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. Presentation of four new cases with chromosome 2q terminal Background Molecular High Resolution Comparative Genome Hybrid- deletion ization (HR-CGH) is applied to detect an imbalance in whole genome . M. Elena1,2, M. Palomares1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2, B. Fernández1, I. Martínez1, P. This technique is especially successful in detecting small genomic Lago1, J. Arcos3, A. Delicado1,2; abnormalities in patients with unexplained mental retardation and/or 1Servicio de Genética.Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de congenital malformations . Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Objective To detect and identify the existence of any chromosome Spain, 3Servicio de Neurología Infantil.Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, alteration in two unrelated girls with mental retardation and multiple Spain. congenital clinical features . Terminal deletions of chromosome 2 may be found commonly among Methodology G-banding, HR-CGH and FISH . patients, with idiopathic mental retardation, referred for subtelomeric Results Conventional GTG-banded chromosome analyses revealed a screening . Chromosome 2q terminal deletion (2q37) is characterized normal karyotype in both cases . Analysis by HR-CGH demonstrated by mild to moderate mental retardation, behaviour manifestations on a loss in 1p36 in two patients. However, FISH with a specific subtelo- autism spectrum, facial dimorphism (prominent forehead, thin, highly meric 1p probe detected 1pter deletion in only one patient . arched eyebrows, depressed nasal bridge, and hypoplasia nasal alae, Conclusion Our results showed that a combination of both CGH and prominent columella and thin upper lip) and other major congenital FISH should always be used in the identification of 1p36 microdeletion, malformations . Patients with most distal deletion present phenotypic which is difficult or impossible by banding techniques alone features which mimic Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), in- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: This work was supported by MCYT (SAF cluding brachymetaphalangia in nearly half of all patients . 2003-03894) and CIRIT (2005, SGR-00495) .Cytogenetics  P02.008 P02.010 Reconfirmation of terminal deletions and derivative FisH analysis of replication timing of human subtelomeric chromosomes by mLPA subtelomeric screening regions K. Wakui1,2, Y. Furui3, K. Shinogi3, T. Fukui3, R. Kawamura1, Y. Kinishita1, T. I. Petković; Kosho1,2, T. Wada1,2, H. Ohashi4, N. Gondo3, S. Yokoyama3, H. Higashi3, Y. University Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. Fukushima1,2; Recent studies have shown that DNA replication timing is correlated 1Dept Med Genet, Shinshu Univ Sch Med, Matsumoto, Japan, 2Div Clinical and with transcriptional activity of genes . Synchronous replication of al- Mol Genet, Shinshu Univ Hosp, Matsumoto, Japan, 3Biomedical Business Div. leles was demonstrated for genes with a biallelic and asynchronous FALCO biosystems Ltd, Kyoto, Japan, 4Div Clinical Genet, Saitama Children’s replication for those with a monoallelic mode of expression . Alteration Hospital, Saitama, Japan. of replication order has been associated with aneuploidy and genetic Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) has come instability, while asynchronous replication with the formation of a dele- into wide use for subtelomeric screening as a new molecular cytoge- tion . No data on replication timing of subtelomeric regions (SR) are netic technique . We used 2 kinds of MLPA® Kits (SALSA MLPA KIT available so far . SRs are highly unstable and rearrangements have HUMAN TELOMER, P036B and P070, MRC-Holland) for analyzing 21 been reported in ~7% of patients with mental retardation . subjects of known subtelomeric imbalances which have been already The objective of this study was to determine the replication timing of detected by G-banding . Of the 12 cases detected as additional materi- human SR . The replication pattern of SR of chromosomes 5, 7, 8 and als of unknown origin at one of the chromosomal end by G-banding, 9 20 was investigated using FISH method in lymphocytes of 4 healthy had loss of the subtelomere of the derivative chromosome and gain of donors . At least 200 cells per probe per person were studied . The rep- the subtelomere of the other chromosome by MLPA, as we suspected . lication status of a locus was classified as unreplicated (“s”-single sig- But, in the rest of 3 cases, MLPA showed only gain of the subtelo- nal) and replicated (“d”- doubled signal) . mere of the other chromosomal end, but no loss of the subtelomere The results showed that each SR had a characteristic timing of replica- of the derivative chromosome . Of the 9 cases detected as terminal tion, and that 20q (ss: 47.8±3.1%; dd: 18±1.8%) was the first of exam- deletion by G-banding, 6 cases had only loss of the targeted subtelo- ined SRs to replicate, whereas 5q (ss: 75 .9±1 .8%; dd: 4 .3±0 .5%) was mere, as we suspected . But the other 3 cases had been detected not the last (p<0 .001) . The analysis revealed variable level of replication only loss of the targeted chromosomal end, but also gain of the other synchrony of homologous SR . The frequency of sd cells hybridized subtelomere by MLPA . We performed the metaphase FISH analysis to with the probes for the 5p, 7p, 8q, 20q (30.1±2.6%) was significantly confirm the results of MLPA for the cases having discrepancies of the higher (p<0 .02) compared to 5q, 7q, 8p, 20p (20 .6±2 .0%) . results between G-banding and MLPA . When a distal part of chromo- These results suggest that replication pattern might contribute to the somal arm looks smaller than the normal chromosome by G-banding, non-random involvement of specific SR in the aetiology of mental re- the abnormal chromosome is often interpreted as terminal deletion . tardation . But, it is noteworthy even shorter chromosome may be derived from familial balanced translocation . MLPA subtelomeric screening is useful P02.011 for the precise diagnosis of structural chromosomal abnormality, and Human herpesvirus 6 always integrates at the telomere region necessary for providing genetic counseling . A. Virgili1, D. Brazma1, K. N. Ward2, P. Hubacek3, D. A. Clark2, M. J. Dyer4, E. P. Nacheva1; P02.009 1Academic Haematology, Royal Free & UCL Medical School, London, United A terminal 7,1 Mb chromosome 18p deletion flanked by a 2,3 Kingdom, 2Centre for Virology, Department of Infection, Royal Free & UCL mb duplication in a phenotypically normal mother and her Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Paediatric Haematol- microcephalic and mentally retarded son ogy and Oncology, Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4MRC K. H. Ørstavik1,2, D. Misceo3, H. Lybæk4, E. Frengen3, G. Houge4; Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, Oslo, Human Herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) has the unique ability amongst the hu- Norway, 2Faculty Division Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, man herpesviruses of integrating its genome in a persistent latent state 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4Center for into a chromosome of the individual infected. We used fluorescent in Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, situ hybridization (FISH) to investigate the HHV-6 chromosomal inte- Bergen, Norway. gration sites in 7 unrelated individuals with high levels of HHV-6 viral Deletions of chromosome 18p are frequent and associated with broad load, which is indicative of HHV-6 chromosomal integration . A cocktail phenotypic variability . We report an identical and cytogenetically vis- of 8 non-overlapping plasmids containing between 9Kb-16Kb inserts ible terminal deletion in a mentally retarded microcephalic boy and his of the HHV-6 genome was used as a HHV-6 specific probe (Clark DA normocephalic cognitively normal mother . et al ., 2006) . FISH proved HHV-6 chromosomal integration in all 7 indi- The patient was a 13 year old boy with head circumference 1 .5 cm be- viduals, either in phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral blood (PB) low the 2 .5th centile . Height was at the 10th centile and weight between leukocytes or in Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell the 25th and 50th centile . Early motor milestones were unremarkable . lines derived from PB lymphocytes . HHV-6 was found in all 50 cells However, he has needed extra help at school because of problems analyzed and 6 different chromosomal integration sites were identified. with concentration, behaviour, and activities requiring fine motor skills. Two of the sites had already been reported: 17p13 .3 and 22q13; while On examination, he had a single right palmar crease . He was microce- the remaining four, 9q34 .3, 18p11 .3, 18q23 and 19q13, had not been phalic but not otherwise dysmorphic . His mother was of normal intel- previously described . HHV-6 was found at one genome location per ligence . She was 172 cm tall with a normal head circumference and no individual and always affecting only one chromosome homologue . The dysmorphic features . HHV-6 signals were always found in the vicinity of the telomeric re- G-banded chromosome analysis revealed a terminal 18p deletion, gion . For 9q34 .3, the site of integration was further mapped using the removing band 18p11 .3 . Array CGH analysis on Agilent 44K arrays BAC clone RP11-424E7, which locates at the end of 9q34 .3 (genome indicated a 7,1 Mb terminal deletion flanked by a 2,3 Mb duplication; address: 140,005,384-140,207,236) . Both RP11-424E7 and HHV-6 arr cgh 18p11 .32p11 .23(RP11-76H24->RP11-42J5)x1,18p11 .23p11 .2 signals co-localised in metaphase and interphase cells . HHV-6 also 2(RP11-207E16->RP11-784M9)x3 . Work is under way to determine co-localised with a pan-telomeric probe . In summary, our study iden- if the duplication is inverted . Inversion would lead to generation of a tifies four novel chromosomal integration sites and most importantly new 18p terminus . The mother’s karyotype was identical . The mater- localises preferential site of HHV-6 integration at the chromosome telo- nal grandmother had normal chromosomes . The maternal grandfather mere region . was deceased . Inheritance of an 18p deletion has been reported previously in seven families . In all cases the deletion was inherited from the mother, pos- sibly indicating that males with 18p deletions are more likely to express adverse phenotypic effects of this genomic imbalance. This is the first reported family in which the mother had a normal phenotype .Cytogenetics  P02.012 Subtelomeric assay using MLPA with SALSA P036B/C and P070 kits, High resolution oligonucleotide acGH in a Jacobsen syndrome and FISH in some cases were performed . patient with an atypically small 6.5 mb terminal 11q deletion MLPA revealed subtelomeric changes in 9 out of 108 MR patients supports FLi1 as an important mediator of thrombocytopenia (8 .3%), 7 deletions: 1p, 1q(2), 18p, 19q, 22q(2), one duplication 16q, D. H. Tegay1,2, H. V. Toriello3, G. Parsons3, E. Hatchwell2; all of them de novo abnormalities, and one case with a concurrent 1New York College of Osteopathic Medicine, Old Westbury, NY, United States, duplication and deletion 6q/3p inherited from a parental transloca- 2Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY, United States, tion . Among these imbalances we report two rare cases . 1 .-Duplica- 3Spectrum Health, Grand Rapids, MI, United States. tion of chromosome 16q in a 2 -year-old girl with a pschymotor delay, Jacobsen syndrome (JBS; OMIM#147791) is a MCA/MR syndrome who showed intrauterine growth retardation and ventriculomegaly in clinically characterized by growth and mental retardation, thrombo- prenatal examination; plagiocephaly, delayed clousure fontanel, hy- cytopenia, congenital heart defects, trigonencephaly and dysmorphic pertelorism, epicantus, small nose and mouth, tapering fingers and facial features including telecanthus, downslanting palpebral fissures, hypotonia . 2 .-Deletion of chromosome 19q in a 5-year-old boy with a broad nasal bridge and a “carp” shaped mouth . The vast majority of speech impairment and behaviour disorder, high palate and narrow reported cases are due to ~7-15 Mb de novo terminal 11q deletions palpebral fissures. typically extending from chromosome band 11q23 to 11qter . With the Comparing clinical features, only one case of dup(16)(qter) (Ahn, advent of high-resolution molecular karyotyping by microarray com- 2007), and one case with del(19)(qter) (EUCARUCA database) re- parative genomic hybridization (aCGH) smaller deletions are now fre- ported, both phenotypes are different from described in our patients . quently uncovered allowing further refinement of genotype-phenotype These two new cases could contribute to a better clinical characteriza- correlations . Here we report the case of a 5-year-old girl with clinical tion of these subtelomeric imbalances but more cases are necessary . features of Jacobsen syndrome including growth and mental retarda- Supported by the grant from Fundació Parc Taulí of Sabadell. tion, thrombocytopenia, and classical facial dysmorphism as well as unilateral optic nerve hypoplasia, multicystic kidneys, aortic valve re- P02.015 gurgitation and a tethered spinal cord . This patient was found by high- mLPA as screening method for the detection of cryptic density whole-genome oligonucleotide aCGH to have a small ~6 .5 Mb subtelomeric rearrangements in patients with idiopathic mental chromosome 11q24 .3-qter deletion . This deletion starts just proximal retardation to FLI1 (friend leukemia virus integration 1) and provides additional L. Morozin Pohovski, I. Sansović, I. Barišić; evidence supporting FLI1 as the important mediator of thrombocyto- Children’s University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. penia in JBS . Background: Submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements involving the subtelomere regions are considered to be a significant cause of P02.013 idiopathic mental retardation (MR) . The Multiplex Ligation dependent 19ptel (p13.3) duplication Probe Amplification (MLPA) analysis has increasingly been used as C. Garrido1, E. Gean2, V. Català1, L. Vila1, P. Poo2, C. Fons2, E. Cuatrecasas1, an adjunct to routine cytogenetic testing and a relatively low cost and M. Pérez2, A. Serés1; high throughtput screening for the deteciton of small rearrangements . 1Prenatal Genetics, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Objective: To screen for submicroscopic subtelomeric aberrations by Spain. MLPA method . Results: We have studied a series of 50 unselected Submicroscopic rearrangements involving chromosome 19 are very patients with mental retardation and negative chromosomal analysis . uncommon, there are very few reports in the literature of patients with The MLPA with SALSA P036C and SALSA P070 probe mixes was partial trisomy of distal 19p . We describe two cases with 19p duplica- performed for subtelomere screening . Unbalanced chromosomal rear- tion . rangements detected by MLPA were confirmed by quantitative fluo- Kariotype were normal in both patients but the availability of subtelo- rescent-PCR (QF-PCR) . The MLPA screening revealed chromosome mere specific FISH probes has made identification of cryptic subtelo- aberrations in two (4%) cases: one patient with terminal deletion in the meric rearrangements possible . long arm of chromosome 22 and one case with double subtelomeric case 1: Male, second child born to healthy unrelated parents, intra- aberration consisting of a 12p deletion associated with 22q duplica- uterine grow retardation (IUGR) detected in third trimester and low tion . Conclusion: MLPA screening is a fast, sensitive and cost-effective weight at birth . Severe developmental delay and seizures, normal technique for screening idiopathic mentally retarded patients with nor- hands and feet, and very dismorphic face . mal karyotype . Validation by another cytogenetic or molecular method Duplication of 19ptel using Totelvysion panel (Vysis) was observed . is still needed for use in routine diagnostics . The extra 19ptel signal was detected at p arm of an acrocentric chro- mosome of group G . P02.016 Parents were studied and showed normal hibridization results . Dupli- Array-cGH analysis in 48 patients with complex syndromic cation of 19ptel was “de novo” in the proband . phenotypes case 2: Male, first child from non consanguineous parents, IUGR de- E. F. Belligni1, J. Messa2, A. Vetro2, C. Migliaccio1, N. Chiesa1, C. Molinatto1, G. tected in the third trimester and low birth weight . Severe developmen- A. Delmonaco1, G. B. Ferrero1, O. Zuffardi2, M. Cirillo Silengo1; tal delay, epilepsy and gastroesophageal reflux. 1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Genetics - University FISH studies showed a duplication of 19ptel and a deletion of 17qtel . of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. The extra signal 19ptel is contained within the terminal long arm of the Array comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) detects DNA deleted chromosome 17q . copy number variations, allowing to identify genetic imbalances in hu- Parents’ studies have to be done . man genetic disorders . We present the results of array-CGH analysis in 48 children affected by mental retardation, congenital malformations, P02.014 and dysmorphic features . Standard karyotype was normal in all cases screening for subtelomeric rearrangements in mental but 3, array-CGH analysis detected a chromosomal imbalance in 19 retardation. Description of two new cases: dup16qter and patients: 7 deletions, 3 duplication, 1 tetrasomy, 2 double deletion, 1 del19qter double duplication and 5 more complex chromosomal rearrangements . N. Baena1, L. Comadran1, I. Crespo1, E. Gabau1, M. Roselló2, M. Guitart1; In a patient affected by a complex PEHO-like syndrome, character- 1Corporacio Sanitaria Parc Tauli, Sabadell, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario La Fe, ized by severe developmental delay, severe seizures, hyporegenera- Valencia, Spain. tive anemia, hypoalbuminemia and specific facial dysmorphisms, a de Copy number changes of subtelomeric chromosomal regions are re- novo duplication of 22q11.23 has been identified, allowing to define a sponsible for 5-10% of all mentally retarded (MR) patients . Multiplex- putative critical region for this complex developmental disorder . The Ligation Probe Amplification (MLPA) is a technology used to detect analysis confirmed the clinical diagnosis of five genomic syndromes microdeletion and microduplication syndromes . (Smith-Magenis, del1p36 .33, del9q34 .3, X-linked ichthyosis, Pallister- In the current study we determined the frequency of subtelomeric Killian), and in 3 patients it identified a complex chromosomal rear- changes in a series of 108 patients showing MR and dysmorphic fea- rangement previously described as a simple chromosomal anomaly tures in which G banded karyotype at a 600- band level were normal . by standard karyotype . Rouling out the four cases in which the chro-Cytogenetics  mosomal rearrangement could theoretically be performed by region negative by FISH . specific FISH, array-CGH detected 15 rearrangements in 44 patients, We conclude that oligonucleotide based array-CGH can be used as with a high detection rate (34,09%), allowing to propose a new critical excellent diagnostic tool for genome-wide screening and identification region for a complex syndromic PEHO-like phenotype . of cryptic chromosomal imbalances not evident by routine cytogenetic analysis . P02.017 Defining a new checklist of sensitive clinical signs in mental P02.019 retardation, useful to select patients for array-cGH and to High resolution Agilent 244K oligoarray CGH analysis for validate array-cGH results screening of patients with congenital eye malformations M. Zollino1, G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, R. Lecce1, M. Murdolo1, M. E. Grimaldi1, I. Balikova, T. de Ravel, K. Devriendt, J. Fryns, J. R. Vermeesch; A. Orrico2, O. Zuffardi3, G. Neri1; Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Hereditary diseases of the eyes are a frequent cause for blindness in Italy, 2Clinical Genetics, UOC Molecular Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera Univer- early childhood with complex etiology . The exact frequency of chromo- sitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, University somal deletions and duplications causing congenital eye abnormali- of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. ties is unknown . Summarising results from conventional karyotyping Cryptic chromosomal rearrangements are responsible of about 1-25% showed that around 1/8 segmental chromosomal duplications and 1/6 of cases of idiopathic mental retardation . deletions are associated with eye malformations . Considering the high We studied 325 subjects with mental retardation/developmental de- frequency of microscopically visible imbalances associated with eye lay by the means of subtelomeric FISH (300 patients) and array-CGH disorders we hypothesize that patients with idiopathic eye anomalies analysis (70 patients) using BAC-array with an average resolution of may carry submicroscopic imbalances . 1 Mb . Compared with conventional cytogenetics methods - karyotyping and Cryptic chromosomal rearrangements were detected in 29 cases (10%) fluorescent in situ hybridization [FISH], array Comparative Genomic by subtelomeric FISH . A total of 70 patients with normal telomeres un- Hybridization [array CGH] provides the advantage of full genome scan derwent array-CGH, that disclosed an interstitial cryptic abnormality with significantly higher resolution to detect deletions or duplications. in 17 (24%) . Adapting this percentage to all cases with normal telo- Agilent 244K oligoarrays allow to perform a genomic screen with a meres, detection rate for cryptic chromosome abnormality was 30% in theoretical resolution higher than 50kb . the present cohort of patients . It represents the highest detection rate We screened patients with congenital eye malformations and associ- of cryptic chromosome abnormalities in idiopathic mental retardation ated abnormalities and their both parents on 244K array . The project reported so far by molecular karyotyping . aims to identify novel genes involved in the development of the eye Detailed clinical analysis of all positive cases and of 50 negative and to improve the diagnosis in these patients . We will present results patients allowed us to develop a new checklist of the clinical signs from the analyses . sensitive for chromosomal abnormalities . It includes 5 categories: 1) postnatal growth abnormalities, 2) disproportion between growth pa- P02.020 rameters, 3) minor facial anomalies, 4) hands and feet abnormalities inherited not polymorphic cNV in mental retardation patients: and 5) major malformations . A 0-2 score was assigned to each cat- implications in clinical practice egories, with a maximum of 10 . Cut-off value resulted to be 4 in our E. Katzaki, M. A. Mencarelli, F. T. Papa, R. Caselli, V. Uliana, M. Pollazzon, K. series . Interestingly, familial MR and IUGR were not sensitive signs . Sampieri, I. Longo, F. Ariani, I. Meloni, F. Mari, A. Renieri; Genotype-phenotype correlations represent a great problem during ar- Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy. ray-CGH analysis . Mental retardation is a common disorder, affecting 1-3% of the popula- We propose this checklist as an useful tool for clinical validation of the tion . In spite of all diagnostic tools available, the etiology can still not be chromosomal unbalances detected by array-CGH . established in half of the cases .The introduction of array-CGH analysis has improved the identification of novel genomic disorders. However, P02.018 this high-resolution new technique open novel diagnostic challenges Identification of cryptic chromosomal rearrangements in when inherited private CNVs of unclear clinical significance are found. patients with multiple anomaly syndromes and mental The analysis of 84 patients with mild to severe mental retardation as- retardation using oligo-based array-cGH sociated to facial dysmorphisms and/or congenital anomalies revealed V. Vranova1,2, P. Kuglik1,2, I. Slamova2, E. Zrnova1, A. Oltova2, R. Gaillyova2; 10 private CNVs inherited from an healthy parent . Three were dele- 1Masaryk University, Institute of Experimental Biology, Department of Genetics tions (7q31, 14q21 .1, Xq25) and 7 duplications (12p11 .22, 12q31 .31, and Molecular Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital Brno, De- 13q31 .1, 17q12, Xp22 .31, Xq28) ranging between 0 .1 and 3 .8 Mb . partment of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic. Three small rearrangements were gene desert . The remaining 7 had a Chromosomal abnormalities are the major cause of mental retarda- mean gene content of 5 (ranging from 1 to 18) . None of the rearranged tion (MR), growth and developmental delay and dysmorphic features . genes is known to be imprinted . Three disease-genes were found Many of these imbalances are caused by submicroscopic deletions in three different cases: KAL1 in dupXp22 .31, STS gene in another or duplications not detected by conventional cytogenetic methods . Ar- dupXp22 .31 and TCF2 gene in dup17q12 . The patient carrying the last ray-CGH is an innovative high-resolution technology that detects and duplication presents, among others, sex reversal, Peters’ anomaly and maps submicroscopic DNA copy number alterations, improving the di- renal cysts and the duplication is located 4Mb apart of the HSD17B1 agnostic detection rate of subtle copy number changes . gene, coding a key enzyme of testosterone biosynthesis . We suggest From 67 patients with mental disability, congenital anomalies, dysmor- that at least in this case low penetrance instead of no pathogenesis, phic features and unknown underlying cause investigated by G-band- should be taken into account. We discuss on the final interpretation ing, FISH, SKY and high-resolution CGH (HR-CGH) were chosen 4 that should be given in the clinical practice and the opportunity to re- that were also screened using 60-mer oligonucletide-based array-CGH port such rearrangements in the family reports . (Agilent). Two interstitial and two terminal imbalances were identified. In patient 1 and 2, both with normal karyotype, de novo interstitial de- P02.021 letion was found at 6q15 and 11q13, respectively . Both abnormalities Description of two new cases of microdeletions detected by arose de novo and were previously detected using HR-CGH . Array- array-cGH in carriers of apparently cytogenetically balanced CGH studies not only confirmed these aberrations but specified their chromosome rearrangements associated with phenotypic position and size. In patient 3 with no cytogenetic finding, array-CGH abnormalities revealed deletion of terminal part of 1p include 1p36 . The deletion was I. Mademont-Soler1, C. Morales2, L. Armengol3, E. Margarit2,4, A. Soler2,4, X. de novo and was confirmed by FISH and MLPA methods. The last Estivill3, A. Sánchez2,4; patient had karyotype 46,XY,der(4p), but no evident cytogenetic imbal- 1CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular, ance . Using array-CGH, not only deletion of telomeric region of 4p, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3CRG, Barcelona, Spain, 4IDIBAPS, Barce- but additional duplication of terminal part of 8p was revealed . Both imbalances were also detected by MLPA, but duplication at 8p wasCytogenetics  lona, Spain. P02.023 Cytogenetically balanced chromosome rearrangements constitute Array cGH detection of genomic imbalances in 370 patients with chromosome abnormalities that may be associated with mental re- unresolved retardation syndrome tardation and dysmorphic features, suggesting possible cryptic imbal- U. Koehler, E. Holinski-Feder, E. Holinski-Feder; ances in the breakpoint . Due to the limited resolution of conventional Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany. cytogenetics, new molecular techniques are required for their detec- Genomic imbalances are a major cause of mental retardation and de- tion, such as array-CGH . velopmental delay in patients with congenital and developmental ab- We present two patients with phenotypic abnormalities and de novo normalities . With the advent of whole genome array-CGH analysis, cytogenetically balanced rearrangements . After analysing them by 1 the number especially of interstitial genomic imbalances increased Mb array-CGH, imbalances were observed in both cases (just one dramatically . Here we present our results of array-CGH investigations case involving the breakpoints) . in 370 cases of patients with retardation syndromes and dysmorphic In patient 1, who presented deafness, hidrocephaly and coloboma, features using the Cytochip v2 BAC array (BlueGnome, Cambridge) . the karyotype was 46,XX,t(6;13)(q23;q31)dn . Array-CGH detected a Among these cases we found 55 genomic imbalances (15%) . Seven 13q32 .2 deletion, 13q33 .1 duplication, 1q44 duplication and 16q21-22 (2,1%) of the genomic imbalances were telomeric (3 deletions, 4 du- deletion. The last one is the only confirmed abnormality by FISH for plications) and 48 interstitial (12,9%, 28 deletions, 12 duplications) . the time being (BACs RP11-89O14 and RP11-468F3), but it has been Of these interstitial imbalances 28 were >1 Mb in size (average 3,5) described as a polymorphism . whereas 20 were smaller or equal to 1 Mb in size . Four aberrations in- Patient 2, with a Silver-Russell-like phenotype, showed the karyotype cluded terminal deletion/duplication events (three de novo, one inher- 46,XX,inv(7)(q21 .12q34)dn . Array-CGH did not show any deletion in ited from a balanced father) . 8 cases (2,4%) were patients with known the breakpoints, but highlighted a de novo microdeletion of 5Mb at microdeletion or microduplication syndromes (two microdeletions 3p12.3-3p13, confirmed by FISH (BACs RP11-781E19 and RP11- 22q11 .2, two microdeletions 17p11 .2, two microdeletions 15q11 .2q13, 59O5) . two microduplications 17p11 .2) . FISH has not been performed prior In relation to patient 2, the only confirmed case for now, a review of to the array CGH, as no obvious indication of the referrals existed . similar reported cases has been performed . Although none of them All of the detected gains and losses have been confirmed by either has an identical microdeletion, common features have been observed, FISH or MLPA . A small 0,8 Mb deletion in the long arm of chromosome ranging from minor anomalies to growth and mental retardation, and 2 (2q22.3) lead to the molecular genetically confirmed diagnosis of brain, heart and lung malformations . Many genes of 3p12 .3-3p13 re- Mowat-Wilson syndrome . To summarize, array CGH is a very power- gion remain still unknown, making it difficult to establish a good geno- ful tool to detect genomic imbalances in at up to 15% of previously type-phenotype correlation . unresolved cases . These results underline the importance of the use of molecular cyto- genetics in patients with apparently cytogenetically balanced chromo- P02.024 some rearrangements associated with phenotypic abnormalities . Genome-wide analysis of DNA copy-number changes in subjects with mental retardation P02.022 R. Ciccone, A. Vetro, O. Zuffardi; Oligonucleotide array-cGH in postnatal cytogenetics University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. H. Tönnies1, A. Caliebe1, I. Martin-Subero1, S. Gesk1, N. Husemeyer1, I. During the last three years we analyzed more than 1000 individuals Stefanova2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2, K. Bruhn3, U. Stephani3, G. Krüger4, M. affected by mental retardation and/or congenital anomalies by oligo- Kautza5, J. Weimer6, R. Siebert1; based array-CGH . About 300 of these subjects had a known imbal- 1Institut für Humangenetik, Kiel, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, ance already defined by conventional cytogenetics and the genome- Germany, 3Klinik für Neuropädiatrie, Kiel, Germany, 4Abteilung für Medizinische wide analysis helped us to better characterize these rearrangements . Genetik, Rostock, Germany, 5Praxis für Humangenetik, Kiel, Germany, 6Onkolo- A group of 703 individuals with normal karyotype was investigated by gisches Labor der Klinik für Gynäkologie und Geburtshilfe, Kiel, Germany. using two different microarrays (Agilent 44K and 244K) which have High-resolution array-CGH (aCGH) allows the detection of small, sub- an average resolution of about 100Kb and 20Kb respectively . Among microscopic imbalances in euchromatic chromosomal segments . We those investigated by the 44K chip (557), 126 (22,6%) subjects were have performed aCGH for the detection of constitutional imbalances unbalanced and 82 (14,7%) had imbalances causative of their pheno- in 129 patients with normal karyotype and developmental delay and/ type . 146 patients were investigated through the 244K chip; 46 (31,5%) or various malformations, dysmorphisms, or complicated epilepsy of were unbalanced and 22 (15%) such imbalances were pathogenic . We unknown etiology using 44K, 105K, and 244K oligonucleotide arrays are not able to establish whether the remaining 66 imbalances were (Agilent) . In 22 of 129 patients euchromatic imbalances have been de- causative or not . In fact most of them were inherited from a normal tected (~17%) by aCGH and verified by FISH analyses. In seven out of parent whereas in few cases we could not investigate the parents . In- 18 cases where parental samples were available for verification analy- terestingly, our study highlighted some peculiar rearrangements such ses, it could be shown that the euchromatic imbalance (3 deletions: 0 .4 as de novo triplications or two independent genomic disorders in the Mb-1 .9 Mb; 4 duplications: 1 .3 Mb-5 .3 Mb) has been transmitted from same patient . On the other hand, our study demonstrate that increas- a phenotypically normal parent . Overall, in 14 of 129 patients (~11%) ing the resolutions may improve the detection rate, although the per- a de novo aberration has been detected; some of thosw representing centage of potentially causative imbalances detected using these two well known, others recently established microdeletion and microdupli- platforms is not significantly different. cation syndromes . In addition to the 129 patients, 19 patient samples were analyzed to further characterize a chromosomal aberration de- P02.025 tected initially by conventional cytogenetics . In eleven of these cases Validation of BAc-array cGH using a different array cGH (~58%) including complex translocations and ring chromosomes, the platform imbalance(s) could be characterized successfully in more detail using U. Heinrich1, L. Melanie1, H. Tanja1, S. Kai1, A. Polten2, R. Imma1; aCGH . Hybridization of microdissected chromosome material of a su- 1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, pernumerary ring chromosome 19 onto a 105 K array allowed the high 2Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany. resolution mapping of the nonlinear euchromatic content . However, Array CGH utilizing spotted BAC/PAC clone microarrays has recently in eight preselected cytogenetic samples no euchromatic imbalance been introduced as a valuable diagnostic tool for the detection of chro- could be detected by aCGH using whole genomic DNA . In summary, mosomal imbalances in patients with mental retardation and develop- aCGH and array-hybridization of microdissected chromosomes are mental delay . Since diagnostics generally requires a binding medical highly informative methods for the detection and characterization of opinion, results from array CGH analyses need to be validated to avoid chromosomal imbalances in postnatal cytogenetics . false positive results . The currently most widely used validation meth- od is FISH of metaphase spreads using the same BAC/PAC clone that has been identified as conspicuous on the chip array. Whereas FISH is the method of choice for the validation of deletions, duplications are generally difficult to interpret. We therefore used a second, oligonucle-Cytogenetics  otide-based array platform (244K chip, Agilent, Santa Clara, USA) on This work was supported CONACyT Grant No .2005-13947 and UNAM a series of 10 cases that had prior been analyzed on the CytoChip Grant No . SDEI . PTID .05 .1 version 2 .0 (BlueGnome, Cambridge, UK) and partially validated by FISH. Our findings indicate that cross validation using a second array P02.028 CGH platform is a suitable approach for the validation of BAC/PAC ar- Array-cGH diagnosis of cryptic chromosome aberrations ray results that combines the advantages of other validation methods R. Stoeva1,2, L. Grozdanova3, J. P. Fryns2, J. Vermeesch2, I. Ivanov1, I. such as FISH, qPCR or MLPA . The cross validation approach is char- Patcheva1, I. Stoev1, B. Dimitrov2, R. Thoelen2, T. Krastev1, M. Stefanova1,4; acterized by a robust protocol, a rapid work-up, no need for metaphase 1Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, spreads and moderate costs . Bulgaria, 2Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit, Leuven, Bel- gium, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, P02.026 4Center for Human Genetics, Free Flemish University Hospital, Brussels, Bel- characterization of balanced chromosome translocation gium. breakpoints associated to phenotype by microdissection and Chromosome abnormalities are the most frequent cause of congenital acGH malformations/mental retardation syndromes . Recently it was demon- O. Villa1, N. Kosyakova2, I. Cuscó1, M. Aragonés3, D. García-Cruz4, F. Solé5, A. strated that molecular karyotyping improves the detection rate of sub- Plaja6, T. Liehr2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,6; microscopic aberrations up to 5-17% . Here we present the molecular 1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, U735 CIBERER, Barcelona, and clinical data of three unrelated individuals with different chromo- Spain, 2Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 3Genes some aberrations, depicted by array-CGH analysis . and disease program. Center for genomic regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, The smallest described so far deletion 1q44, only 200 kb in size, ap- 4Instituto de Genética Humana “Dr. Enrique Corona Rivera”. Departamento de peared de novo in a 4-year-old girl with clinical features inconsistent Biología Molecular y Genómica, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guada- with the currently known phenotype of 1qter deletion syndrome . She lajara, Mexico, 5Laboratorio de Citogenética y Biología Molecular. Hospital del presented mild mental retardation, speech delay, epilepsy, persistent Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 6Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital foramen ovale and facial dysmorphism . Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. A 123 kb duplication of 8p11 .1 chromosome region was detected in a The positional cloning of genes affected by cytogenetic anomalies as- severely mentally retarded 13-year-old boy with microcephaly, down- sociated with phenotype is one of the main methods for the identifica- slanted palpebral fissures, midface hypoplasia, bird-like nose, long tion of disease-related genes . However, mapping translocation break- philtrum and retrognathia . Very few patients with duplications involving points and rearranged chromosomal boundaries by molecular cytoge- the same chromosome region were reported till now . Surprisingly, both netics is labour intensive . The isolation of the aberrant chromosomes the mother and healthy brother had cytogenetically balanced translo- by either flow sorting or microdissection permits the specific analysis of cation t(9;22)(q22 .1;q13 .1) . their genomic content by high throughput technologies such as aCGH Duplication of CHKAD clone (Shaikh et al ., 2000) within the critical or sequencing . We have applied chromosome microdissection and Di George region was found in an 11-month-old-boy . He was a prod- aCGH to map three apparently translocation breakpoints associated uct of twin pregnancy and had developmental delay, large fontanel, with different phenotypes: 1) 46,XY,t(4;15)(q22;q26) in a chronic my- hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, long phil- elomonocytic leukaemia; 2) 46,XX,t(11;13)(q21;q14) in a patient with trum, microretrognathia and inverted nipples . Few mentally retarded language and developmental delay; and 3) 46,XY,t(7;18)(p15 .1;q21 .1) individuals with 22q11 .2 duplication, but larger in size, approximately in a male with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. We first isolated one 3-6 Mb, were described . The phenotype was variable, characterized of the two derivative chromosomes (6-8 chromosomes), amplified the mainly with neurological disturbances . DNA by DOP-PCR, and performed reverse FISH in order to verify the The reported herein chromosome aberrations, smaller than 1 Mb, con- appropriate cytogenetic location of the microdissected material . Then, tribute to the interpretation of such anomalies in the clinical practice, we hybridized the DNA onto a BAC array and the Agilent 244K CGH an evolving issue after the routine application of array-CGH . oligoarray for precise mapping . All three translocation breakpoints have been narrowed down to regions of ~8-15 Kb in each chromo- P02.029 some with high reproducible signals . We are currently attempting to De novo balanced chromosomal rearrangements in patients with further define the exact breakpoints by either tiling array or direct PCR mental retardation and/or multiple congenital abnormalities re- and sequencing . In summary, the manual microdissection of aberrant analysed by array cGH chromosomes is a cheap and reliable method to obtain target DNA for B. Sikkema-Raddatz, N. Hanemaaijer, Y. Swart, T. Dijkhuizen, C. v. Raven- ulterior high throughput analysis with microarrays . swaaij-Arts, K. Kok; Department of Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands. P02.027 De novo balanced chromosome rearrangements, as detected by cyto- High Resolution comparative Genomic Hybridization analysis in genetic banding techniques, occur in approximately one in 2500 new- patients with idiopathic mental Retardation borns . The risk of mental retardation (MR) and/ or multiple congenital K. Nieto-Martinez, J. Duarte, C. A. Venegas, S. Kofman-Alfaro; abnormalities (MCA) is twice as high as in random populations . It is Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico. plausible that in approximately half of these cases the observed phe- Mental retardation (MR) and development delay (DD) occur in 2-3% notype is caused by deletion, disruption or otherwise inactivation of a of the general population and are very heterogeneous entities . Clini- gene(s) at the breakpoint region(s) . As the resolution of standard cy- cal characteristics observed in these patients are not always related togenetic banding techniques is approximately 5 Mb, the unbalanced to a specific syndromes, so different technologies must be applied to nature of some of these translocations may have escaped detection . investigate the origin of MR . Conventional karyotyping has a resolu- We analyzed 19 patients with MR/ MCA and an apparently de novo tion of >5 Mb and detects chromosomal alterations in >5% of individu- balanced chromosome rearrangement at minimal 550 banding level, als with unexplained MR, while Comparative Genomic Hybridization by high resolution arrayCGH using an 244K oligo array (Agilent) . Eigh- (CGH) is a molecular cytogenetic technique that can characterize un- teen patients carried a translocation, one of these patients had a com- balanced genetic material in a one-step global screening procedure . plex translocation involving three chromosomes . A further patient car- CGH analysis also provides information about the origin of gains and ried an inversion . With the 244K oligo array we detected an unbalance losses of chromosomal material and maps these imbalances to their at the breakpoint regions for four patients; at 5 out of 39 breakpoints . position on the chromosome . We have used high resolution CGH to In addition cryptic microdeletions and duplications not located at the detect deletions and duplications in the range of 2-5 MB in order to translocation/inversion breakpoints were seen for several patients . find genomic imbalances in 10 patients with idiopathic mental retar- The de novo nature of these aberrations is still under investigation . dation. The analysis by HR-CGH reveals 8 cases with normal profile The clinical relevance of our findings will be discussed. and two showed abnormal results, one with a gain in 11p15 .1 and the second one a loss in 12q21 .3 . These cases illustrate the value of molecular cytogenetic techniques as an important tool in the diagnosis and assessment of MR as well as a phenotype-genotype correlation .Cytogenetics  P02.030 Table: Chromosomal microdeletions amenable to modelling by mouse chromosome investigation of cryptic chromosomal imbalances in patients engineering with mental retardation and/or multiple congenital abnormalities 1. Nat Genet . 2006: 38(9):1032-7 using array-cGH 2. Am J Hum Genet . 2008: 82(1):214-21 C. Sismani1, G. Koumbaris1, V. Anastasiadou2, G. Stylianidou2, S. Hadjiloizou3, 3 . Nature . 2001: 410(6824):97-101 P. Evangelidou1, P. C. Patsalis1; 4. Nat Genet . 2004 36(8):867-71 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department 5 . Am J Med Genet A . 2007: 143(2):172-8 of Paediatrics, Makarios Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3”Paidi” Center for Special- 6 . Eur J Med Genet . 2007: 50(4):315-21 ized Paediatrics, Nicosia, Cyprus. 7 . Genetics. 2006:173(1):297-307 . Chromosomal abnormalities constitute the major cause of mental re- tardation (MR) . Conventional chromosomal analysis still remains the P02.032 most important tool for identification of genomic imbalances causing scanning copy number variations (cNV) in Angelman syndrome, MR, however subtle aberrations smaller than 5Mb are missed by rou- mental retardation and autism tine karyotyping . Array-CGH was recently introduced to clinical practice, S. Villatoro1, L. Armengol1, I. Crespo2, E. Gabau2, L. Comadran2, M. Coll3, M. significantly increasing the detection rate of chromosomal abnormali- Guitart2, X. Estivill1,4; ties . The aim of the current study was to investigate 70 patients with 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2Corporació Sani- various degrees of mental retardation and/or congenital abnormalities tària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 3Departament de Biologia Cel•lular Universitat for cryptic chromosomal imbalances . All patients were clinically exam- Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 4Pompeu Fabra University, Barce- ined and tested by karyotyping and FISH, in order to exclude large lona, Spain. chromosomal abnormalities and suspected microdeletion syndromes . Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a Array-CGH was performed using BAC microarray Cytochip platform recognizable molecular cause in about 85% of cases . Copy number (BlueGnome) with a median resolution of 565kb. Clinically significant variations (CNV) are an important source of variation and genes locat- submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances were detected in 4 patients ed therein are likely to have altered expression patterns, therefore con- (5.7%). Abnormal results were confirmed by FISH. The percentage of tributing to phenotypic changes . Twenty AS patients without the typical identified abnormalities in the current study is lower than previously molecular alterations but with well-defined clinical features were ana- reported by other studies, probably due to the fact that no specific lysed by aCGH using the 244K Agilent platform . Altered regions that selection criteria were applied in our patients . One deletion, one du- contained rare CNVs (<2 findings in the literature) or not reported in plication, one unbalanced translocation and one mosaic case with the Database of Genomic Variants were selected for custom Multiple both a deletion and duplication were identified. One of the detected Ligation Probe Amplification (MLPA) assays. We assessed the CNV abnormalities was de novo, one was familial, while the remaining two status using MLPA (52 regions) in the 20 AS family trios, and expanded are still under investigation . Two out of the four detected abnormalities the study to idiopathic mental retardation (n=220) and autism (n=100) . would have been identified by subtelomeric screening and two would CNV analysis by MLPA was also assessed in 450 control samples . The have been missed. Array-CGH is a powerful tool for the identification findings included: two de novo deletions (1p36, 1q44), one maternally of novel chromosomal syndromes and identification of new cases of inherited duplication (Xp11 .23), altered regions in diseases cases but known syndromes that will allow more accurate prognosis and pheno- not present in controls (4q31 .3, 6q21, 6q26, 7q22 .1, Xp11 .23, Xp22 .2 type-genotype correlations . and Xq28), and several inherited genomic variants (5q31 .2, 9q33 .1, 10p12 .33, 16p13 .3, 17p13 .1 and 19q13 .41) not found neither in other P02.031 samples nor in controls . Our results support the view that a consider- modelling human microdeletion syndromes by chromosome able proportion of genomic regions showing variability in copy number engineering in mice could be involved in neurodevelopmental disorders . The absence of C. J. Shaw-Smith1, M. Storer1, D. Szumska2, P. Scambler3, S. Bhattacharya1, genomic abnormalities in controls of inherited genomic changes de- A. Bradley1; tected in cases, suggests that even if inherited, they could be respon- 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome sible for some of the clinical features perhaps uncovering recessive Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Child mutations in specific genes involved in the phenotypes. Health, London, United Kingdom. Array-based diagnostics and the pooling of information in databases P02.033 such as DECIPHER has accelerated discovery of novel microdeletion High-density sNP array analysis reveals novel chromosomal syndromes . Examples include the recently described 17q21 .31 and rearrangements in human cortical malformations 22q11.2 microdeletion syndromes (refs 1 and 2). The identification G. M. S. Mancini1, R. Schot1, B. Dumee2, M. Y. de Wit3, R. F. de Coo3, M. H. of the individual genes responsible for the phenotype is facilitated by Lequin4, W. B. Dobyns5, P. van der Spek2, A. J. M. H. Verkerk2; chromosomally engineered mouse models . We are using such models 1Clinical Genetics ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Bioinformatics to analyze the chromosomal loci for recently described microdeletion ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Child Neurology ErasmusMC, syndromes (see Table) . Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Radiology ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Nether- Our strategy is to target MICER clones (ref 4) to the proximal and dis- lands, 5Human Genetics, Chicago, IL, United States. tal endpoints, respectively, of each deletion . Following Cre treatment, Approximately 200 patients with cortical brain malformations (MCD), mouse ES cells are microinjected into blastocysts to generate male including simplified gyral pattern (SGP), lissencephaly (LIS), nodular chimaeras . Phenotyping of offspring is carried out by MRI scanning at heterotopia (PNH) and polymicrogyria (PMG), were recruited in 15 embryonic day 15.5. Where an appropriate phenotype is identified, a years at our academic hospital . An etiological diagnosis was made in series of nested deletions is made in order to identify a candidate gene 40% of the cases after systematic neuro-radiologic, clinical genetic, or genes . Ultimately, suitable candidates are tested by BAC rescue routine cytogenetic and molecular genetic tests (Archives of Neurol- of the deletion . The 6 .8 Mb mouse deletion at human 17q22-23 was ogy, in press) . In the remaining group without etiological diagnosis we made by this method and has a cardiac phenotype; generation of other tested DNA of circa 100 patients on Affymetrix 250K SNP arrays and mouse deletions is in progress . . analysed the data using the CNAG and CNAT programs to detect sub- Size of Syntenic mouse Salient phenotypic microscopic chromosomal abnormalities . We could demonstrate 18 Syndrome Ref deletion chromosome features pathogenic changes, 17 deletions and 1 amplification) in about 20% MR, seizures, neo- of the tested patients . Of these, 15 had PMG and 4 PNH . Two patients Del 17q21 .31 500 kb 11 1 natal hypotonia had both PMG and PNH; 1 PNH and 2 PMG were associated with hy- Del 22q11 .2 2 .1 Mb 16 Truncus arteriosus 2 drocephalus . No pathogenic abnormalities were found in the SGP and Cleft palate, atrial Del 15q14 5 .3 Mb 2 5 LIS group. The chromosomal aberrations were confirmed by qPCR septal defect and parental testing . Some concerned known loci for MCD like 1p36, Del 6q24 .3-25 .1 2 .6 Mb 10 Atrial septal defect 6 6q27, 22q11; among the new loci found are 2q13, 4q22, Xp11, 21q22, Del 17q22-23 6 .8 Mb* 11 Tetralogy of Fallot 7 22q13 . These are not annotated as polymorphic CNV in the know da- *deletion in chromosomally engineered mouse tabases of variants and contain candidate genes . The size of the rear-Cytogenetics  rangements ranged between 12 Kb and 10 Mb . With this technique, proven that array-MAPH clones can be also efficiently implemented also single gene deletions were detected, which directly pointed to the in array-CGH . causative mutation . Our data show that this novel approach detects We suggest that efforts for upgrading genomic copy-number screen- up to 20% genomic abnormalities in a highly selected MCD patient ing should not only focus on new CGH microarray probes, but also on population, mostly in the group of PMG and PNH . introducing new platforms, such as array-MAPH, as a reliable, flexible and cost-effective alternative to array-CGH and high-density genotyp- P02.034 ing chips . Detection of genomic copy number changes in Estonian patients with idiopathic mental retardation P02.036 O. Zilina1, K. Männik1, H. Puusepp1,2, S. Parkel1, P. Palta1, K. Õunap2,3, A. Array comparative genomic hybridization and computational Kurg1; genome annotation in constitutional cytogenetics: suggesting 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2De- candidate genes for novel submicroscopic chromosomal partment of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Medical Genetics imbalance syndromes. Centre, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. B. Coessens1, S. Van Vooren1, B. De Moor1, Y. Moreau1, J. Vermeesch2; Mental retardation (MR) is a highly heterogeneous condition with a 1K.U.Leuven, ESAT / SCD (SISTA), Leuven, Belgium, 2K.U.Leuven, Center for prevalence of ~1-3% . It is caused by genetic, epigenetic or environ- Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. mental factors solely or in combination . Despite extensive investi- Genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization screening is gations the underlying reason remains unknown in about half of the uncovering pathogenic submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances in cases . patients with developmental disorders . In those patients, imbalances We started the first comprehensive study in Estonia in order to find out appear now to be scattered across the whole genome, and most pa- causative factors in families with idiopathic MR and help to shed light tients carry different chromosomal anomalies . Screening patients with on molecular mechanisms underlying MR . To date, we collected more developmental disorders can be considered a forward functional ge- then 230 DNA samples from MR patients with normal karyotypes and nome screen . The imbalances pinpoint the location of genes that are their unaffected family members . involved in human development . Because most imbalances encom- Infinium-2 genotyping assay with Human370CNV BeadChips (Illumina pass regions harboring multiple genes, the challenge is to (1) identify Inc) was applied as initial screening tool for detection of DNA copy those genes responsible for the specific phenotype and (2) disentan- number changes and copy-neutral LOH events in the samples . Ac- gle the role of the different genes located in an imbalanced region . We quired data were analyzed using BeadStudio v3 .1 (Illumina Inc) and discuss our work on novel tools and databases that we recently devel- QuantiSNP (Colella et al 2007) software . Relevant results were con- oped to aid this gene discovery process. Identification of the functional firmed by RT-qPCR. relevance of genes will not only deepen our understanding of human After validation of the study-platform using reference DNAs, first 100 development but will, in addition, aid in the data interpretation and im- individuals from 22 families were screened . About 35 genomic rear- prove genetic counseling . rangements per individual were detected, most of which are reported in the Database of Genomic Variants or present recurrently in our P02.037 samples . cryptic chromosomal imbalances in patients with idiopathic In three families, possible disease-related imbalances were mental retardation and multiple congenital anomalies found: 1 .6Mb dup(X)(p22 .31), 3 .9Mb del(15)(q13 .1q13 .2), 8 .3Mb C. Orellana, S. Monfort, M. Rosello, I. Ferrer, S. Oltra, F. Martinez; del(7)(q31 .1q32 .1) . The detected rearrangements were not present Fundacion Para La Investigacion, Valencia, Spain. in unaffected family members . Cases with similar phenotypes and Background: Chromosomal abnormalities are a major cause of men- aberration(s) in the overlapping regions are also reported in the DECI- tal retardation and multiple congenital anomalies . Array CGH studies PHER database . have shown an incidence of 10-15% of formerly undetected imbal- In addition, several other potentially clinically significant aberrations ances among these patients . were found . Involvement of these aberrations in the etiology of MR is Objective: To report array CGH screening of a series of 160 patients currently under investigation . with idiopathic mental retardation and congenital abnormalities . Material and methods: 160 patients with normal karyotype and normal P02.035 subtelomeric results by MLPA were evaluated for cryptic chromosomal Application of two different copy-number detection rearrangements by array-CGH using a high-definition microarray con- methodologies - array-cGH and array-mAPH - with identical sisting of 44 .000 probes (Agilent technologies) . amplifiable target sequences. Results: A total of 46 (29%) probably pathological rearrangements L. K. Kousoulidou1, K. Männik2, O. Zilina2, S. Parkel2, P. Palta2, M. Remm2, A. were detected . Of these, 11 alterations have been proved to be patho- Kurg2, P. C. Patsalis1; logical, while the remaining are under study . Deletions and duplica- 1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Institute of Mo- tions are equally represented . Duplication sizes ranged from to 20 to lecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu/Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. 3,859 kb (mean 1,250 kb, SD 2,276) . Deletion sizes ranged from to 0 .4 Array-CGH has become the method of choice for the detection of to 10,314 kb (mean 1,369 kb, SD 2,319) . subtle imbalances as cause of genomic disorders . Novel array-CGH It is worth to note the occurrence of two de novo alterations in one modifications were introduced in order to detect smaller aberrations by patient: a 10,3 Mb deletion at 6q16 and a 360 kb duplication at 16p11 . varying the type and density of arrayed target sequences . At the same As the phenotype is comparable to other cases with 6q16 deletion, the time, certain limitations have become obvious, emerging the need for duplication can be considered as a de novo polymorphism . alternative methodologies. Array-based Multiplex Amplifiable Probe Conclusions: Array CGH should be considered an essential tool for Hybridization (array-MAPH) is a recent approach, where the analysis the genetic analysis of patients with mental retardation and congeni- of copy-number data is performed by conventional MAPH, followed by tal anomalies . However, caution must be taken when interpreting the rehybridization to microarrays containing DNA sequences, identical to results in order to distinguish pathological from polymorphic imbal- MAPH probes. Thus, targeted amplification and reduction of the com- ances . plexity in genomic material is achieved . The aim of this study was to estimate whether a probe set, initially P02.038 developed for array-MAPH, is potentially useful for array-CGH . The Identification of disease-related copy number variation (CNV) in same human chromosome X specific probe set was applied to com- patients with mental retardation by high-dense sNP genotyping pare array-CGH and array-MAPH performance and to further evaluate microarrays the potential of array-MAPH methodology to be used for genome-wide N. Rivera Brugués1, J. Wagenstaller1, M. Hempel1, S. Spranger2, B. Kazmierc- identification of locus copy-number changes. zak2, C. Daumer-Haas3, K. Hörtnagel3, T. Meitinger1, T. M. Strom1; Normal male and female DNA samples were studied, as well as three 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University Munich and Helmholtz Cen- patients with known chromosome X aberrations: two patients with a ter Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg- 12-Mb deletion and one patient with 1-Mb duplication . Our data has Munich, Germany, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 3Pränatal-Cytogenetics  Medizin München, Munich, Germany. Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom. We investigated 98 children referred for unexplained mental retarda- We have identified a patient with a novel 4 megabase duplication of tion using Hap550 oligonucleotides arrays (Illumina) . Conventional 2q32 .2-q32 .3 chromosome region using GeneChip 250K Nsp SNP karyotyping did not reveal any abnormality . Data analysis were per- array from Affymetrix . The proband has global developmental delay, formed with median normalization and genotypes-specific dosage cal- speech delay, and is aggressive with violent behaviour towards others culation using R-scripts . We used standard deviation (mean SD: 0 .15) and a tendency towards self-mutilation . She has foraging behaviour and mean absolute deviation (mean MAD: 0 .11) of the log2 intensity leading to obesity . She has striking blonde, dry, wiry hair, straight eye- ratios to assess data quality . We also calculated a signal-to-noise ratio brows and low-set ears . She has brachydactyly, and 5th finger clinod- (mean SNR: 5 .44) in male DNA samples (median log2 intensity ratio actyly . Her feet are broad, with a sandal gap, short toes and mild 2/3 of the X-chromosomal SNPs minus median log2 ratio of the autosomal toe syndactyly . The FISH studies have shown that this 4 megabase SNPs divided by MAD) . 254 candidate regions were evaluated with 2 duplication has been inherited from her mother who has depression, or 3 quantitative PCRs each . 58% were determined to be true-positive and left school without any qualifications suggestive of a lower than findings. Our experiments are likely to underestimate the true positive average IQ . An unaffected sibling has not inherited the duplication . A rate because we excluded all known CNV polymorphisms . Under the recent report of a larger 2q32 deletion partially overlaps the duplica- assumption that all detected know CNV polymorphisms are true posi- tion in this family . The duplicated region includes INPP1, previously tive, this rate would be 89 .7% . 65 .5% of the false positive CNVs were implicated in bipolar disorder, and COL3A1 and COL5A2, which are detected in regions defined by <8 SNPs, 32.3% in 8-20 SNPs and candidate genes for wrinkly skin syndrome but the proband does not 1 .8% in >20 SNPs . Preliminary results revealed 15 de novo CNVs, 13 share any characteristics of this syndrome except the mental retarda- deletions and 2 duplications (15%), which varied in size from 125 kb to tion . Similarities with patients with the larger 2q32 deletion include a 13 Mb . Seven CNVs were known genomic disorders . Two CNVs over- common behavioural phenotype and hair abnormalities . This suggests lapped approximately 0 .9 Mb with a DECIPHER entry . The remaining that copy number variation of 2q32 is a necessary, but perhaps not suf- 6 CNVs were not described before . ficient component for the behavioural phenotype and further analysis Gain/ Position Start Position End Number Length Known of the minimum region of overlap may help to identify important genes IDChromosome Loss (UCSC hg18) (UCSC hg18) of SNPs (Mb) Syndrome involved with this in particular . We discuss the clinical phenotype, re- 1 1q44 Loss 241 .559 .266 241 .684 .687 18 0,125 no 2 17p13 .1 Loss 7 .054 .704 7 .348 .051 57 0,293 no view the literature, and discuss the difficult counselling issues involved 3 13q32 .2 Loss 99 .000 .207 99 .549 .209 156 0,549 yes where the link between submicroscopic DNA copy number change and 4 19p13 .3 Loss 218 .039 1 .103 .656 180 0,885 no phenotype is unclear . 5 1q43-q44 Loss 241 .477 .990 24 .3498 .562 398 2,021 yes 6 16q22 .2-q23 .1 Loss 70 .464 .098 74 .053 .487 722 3,589 no 7 7q31 .2-q31 .31 Loss 113 .212 .019 117 .409 .113 593 4,197 yes P02.041 8 12q24 .31-q24 .32 Loss 120 .674 .768 125 .508 .628 875 4,834 no 9 15q11 .2-q13 .1 Loss 21 .200 .233 26 .208 .861 1 .130 5,009 no Confirmation of the new microdeletion syndrome of 16p11.2- 1016p11 .2-p12 .2 Loss 21 .512 .681 29 .223 .380 1 .373 7,711 yes p12.2 112q37 .1-q37 .3 Loss 233 .320 .827 242 .656 .041 2 .254 9,335 yes A. Battaglia1,2, A. Novelli3, L. Bernardini3, T. Filippi1; 126q25 .3-q27 Loss 157 .812 .841 170 .723 .055 3 .545 12,910 no 136p22 .1-p23 Loss 14 .554 .649 27 .849 .661 3 .265 13,295 no 1Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute, Calambrone (Pisa), Italy, 2Division 1422q11 .21-q11 .23 Gain 17 .345 .628 22 .757 .878 1 .155 5,412 yes of Medical Genetics, Dept Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 1516q11 .2-q12 .2 Gain 45 .096 .893 53 .506 .358 1 .453 8,409 no United States, 3Ospedale CSS-IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo e Istituto CSS P02.039 Mendel, Roma, Italy. Elucidation of complex structural Variations at 17q21.3, the NSF We have identified a pericentromeric deletion, spanning about 8.2 Mb, Locus in 16p11 .2-p12 .2, in a patient with DD and dysmorphic features, by G. W. Tam, K. Porter, N. Carter, S. Grant, R. Redon; aCGH . This deletion arose de novo and is flanked by segmental dupli- Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. cations . The proposita was the only child of healthy non-consanguine- Multiple studies have recently described extensive structural variation ous parents, born after an uneventful pregnancy, at 40 weeks ges- in the human genome . Among the regions with most extensive varia- tation, by normal delivery . She suffered from perinatal distress . Birth tion, the 17q21 .31 locus harbours a complex architecture, with several weight was 2,740 g, length 48 cm, and OFC 33 cm . Family history is structural variants previously associated with abnormal phenotypes . non-contributory . Hypotonia and DD were present from early on . She This locus is the site of a ~900kb inversion polymorphism responsible started walking alone at 18/12. We first saw her at age 3 10/12 years. for two divergent haplotypes, named H1 and H2 . In addition, the H1 On examination, there were flat face; low-set, posteriorly rotated ears; haplotype is divided into subtypes which show considerable structural high-arched palate; hypotonic face; left single palmar crease; long, thin heterogeneity . While the H2 haplotype has been associated to one fingers; a sacral dimple; and no speech. Height was at the 50th centile, microdeletion syndrome causing learning disability and dysmorphic weight at the 25th, and OFC at the 30th . DNA FraX , HRB, metabolic features, certain H1 sub-haplotypes have been linked to neurodegen- work-up, audiologic evaluation, brain MRI, electroencephalogram, erative disorders, including progressive supranuclear palsy and fron- heart/abdomen ultrasonography were normal . When last seen, aged tomental dementia . By using published copy number variation data on 7 7/12 years, she had a mild-moderate MR, with a comprehension 270 HapMap individuals, we have defined several structural variations of a 4-year-old child, and was able to pronounce simple words and a within the 17q21 .31 locus, including a duplication polymorphism involv- few telegraphic phrases . Hypotonia was still present . Over the 3 9/12 ing the 5’ portion of the N-ethylmaleimide sensitive factor (NSF) gene years follow-up, we observed a slow, but constant, overall improve- and a second distinct CNV upstream of NSF, which is detected only in ment . Our patient shows common clinical features to the four individu- European individuals on both H1 and H2 alleles . CNV breakpoints in als described by Ballif et al (2007), and aCGH suggests that the dele- each sub-type were also delineated using high-resolution oligo array . tions of all cases share the same distal breakpoint . Our observation We have further developed a set of quantitative PCR assays to resolve validates the possibility that deletions in 16p11 .2-p12 .2 constitute a the different H1 and H2 sub-haplotypes . Given the previous associa- distinct syndrome . tion of the 17q21 .31 locus with disease and the presence in this inter- val of several genes related to the brain function, this new genotyping P02.042 assay will be a valuable resource for testing the involvement of H1/H2 complex genomic structure underlying an interrupted subtypes in neuro-psychiatric disorders . microdeletion in 16p11.2-p12.1 with breakpoints mapping to non- homologous LcRs P02.040 B. Nowakowska1, A. Midro2, B. Panasiuk2, D. Rychter3, P. Stankiewicz4, E. A Novel familial 2q32 duplication associated with distinct Bocian1; behavioural phenotype 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University Białystok, S. G. Mehta1, C. Shaw-Smith1, E. Kivuva1,2, R. Reading3, G. Parkin1, I. Si- Bialystok, Poland, 3University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Baylor Col- monic1, L. Willatt1; lege of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United The LCR-rich proximal chromosome 16p has been shown recently Kingdom, 22. Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospi- to be associated with the novel genomic disorders: the 7 .1-8 .7 Mb tal, Exeter, United Kingdom, 33. Department of Paediatrics, Norfolk and Norwich microdeletion 16p11 .2-p12 .1, and the proximally adjacent, recurrentCytogenetics 0 593 kb microdeletion and microduplication in 16p11 .2 found in ~1% By clinical examination we noticed craniofacial dysmorphism: right of patients with autism . The recurrent 16p11 .2 rearrangements im- parieto-occipital plagiocephaly, downward lips, distinct ,,Greek war- plicated in autism likely occur via nonallelic homologous recombina- rior helmet” face with broad beaked nose, high frontal hairline, frontal tion (NAHR) between directly oriented LCRs . The breakpoints of the bossing, hypertelorism; dysmorphic downward ears, bilateral preau- 16p11 .2-p12 .1 deletions were mapped to nonhomologous sequences; ricular tubercles, low occipital hair insertion . Skin dimples on elbows however, the deletions were proposed to have arisen via NAHR . We and left parasternal holosistolic cardiac murmur were present . Imag- present a 17-year-old patient with developmental delay, short stature, istic evaluations show large axial and transverse skull diameters and skeletal anomalies, and a normal G-banding karyotype and M-FISH . normal sized .cerebral ventricles . Small ventricular septal defect with Using metaphase HR-CGH, we identified a deletion in 16p11.2-p12.1 left-to-right shunt was detected . Serologic tests for TORCH syndrome and verified it by FISH with BAC clones. Whole genome array CGH and immunoglobulin level were normal . Karyotype analysis noticed de- with ~385,000 oligonucleotide probes (NimbleGen) defined the dele- letion in 4p15-pter region . tion between ~22 .482 .580-29 .342 .610 bp (6 .8 Mb) . Unexpectedly, we Conclusion: Although the patient has no growth problems or physical identified a second deletion ~600 kb in size, mapping ~750 kb distal to disabilities, nor mental retardation, constant cardiologic and neurologic the first one. The breakpoints of both deletions map within nonhomolo- follow-up care is required . gous sequences; breakpoint junction sequencing is in progress . We propose that the deletions arose through recently reported Fork Stall- P02.045 ing and Template Switching (FoSTeS) replication-based mechanism the 4P-syndrome. A case report and literature review (Lee at al . 2007) rather than NAHR . Phenotype-genotype correlation F. Mortezapour1, F. Mahjoubi2; with the previously reported cases will be also presented . 1Iran blood Transfusion Organization Research Centre (IBTO), Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran blood Transfusion Organization Re- P02.043 search Centre (IBTO), Tehran, Iran & Clinical Genetic Dept. National Institute 3 Dimensional imaging in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome for Genetic Engineering and Biotecnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Repub- P. Hammond1, F. Forzano2, F. Faraveli2, S. Williams3, S. T. South4, J. C. Carey4, lic of Iran. O. W. J. Quarrell3; Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a rare developmental disorder 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Galliera Hospital, Genoa, associated with a deletion of short arm of chromosome 4 . Well-known Italy, 3Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4The University features of WHS are typical facial anomalies, midline defects, skeletal of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. anomalies, prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, hypotonia, men- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) has characteristic facial features tal retardation, and seizures . resulting from terminal 4p deletions which may be small or large; or Here we report a new case of WHS who was referred to our clinic for result from unbalanced translocations . Those with small deletions are cytogenetic investigation . less likely to have congenital anomalies . We used 3D imaging and Case Report: The patient was a 9 month old baby boy with devel- dense surface modelling to investigate whether facial features corre- opmental delay, hypotonia, respiratory and heart problem, prominent late with the aetiology of the 4p deletions . eyes and forehead and delayed bone age . 3D images and routine karyotype results were collected from patients Materials and Methods: Lymphocyte cultures from the patients were attending support group meetings . Excluding adults and unusable im- set up in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 20% FBS . Cell pro- ages, dense surface models from 76 Caucasian WHS cases (mean liferation was stimulated with phytohemagglutinin . The cells were har- age 7 .7 years, range 1 .4 - 18 .9 years) were compared with 150 con- vested after 72 h culture time . Hypotonic treatment of the cells was trols (mean age 7 .9 years, range 0 .2 - 20 .4 years) . The WHS cohort performed in 0.052 M KCL for 10 min at 37c. The cells were fixed in consisted of 19 large deletions (breakpoint proximal to 4p16 .3); 17 methanol: glacial acetic (3: 1) overnight, and, after washing in fixa- small deletions (breakpoint within 4p16 .3); 12 (4;8) translocations; 11 tive, were dropped onto clean slides . The slides were G-banded and other translocations and 17 unclassified mainly because the break- analyzed . point was recorded as 4p16 . Pattern recognition algorithms supported Result :GTG banded karyotype revealed a deletion of the distsal part 100% discrimination between WHS and control images . Eight addi- of 4p (p15 .31-pter) . We describe some of the features of our case and tional cases were tested unseen, 4 interstitial deletions and 4 from will compare it with other reported cases . different ethnic backgrounds; all were more similar to the mean of the WHS cases than the controls . P02.046 There was a significant time lag in facial growth in WHS that does Pure de novo trisomy 4p: About 2 cases not seem to depend on deletion size . Those with larger deletions had M. Chaabouni1, L. Kraoua1, I. Ouertani1, S. Bouzguenda2, I. Chelly1, R. Med- greater facial dysmorphology and greater facial asymmetry than those deb1, L. Ben Jemaa1, F. Maazoul1, S. Gaigi2, H. Chaabouni1; with smaller deletions . There is increasing interest in those few chil- 1Department of Hereditary and congenital disorders, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Depart- dren with the smallest 4p deletions which define the WHS critical re- ment of Foetopathology, la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia. gions . We suggest 3D imaging is used for objective assessment of Trisomy 4p is a well-known entity as more than 80 cases have been these crucial cases . published . Most of the reports of trisomy 4p were due to unbalanced translocations and resulting in associated trisomy or monosomy of P02.044 other chromosomes . Cases with pure trisomy 4p are seldom . Wolf-Hirschorn syndrome - case report We report on two cases of pure trisomy 4p arising de novo in a girl and T. Marcovici1, I. Sabau1, I. Simedrea1, M. Mihaescu1, M. Puiu1, R. Tudorache2; a male foetus . 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2”Louis Turcanu” The girl aged 7 years presented with mental retardation, behaviour Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. troubles, growth retardation, asymmetrical skull, microcephaly, trian- Wolf-Hirschorn syndrome is a rare disease caused by the partial dele- gular face, strabismus, bulbous nose, teeth malposition, abnormal tion of the fourth chromosome’s short arm . Female to male ratio is 2:1 . shape of the ears and camptodactyly . Because of the vast range of deleted material (1% to 50%) the effect Standard karyotype performed on the patient and her parents showed on each child varies widely, but the facial appearance is suggestive of a derivative chromosome 14 associated with a whole 4p trisomy: 46,X 4p- syndrome . No treatment exists for the underlying disorder and the X,der(14)t(4;14)(p12;q11 .1)mat . management is supportive . The second case was a male foetus for who a karyotype was per- We present a nine months old female admitted in our clinic for sistolic formed because of an increased nuchal translucency and revealed an cardiac murmur . A comprehensive medical evaluation was made: pre- add(4)(qter) .The father has a balanced translocation between the ho- natal and birth history, physical, neurologic and genetic examinations, mologous chromosomes 4, his karyotype was 46,XY,t(4;4)(p12;qter) . biologic and imagistic evaluations (cardiac and abdominal ultrasonog- Thus, the foetus’ karyotype was interpreted as: 46,XY,der(4)t(4;4)(p1 raphy, chest and skull films, brain MRI). 2;qter)pat . The patient is the second child of a young couple . She was delivered Fetopathological examination at 19 weeks of gestation showed slight full term with a weight of 3400g and her development was normal . dysmorphic features, micrognathia, pointed chin, abnormal shape ofCytogenetics  the ears, camptodactyly, and abnormal genitalia . Genetic counselling P02.049 was given . Evidence for epigenetic regulation of CDKNA in normal human Although 4p-syndrome is a distinct entity, it can not be recognized placenta without cytogenetic evaluation as the features are variable sometimes E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashevarova, I. N. Lebedev; very mild . Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Placental development and trophoblast differentiation share many sim- P02.047 ilarities with the process of tumorigenesis . These are rapid prolifera- clinical and cytogenetic characteristics in Wolf-Hirschhorn tion, invasiveness and gene expression profiles. It is possible, that this syndrome - considerations on five cases analogy might provided by epigenetic mechanisms . To test this hypoth- E. Gorduza1, M. Covic1, M. Volosciuc1, E. Braha1, M. Gramescu1, L. Butnariu1, esis methylation status of four tumor suppressor genes in the normal O. Bartsch2; human placentas was investigated . Promoter methylation of p14ARF, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iasi, Iasi, Romania, 2Institute of Medical CDKN2A, CDKN2B and RB1 genes was analyzed by methyl-specific Genetics, Mainz, Germany. and methylation-sensitive PCR in the cytotrophoblast and extraembry- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a rare chromosomal disease onic mesoderm of 32 first-trimester induced abortions. Studied tissues (1/50.000 new-borns) generated by a 4p deletion. We present five have different dynamics of epigenetic genome reprogramming and cases of WHS diagnosed in our service in last 10 years . In all cases we level of methylation . No methylated alleles of p14ARF, CDKN2B and discovered the following features of WHS: marked growth deficiency, RB1 genes were detected in normal extraembryonic tissues . However microcephaly, facial dysmorphism (ocular hypertelorism, down turned aberrant methylation of the CDKN2A promoter was observed in 78% “fishlike” mouth, short upper lip and philtrum). We found cardiac anom- of cases in both placental tissues . Heretofore aberrant methylation of alies in 4 cases, ocular abnormalities in 3 cases, cleft lip in 1 case and CDKN2A gene was frequently observed in different human cancers as talipes in 1 case . Chromosomal analysis was performed in all 5 cases . well as in 20% of hydatidiform moles, 40% of chorioncarcinomas (Xue At 3 patients, karyoptype revealed 4p deletion specific to WHS. In last et al ., 2004) and even up to 14% cases of spontaneously aborted em- 2 cases karyotype was normal and we made FISH analysis in Clinical bryos with normal karyotype (Park et al., 2008). Our data for the first Genetic Institute in Dresden (Germany) . In both cases was found a time have demonstrated that hypermethylation of CDKN2A with high 4p16 .3 microdeletion . In the last case, because of abnormal reproduc- frequency can occur in normal human placenta . Tendency of decreas- tive history of mother (2 spontaneous abortions, and 1 child death in ing in mean gestational age between embryos with (8 .4 weeks, n=7) or neonate) the FISH analysis was made also in mother and indicated a without methylation (10 .2 weeks, n=25) was found . It is possible, that t(4;20)(p16;p13) translocation . In this situation our patient presented in several cell populations with epigenetic inactivation of the cell-cycle fact an association between a 4p partial monosomy and a small 20p checkpoint genes can exist in placental tissues during some periods of partial trisomy . In the last case we estimate a recurrence risk about its development providing evidence for a new unresolved mechanism 10% . Our study reveals the importance of clinical examination in WHS, of successful placentation . in all our cases clinical suspicion being confirmed. In addition, classical chromosomal analysis is not sufficient for confirmation of diagnosis. P02.050 Thus, in all cases with strong evidences for WHS, but with normal screening for 22q13 deletion syndrome in 40 patients with karyotype are required a FISH analysis . Also, genetic counselling is clinical feautures suggestive of Angelman syndrome and normal difficult in some rare cases. methylation test F. García-Santiago1,2, M. Palomares1,2, L. Fernández1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2, V. F. P02.048 Montaño1, A. Delicado1,2; Prenatal diagnosis of simultaneous Wolf-Hirschhorn and 1Servicio de Genética Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de deletion 4q syndromes in a ring chromosome 4 Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER). ISCIII, M. J. Gómez-Rodríguez1, A. Moreno-Izquierdo1, F. Fernández-Martínez1, M. Madrid, Spain. Martín-Ramos1, A. Galindo2, A. Grañeras3, E. Barreiro1; The 22q13 deletion syndrome has been associated with neonatal 1Department of Genetics, Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Fetal Physiopathology, hypotonia, developmental and mental delay, abscent or severe ex- Madrid, Spain, 3Department of fetal Physiopatholgy, Madrid, Spain. pressive language delay, autistic-like behaviour and subtle facial dys- The phenotypes in patients with segmental aneuploidy are syndromes morphisms . As some of those features are suggestive of Angelman which often vary in their clinical manifestation depending on the size of Syndrome (AS), testing for 22q13 .3 deletion in patients with AS fea- the chromosomal region involved . tures without the characteristic molecular 15q abnormalities has been Formation of a ring chromosome 4, often involves loss of 4p and 4q suggested . telomeres and of more proximal regions on either or both chromosome Forty patients with mental retardation, who had been previously re- arms . Deletions of the distal short arm of one chromosome 4 involving ferred with a clinical diagnosis of AS and a normal methylation test parts of 4p16 cause the Wolf-Hirschhorn (4p-) syndrome and deletions result, were included in the study . Patients had not been screened on chromosome region 4q33-4qter have also been recognised as a for UBE3A mutations (about 10%) . Screened for 22q13 deletions ap- distinctive malformation syndrome . pliying the SALSA P188 MLPA kit contains 37 probes detecting se- To date, at least 17 cases with ring chromosome 4 have been de- quences on chromosome 22q13 . This kit including four probes in the scribed, but only two cases were prenatally diagnosed . SHANK3 gene, which is thought to be responsible for at least part of We report a case of prenatal diagnosis corresponding to the pregnan- the phenotype, in particular the neurological symptoms . cy of a 27 year old woman, which was referred for amniocentesis at 24 A 22q13 deletion was discarted in 39/40 patients (97 .5%) because no weeks of gestation because of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) deletions were detected by MLPA analysis . Only one patient showed showing a foetal biometry corresponding to a 18 weeks of gestation . an abnormal result consisting in a deletion of the probe located in exon Moreover, the fetus showed complex cardiac malformations . 9 of SHANK3 gene, but this result needs to be confirmed. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic analysis of the cultured This study confirms the findings of Vries (2002) et al. suggesting that amniocytes revealed mosaic for a de novo ring chromosome 4: patients with an “Angelman phenotype” are not more likely to have a 46XY(10),45XY,-4(10),46XY,r(4)(p16,q35)(16) . 22q13 .3 deletion than other individuals with mental retardation . The ring chromosome 4 was further characterized by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using WCP 4, CEP 4 , tel 4q, tel 4p and the P02.051 Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) . Phenotypic variability in Angelman syndrome - report of two The prenatal and postnatal clinical features are well correlated with cases those described for simultaneous Wolf-Hirschhorn and deletion 4q M. Budisteanu1,2, A. Arghir2, G. Cardos2, S. Chirieac2, S. Magureanu1, A. Lun- syndromes . geanu2; 1Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry “Prof. Dr. Al. Obregia”, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania. Angelman syndrome is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder with a difficult clinical diagnosis and heterogeneous genetic basis.Cytogenetics  We herewith report two cases of Angelman syndrome with different University of Napoli, Caserta, Italy. phenotypes . The Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a paradigmatic con- First case, a 12 year-old girl, was admitted in our department for neu- dition of overgrowth, characterized by macrosomia, congenital mal- rological evaluation because of severe progressive toraco-lumbar sco- formations, neonatal metabolic anomalies, and predisposition to em- liosis, which occurred at the age of five. She also presented severe bryonal malignancies, and a complex pattern of inheritance . Imprinting mental retardation, absence of speech, autistic features, gait difficul- defects in 2 gene clusters located at 11p15.5 have been identified in ties with ataxia, hyperventilation episodes, and epileptic seizures . The about 75% of the cases . We report the clinical and molecular char- second case, a 4 year-old boy, was referred to our department for psy- acterization of a cohort of 49 patients (27 M, 22 F) presenting a clas- chomotor retardation . He had “happy-puppet” appearance, ataxic gait, sic BWS (34) or a BWS-like phenotype (15) . A molecular lesion has and severe mental retardation . Both children were born from healthy been identified in 16 out of the 39 patients analyzed (41%): KvDMR non-consanguineous parents . hypomethylation in 7 (17 .9%), paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) in 6 Clinical investigations included neurological evaluation, EEG, and (15 .4%), partial deletion of the IGF-2/H19 imprinting center in 3 (7 .7%), MRI . 2 maternally inherited and 1 de novo . All the patients presenting a ge- Chromosomal studies were performed on peripheral blood lympho- netic/epigenetic lesion were affected by a classic BWS phenotype . cytes, by GTG banding. Locus specific BAC probes for critical region Seven children of the cohort (14 .3%) developed an embryonic neo- 15q11-13 and control probes were used for FISH analysis . plasm, 5 Wilm’s tumors and 2 hepatoblastomas; all neoplasms were Normal karyotype, and 15q microdeletion was demonstrated in both detected in patients presenting hemihyperplasia, and two of them were cases . diagnosed as affected by BWS only after the onset of the embryonic In the second case, the phenotype was highly suggestive for Angel- tumor. We confirm the complex genotype-epigenotype/phenotype cor- man syndrome, while in the first case, a differential diagnosis with Rett relation in BWS, describing three cases of the rare partial deletions of syndrome was considered, especially because of the severe vertebral the IGF/H19 imprinting center, documenting a high incidence of cancer scoliosis . in our cohort, occurring even in children with an extremely mild expres- A diagnosis of Angelman syndrome should be considered in patients sion of the overgrowth syndrome with Rett-like phenotype. Molecular investigation of specific genetic defect allowed, in our cases, the refinement of clinical diagnosis. P02.054 Financial support: CEEX (Project 150/2006) . molecular defects in patients with clinical symptoms of Acknowledgements: The authors thank Prof . Jean-Michel Dupont and Angelman syndrome Mrs . Dominique Blancho for kindly providing BAC probes and Mrs . M. Gos1,2, E. Obersztyn1, M. Nawara1, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1, A. Szpecht-Po- Marioara Cristea for technical assistance . tocka1; 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2MSCM Cancer Center and P02.052 Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. supravalvular aortic stenosis and Williams syndrome Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare complex neurobehavioral disorder G. S. Doros, M. Gafencu, A. Popoiu, B. Zoica, J. Puiu; that is due to defects in parental genetic imprinting at the 15q11-q13 Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Ti- region resulting in the aberrant expression of genes located within this misoara, Romania. region . It was also suggested that mutations in UBE3A gene might be Aim: To present two cases of supravalvular aortic stenosis, selected responsible for AS . from the group of aortic stenosis children, admitted in the IIIrd Pae- We included 206 patients with clinical symptoms of AS in our study . diatric Clinic in 2007, considered to be Williams syndrome . Williams First, the analysis of methylation status was performed with MS-PCR syndrome is caused by the deletion of genetic material from the re- method using primers specific for SNRPN locus . The abnormal (pater- gion q11 .2 of chromosome 7, including more than 20 genes, several of nal only) methylation pattern was found in 23 patients and in several these contributing to the characteristic features of this disorder . cases it was due to the deletion in 15q11-q13 region as shown by Material and method: The patients were young children, one girl and Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification one boy, extremly friendly, with moderate mental retardation, short technique . stature, characteristic elfin face, joint laxity, systolic murmur and atrac- Patients with the normal methylation pattern were qualified to the tion to music . They performed clinical examination, ECG, echocardiog- analysis of UBE3A coding sequence . Three missense (c .1291G>A - raphy, cardiopulmonary X ray and angio CT, and after that they were p .Gly192Ser, c .1249G>A - p .Ala178Thr, c .1643A>G - p .Asn309Ser), refered to the genetician, ENT and ophtalmologic department . two frameshift (c .3228-3231del4 and c .1683-1689del7) and one Results: Supravalvular aortic stenosis was confirmed in both cases, splice-site (c .2616A>G) mutations were found in our group . Moreover, associated with hypolasia of aortic arch and large coarctation of the a 14bp deletion (c .3298-3311del14) in 3’UTR and stop codon change aorta in girl . She had from birth irreductible inguinal hernia, operated in (c .3275A>G) were detected in 2 and 3 patients, respectively . In 32 newborn period, followed by cardiopulmonary arrest, resuscitated . The (15 .5%) patients, a small insertion in intron 6 (c .678 -48insT) always inghinolabial hernia reoccur . She also still have feeding problems for linked to small deletion in intron 7 (c .720 -66_68delGAT) was identi- semisolid food . Barium examination reveal large esofageal stenosis in fied. Therefore, the molecular analysis confirmed the clinical diagnosis the 1/3 inferior part . Both of them have proeminent lips with an open of AS in 29 (14 .1%) examined cases . mouth, defective tooth enamel and spaced teeth . The girl associated However, defects in other genes e .g . MECP2, ATP10C or CDKL5/ hypercalcemia . STK9 might be responsible for AS specific phenotype. After careful Conclusions: After examinations, both patients are able to be con- examination of clinical symptoms selected patients would be qualified sidered Williams syndrome. The FISH test to confirm this syndrome to further molecular analysis . has to be done . They are in follow up programe and we intend, after The study was supported by grant PBZ-KBN-122/P05/01-4 . confirmation of the genetic FISH test, to introduce them in Williams Syndrome Children Association . P02.055 Hypomethylation gradient at the 11p15 Different methylated P02.053 Region 2 (DmR2) in BWs patients clinical and molecular characterization of a cohort of 49 children V. Romanelli1,2, L. Magano1,2, L. Fernández1,2, P. Arias1,2, I. Incera1,2, R. Gracia affected by Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and related Bouthelier3, P. Lapunzina1,2; congenital defects 1Servicio de Genética Medica y Molecular, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Ma- A. Mussa1, G. Baldassarre1, C. Molinatto1, L. Peruzzi2, E. Pepe3, A. Riccio4, M. drid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfer- Cirillo Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; medades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Endocrinología Infantil, Hospital 1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Division of Nephrology , Regina Mar- Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. gherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Surgery, Regina Mar- Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a genetic disease charac- gherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, terised by somatic overgrowth, macroglossia, abdominal wall defect and a variety of other findings including predisposition to embryonal tumours .Cytogenetics  There are several molecular abnormalities associated with BWS . The extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes and PCR methylation majority of BWS patients (50-60%) have an epigenetic defect at the tests for 11p15.5 loci were performed to confirm the diagnosis. Results: DMR2 of the 11p15 region . The epigenetic defect present in this region All patients accomplished the consensus clinical diagnosis criteria and involves loss of methylation (LOM) of the maternally inherited copy of had ispislateral hemihyperplasia . Transient neonatal hypoglycemia KvDMR (DMR2), a CpG island localised at the intron 10 of the mater- was recorded in two cases, three cases had cardiac involvement . The nally expressed gene KCNQ1 . cases where confirmed by DNA methylation for loci LT1 and H19, mi- In this same intron 10, this CpG island surrounds the promoter that crosatellite analysis was performed for one case and showed 11p15 .5 drives a long transcript (KCNQ1OT1) with antisense transcription to mosaic paternal UPD . Conclusions: The consensus criteria enabled a KCNQ1 . Normally, the maternal allele of DMR2 is methylated and correct and precocious clinical diagnosis in the first two months of life. KCNQ1OT1 is silenced . If there are epigenetic alterations in this re- The DNA tests confirmed the cases and showed that interchromatid gion, loss of maternal methylation of DMR2 is accompanied by bial- somatic recombination was the causal mechanism for one case . Con- lelic expression of the KCNQ1OT1 transcript, usually only paternally sidering that all cases had a similar phenotype we assumed the same expressed . casual mechanism and established a correct tumor screening . We studied the methylation pattern by means of MS-MLPA technique (Methylation-Specific MLPA). With this technique is also possible to P02.058 study the extension of the hypomethyation in the DMR2’s CpG is- Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe lands . Amplification (MS-MLPA) in routine diagnostics of Prader-Willi We studied 87 patients with BWS and among them we found that 37 and Angelman syndromes presented hypomethylation at the DMR2 (42 .5%) . Moreover our re- A. Szpecht-Potocka1, M. Gos1,2, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1; sults are consistent with similar studies which demonstrated that the 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2MSCM Cancer Center and hypomethylation includes the 5’end of the KCNQ1OT1 gene. Our find- Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. ings suggest a clear pattern of hypomethylation at the KvDMR with a Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification 5’-3’ gradient of demethylation at this region . (MS-MLPA) is a novel technique that allows for simultaneous detection of copy number variation and CpG methylation . The usage of probes P02.056 specific for 15q11-q13 locus makes it useful as a diagnostic tool in the Laboratory progress in molecular diagnosis of Prader-Willi diagnosis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes (PWS/AS) . The syndrome and Angelman syndrome - A new strategy by aim of our study was the implementation of MS-MLPA technique as a methylation-specific competitive multiplex PCR standard diagnostic procedure in PWS/AS patients . S. Y. Lin, C. H. Lin, Y. N. Su; The Salsa MS-MLPA Prader Willi / Angelman Kit (ME028) was used National Taiwan university hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. according to MRC-HOLLAND suggested protocol . The MS-MLPA peak Introduction: Most of the Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syn- analysis, normalization and calculation of dosage ratio were performed drome patients are caused by the deletion of chromosomal 15q11-13 with the SoftGenetics LLC GeneMarker ver 1 .6 software . For the pilot or uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 . There are many diagnostic study, we have chosen 20 cases with established PWS or AS mo- tools available like the FISH analysis, methylation-based PCR, multi- lecular diagnosis based on PCR-based DNA methylation analysis of plex PCR, High Resolution Melting analysis and commercialized MS- SNRPN locus (MS-PCR) and the STR analysis of deletion or UPD MLPA . Each of them has some disadvantages and limitations such as presence . high costs, time-consuming and requiring DNA bisulfite-treatment. We The results of the analysis of the copy number variation and the meth- introduce a novel, in-house designed methylation-specific competitive ylation status in 15q11-q13 locus with MS-MLPA confirmed the previ- multiplex PCR, which takes three hours for the reaction, avoids bisul- ous findings obtained for the pilot patients. We have also performed fite-treatment of DNA and provides reliable results of PWS and AS. the copy number variation analysis in additional 16 AS and 24 PWS Material and methods: 68 patients with clinical suspicion of PWS, two patients with abnormal methylation status detected by MS-PCR . The with AS, and 20 unaffected individuals from the general population MS-MLPA technique allowed to exclude from the further molecular were analyzed. In the MS-competitive multiplex PCR, we amplified analysis patients with the deletion without the necessity parents test- one SNRPN control gene, the KRITI gene to serve as internal control, ing . Therefore, it seems that the MS-MLPA is a useful method in the and the promoter of the SNRPN gene, which could be digested them molecular diagnosis of PWS/AS syndromes . with HhaI enzyme . By comparing the copy number of the three re- The study was supported by grant PBZ-KBN-122/P05/01-4 . gions, we could differentiate the wild type, deletion type and UPD type PWS within one reaction . We also evaluated other different diagnostic P02.059 technologies in clinical applications . New hypotheses in PWS/AS research: a multidisciplinary Results: In this article, we successfully made the molecular diagno- approach of rare diseases in Romania sis of one AS patients and 46 PWS patients by several different tech- M. Puiu1, M. Serban1, N. Cucu2, G. Anton3, D. Dan4, C. Popoiu1, C. Rusu5, V. niques . In the MS-competitive multiplex PCR, the total copy numbers Pop6, C. Badiu7; were accurately calculated in all of the cases . 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Conclusions: The MS-competitive multiplex PCR strategy is a good al- Biology, Bucharest, Romania, 3National Institute of Virusology, Bucharest, Ro- ternative for molecular diagnosis of PWS and AS . This approach could mania, 4APWR, Zalau, Romania, 5University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, serve as an alternative genotyping platform for epigenetics . Romania, 6University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj, Romania, 7Institute of Endocrinology Parhon, Bucharest, Romania. P02.057 SPW and SA are two clinical, metabolic and neurological different syn- From phenotype to mosaic paternal UPD11p15 in Beckwith dromes with 1 case for 15000 new born . The molecular mechanisms Wiedemann syndrome identified imply large deletions, uniparental disomia (DUP), intragenic C. Skrypnyk1, M. Bembea1, V. Bica2, C. Rusu3, C. Jurca1, W. Kress4, A. Bau- and epigenetic modifications in the processes of imprinting and only mer5; rare balanced translocations . The actual studies have extended the 1University of Oradea, Genetics Department, Oradea, Romania, 2Institute for area of epigenetic modifications, involving chromatin dynamic struc- Mother and Child Care, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Phar- ture through covalent modifications of their components. A group of macy, Genetics Unit, Iasi, Romania, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Wurzburg, researchers from medical centers of Romania together with APWR Germany, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Zurich, Switzerland. suggests studying new etiological hypotheses of PWS/AS . Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS; MIM 130650) is Since a small number of cases with SPW/SA do not integrate with a model human imprinting disorder resulting from altered activity of the etiologies described by now our project have a great opportunity one or more genes in the 11p15.5 imprinted gene cluster and defined to discover new and interesting aspects . The project aims to follow in by overgrowth, macroglosia, visceromegalia and tumor predisposition . these patients aspects connected to environment, diet, pollution and Approximately 20% of BWS cases have uniparental disomy (UPD) of way of life influence trying to solve the weak points of the correct im- chromosome 11 . Material and methods: We report 4 patients, three printing process . boys and one girl, clinically diagnosed with BWS . Genomic DNA was Knowing the epigenetic aspects from SPW/SA will allow a more pre-Cytogenetics  cise etiological diagnosis, an adequate genetic counseling, avoiding testing should be considered in any male with a phenotype resembling recurrence of the disease, epigenetic therapies and an optimal man- Angelman syndrome particularly if an X-linked pattern of inheritance agement of these diseases . These objectives are doubled by the inter- is suspected . est concerning rare diseases in generally and the opened research wants to be a beginning in the multidisciplinary approach of rare dis- P02.062 eases in Romania . mutations in SLCA cause microcephaly, epilepsy, and severe We are proposing to contact some teams of European researchers mental retardation with abnormal postures. with certain results in the study of PWS/AS to cooperate, with the pur- F. Raymond1, A. Whibley1, C. Freeman1, J. Clayton-Smith2, H. Archer3, A. pose of deciphering the mechanisms involved in these diseases . Clarke3, M. Bitner-Glindzicz4, R. Smith5, P. Tarpey5, M. Stratton5, A. Futreal5, I. GOLD1; P02.060 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Re- Genomic and epigenetic abnormalities in silver-Russell gional Genetics Service, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, syndrome patients 3Medical Genetics, University of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Institute of I. Cuscó1, L. Fernández2, O. Villa1, L. Rodríguez-Revenga3, M. Palomares2, M. Child Health, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 5Sanger Institute, Rosales1, J. del Valle1, S. García-Miñaur4, F. Santos2, M. Milà3, P. Lapunzina2, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,4; We have recently reported pathogenic mutations in SLC9A6 in 4 1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, U-735 CIBERER, Barcelona, families with a characteristic phenotype of severe to profound mental Spain, 2Servicio de Genética, Hospital Universitario La Paz, U-753 CIBERER, retardation in association with microcephaly, epilepsy and abnormal Madrid, Spain, 3Servei de Bioquimica i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, U- postures . The differential diagnosis included Angelman syndrome in 726 CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 4Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, all cases but the pedigree structure suggested an X-linked mode of Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. inheritance in 3 of the families . Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a heterogeneous disorder char- There is considerable clinical overlap between Angelman syndrome, acterized by severe intrauterine and post-natal growth retardation, West syndrome and atypical Rett syndrome and thus we selected characteristic dysmorphic facial features and occasional asymmetry . an additional 30 male patients from these categories and performed The SRS incidence is ~1-30/100000 live-births with most cases being sequence analysis of SLC9A6 to identify causative mutations having sporadic . Maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 and maternal excluded the known causes of disease in each group i .e . UBE3A, ARX duplications or epimutations of the 11p15 region have been reported and MECP2 . We also screened >200 males from families with X-linked accounting for ~35-40% of cases . Several chromosomal abnormali- mental retardation . ties, affecting chromosomes 1, 15, 17 and X, have also been found in We report a deletion within SLC9A6 in a pair of brothers with severe patients with SRS . mental retardation where the mutation is likely to be pathogenic . We In order to define the molecular cause of the disease and to establish also report 2 sequence variants in families with X-linked mental retar- a diagnostic protocol, we have screened a collection of 46 patients dation where the pathogenicity is less clear . These are a missense with a clinical diagnosis of SRS with a “step by step” strategy . Cy- mutation which is likely to be a rare SNP and a splice site mutation togenetic abnormalities were found in three cases (r(15), sSMC(7), (IVS12+4A>G) where the expression of SLC9A6 mRNA in lympho- Xq26-q28dup). A metilation sensitive (MS) MLPA assay targeting five cytes is unaltered . We did not identify further pathogenic mutations imprinted regions (11p15, 7q31,15q12,14q32,20q13) detected epigen- in the samples from males with Angelman, West or atypical Rett syn- etic abnormalities in 4 cases, 2 with maternal UPD (verified by micro- drome cohorts suggesting that the etiology of these conditions remains satellites) and 2 with H19 locus hypometilation (verified by F-COBRA). heterogenous and further genes are likely to cause these overlapping Screening for copy number variants was performed by MLPA (19 can- phenotypes . didate loci), and aCGH in the still negative cases . De novo putatively pathogenic rearrangements were found in 5 additional cases (15q26 P02.063 deletion, 15q26del+11q24dup, 7q36dup+ 10q, 12p13dup and 1 with A valuation of facial dysmorphism in diagnostics of 22q11.2 4q13 .3 del) . Our approach was able to detect the molecular basis of microdeletion syndrome in countries with lower average income 12/46 (26%) SRS patients, further confirming the syndrome heteroge- G. M. Cuturilo1, I. Jovanovic1, S. Grkovic1, M. Djukic1, V. Parezanovic1, G. neity and suggesting novel candidate loci for the disorder . Although Vukomanovic1, M. Stevanovic2, D. Drakulic2; epigenetic abnormalities at 11p15 are less frequent in our series, the 1University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of molecular genet- use of targeted MS-MLPA and aCGH appears to be indicated in the ics and genetic engineering, Belgrade, Serbia. workup of these patients . Most authors consider both specific and non-specific facial dysmor- phism as an important diagnostic criterion for 22q11 .2 microdeletion P02.061 syndrome . As a consequence, FISH analysis should be required fre- mutations in sLc9A6 are present in about 4% of males with an quently . While in most European countries this fact does not represent Angelman syndrome-like phenotype a significant problem, in those with lower average income such wide C. E. Schwartz1, J. Barwick2, R. Patel2, A. Archie2, B. Schutt2, J. Garbern2, R. coverage is still unavailable . Schroer1, M. J. Friez1; The aim of this study was to compare a significance of specific and 1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Wayne State non-specific facial dysmorphism in diagnostics of 22q11.2 microdele- University, Detroit, MI, United States. tion syndrome . Recently, Gilfillan et al (ASHG, in press) reported that mutations in the We analyzed 34 patients that underwent FISH for 22q11 .2 microdele- SLC9A6 gene cause X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) with epilepsy tion in our hospital in the last three years . Among nine newborn infants and ataxia . Additionally, for many of the patients, the phenotype re- diagnosed as positive, eight had some kind of facial dysmorphism . sembled that associated with Angelman syndrome . With this associa- Seven had non-specific dysmorphism (88%), while only one had spe- tion between gene and phenotype, we wished to determine the degree cific dysmorphism (12%). All six children older then one month and of involvement of SLC9A6 mutations in patients with clinical findings diagnosed as positive, had facial dysmorphism . Two of them had non- suggestive of Angelman syndrome who had normal diagnostic test- specific dysmorphism (33%) and four had specific facial dysmorphism ing . We tested 30 males submitted to rule out Angelman syndrome (67%) . who had normal methylation studies and identified 1 mutation (3.3%). In conclusion, it is clear that facial dysmorphism becomes more and Additionally, 65 males with normal UBE3A sequencing were screened more specific with age. In the situation of seriously limited availabil- and 3 mutations (4.6%) were identified. Lastly, based on the pheno- ity of FISH testing, some narrowing of indications possibly could be type, 20 families enrolled in our XLMR project were tested and 2 muta- achieved in group of patients older then one month (or better, older tions (10%) were found . All of the mutations were truncating mutations . then one year) by considering only a specific facial dysmorphism as Taken together, our results would indicate: 1) SLC9A6 mutations may a diagnostic criterion . However, individual approach to the patient and account for about 4% of males with a phenotype resembling Angelman careful clinical assessment are necessary, as it is clear that non-spe- syndrome and 2) SLC9A6 mutations may account for about 10% of cific facial dysmorphism also has an important role in clinical diagnosis males with XLMR associated with epilepsy and ataxia . Thus, SLC9A6 of 22q11 .2 microdeletion syndrome .Cytogenetics  P02.064 tralogy . Later on she had a healthy boy and a third pregnancy ended at 22q11 microduplication syndrome across four generations of a the 9th gestational week in spontaneous miscarriage . The 450 bands single family karyotype of the girl was 46,XX . S. A. McKee, S. McCullough, D. McManus; The amniocentesis was performed at the 16th gestational week, and Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, United Kingdom. the karyotype was 46,XY . We extended the cytogenetic analysis and Microduplication, as opposed to deletion, of the “DiGeorge region” on performed FISH of 4p16 .3, 22q11 .2 and 7q11 .23 and we found that the chromosome 22q11 is an increasingly-recognised finding, associated fetus had a hemyzygous deletion of the 22q11 .2 region . The father was with a very wide phenotypic range . Patients vary in the degree of dys- a carrier of the same deletion . morphism, intellectual disability and cardiac abnormalities, and many MATERIALS AND METHODS: FISH analysis was performed with the patients have now been reported who are classified as phenotypically Vysis probe DiGeorge/UCFS (gene TUPLE1) y ARSA (control) . The normal . karyotype analysis was performed by conventional GTG banding . We report a Northern Irish family in which the proband was diagnosed DISCUSSION: This case illustrates de advantage of widening the pre- with a microduplication at the age of 20 . She has mild learning prob- natal diagnostic spectrum beyond the most common aneuploidies, tai- lems and minimal facial dysmorphism, but has subtle abnormalities of loring the genetics tests to the family history as well as to the prenatal the fingers. Her daughter developed severe seizures at birth, and has data . Assuming that both the Fallot tetralogy and the miscarriage were an atrial septal defect with patent ductus arteriosus . She has ocular related to the familial deletion, the intrafamilial variability spans from hypertelorism, a small mandible, and significant developmental and lethal to almost normal, adding further data to the few catch 22 families growth delay; she tested positive for the duplication . The proband’s studied to date . mother and one of her brothers also carry the duplication . This makes it highly likely that one of her parents in turn also carried the duplica- P02.067 tion (these are reported as phenotypically normal; analysis is ongoing Frequent 22q11 aberrations in patients with non-syndromic in this family) . autism spectrum disorders shown by sNP array based Counselling as to the likely effects of this microduplication is very diffi- segmental aneuploidy screening cult, as the spectrum is so broad even within families . In particular, pre- M. Poot1, N. Verbeek1, R. van ’t Slot1, M. R. Nelen1, B. van der Zwaag2, E. van natal counselling presents significant challenges. As data continues to Daalen3, M. V. de Jonge3, W. G. Staal3, J. A. S. Vorstman3, P. F. Ippel1, M. van accumulate, more accurate risks and prevalences may be established, den Boogaard1, P. Terhal1, F. A. Beemer1, J. J. S. van der Smagt1, E. H. Brils- and potential modifying factors identified. tra1, G. Visser4, H. van Engeland3, J. P. H. Burbach2, H. K. Ploos van Amstel1, R. Hochstenbach1; P02.065 1Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Rudolf Magnus Report of three cases with the 22q11.2 proximal deletion Institute of Neuroscience, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Child and R. Queralt1,2, M. Vallecillos1, Y. Viedma1, M. Obon3, M. Alsius3, E. Margarit1,2; Adolescent Psychiatry, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatrics, 1Servei Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2Ciberer, Barcelona, Spain, 3Laboratori Clínic. Hospital Dr. Josep Trueta, Gi- Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental conditions rona, Spain. characterized by impaired reciprocal social interaction, communicative Hemizygosity for the human chromosome region 22q11 .2 is associ- deficits, and restricted behavioral patterns. ASD occurs in syndromic ated with a wide range of overlapping phenotypes including DiGeorge forms and as non-syndromic cases frequently involving cytogenetic syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome . The acronym CATCH 22 (Car- abnormalities . Recently, array-based genome-wide screens have diac anomaly, Abnormal facies, T cell deficit due to thymic hypopla- demonstrated frequent copy number variation in non-syndromic ASD . sia, Cleft palate, Hypocalcaemia due to hypoparathyroidism resulting Screening 56 patients with autism and additional major or minor anom- from 22q11 deletion) has been proposed to describe the broad clinical alies with the Infinium HumanHap300 SNP platform (Illumina, Inc., spectrum of phenotypes with 22q11 .2 deletions . The frequency of this San Diego, CA) we found in 16 patients 9 regions with deleted and 9 microdeletion is approximately 1:4000-1:8000 live births . Two types of with duplicated signals . Aberrant signals were distributed among 16 deletions have been described . The most common, affects about 85% distinct chromosomal loci . Apart from 14 patients with unique aberra- of patients and spans a ~3 Mb proximal region . The less common, af- tions, 2 patients carried duplications and a 3rd patient a deletion within fects about 7% of patients and spans a smaller, nested ~1 .5 Mb distal the 22q11 region, of 0 .726, 2 .966, and 0 .388 Mb, respectively . The region . Both types of microdeletion were found to occur as a result duplications were confirmed by multiplex ligation-mediated probe am- of nonallelic homologous recombination by means of low-copy repeat plification and are likely to involve LCRs A, B and D. We conclude that sequences located in the 22q11 .2 region . SNP array-based screening of ASD patients uncovers an appreciable We describe the cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic analysis of number of CNVs, which in part overlap with loci already discovered by three patients having the most common proximal 22q11 .2 microdele- other approaches. Our finding that 3 out of 56 ASD patients carried tion . Karyotype analysis from lymphocyte cultures performed by con- aberrations within the 22q11 region is highly unexpected . The rela- ventional G banding, at the level of 500 bands, revealed normal karyo- tively small size of CNVs found in this study may allow us to pinpoint type in all cases . Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis candidate genes for ASD . performed with the commercial dual probe LSI TUPLEI (22q11 .2)/LSI ARSA (22q13) (Vysis) showed hemizygosity of 22q11 .2 region in all P02.068 three cases . A rare recognizable 10p15 microdeletion syndrome of autism and HDR P02.066 V. Herbepin-Granados1, A. Combes1, M. Gilet1, A. Toutain2, R. L. Touraine1; Prenatal detection of 22q11.2 deletion:case report with wide 1CHU Saint etienne, Saint Etienne, France, 2CHU de Tours, Tours, France. intra-familial phenotypic variation The HDR syndrome is characterized by hypoparathyroidism, sensori- A. Gomez Pastor1, J. Ubeda Arades2, J. L. Santome Collazo2, R. Fernandez neural deafness, and renal dysplasia. It is caused by haplo-insufficien- Gonzalez2, P. Blanco Soto2, M. Carballido Viejo2, M. A. Orera2,3; cy of the GATA 3 gene located at 10p15 and inherited as an autosomal 1Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain, 2Hospital dominant trait . Gregorio Maranon, Madrid, Spain, 3Laboratorio Circagen, Madrid, Spain. In our study we describe a patient with HDR phenotype and associated INTRODUCTION: 22q11 .2 deletion constitutes a contiguous gene severe autism . Molecular analysis by MLPA showed a de novo het- syndrome that encompasses the clinical phenotypes formerly de- erozygous deletion at 10p15, encompassing the GATA3 gene without scribed as DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, conotrun- involvment of the DGCR2. These results were confirmed by micro- cal anomaly face syndrome, Opitz G/BBB syndrome and Cayler car- satellite analysis, showing that the deleted region is located between diofacial syndrome . the D10S189 and D10S1649 markers . The size of the deletion can be The diagnosis is routinely performed by FISH analysis . estimated around 2,5 Mb . The GATA3 gene has been reported as a CASE REPORT: We present a 33 years old healthy woman on is 13th gene important in the embryonic development of the parathyroid, renal gestational week that is sent to our office for genetic counseling be- and auditory systems . However mental retardation or autism can not cause of a previous pregnancy that produced a newborn with Fallot te- be ascribed to GATA3 mutations . Therefore we can suspect that thisCytogenetics  deleted region contains a gene responsible for the cognitive impair- sures to more fully understand development . ment observed in our patient . 10p15 microdeletions has already been described in few patients will almost identical symptoms and similar P02.071 dysmorphic features. This confirms the existence of a recognizable Endocrine abnormalities in 18p- albeit rare microdeletion syndrome with HDR and autism . D. E. Hale, C. D. Sebold, J. D. Cody; Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. P02.069 Background. 18p- syndrome has primarily been described in case re- the developing facial phenotype of the 17q21.31 microdeletion ports and small series . An endocrine abnormality is present in ~20% of syndrome. reported cases . The aim of this study was to determine the incidence N. Van der Aa1, L. Rooms2, B. Ceulemans1, B. de Vries3, F. Kooy2; and types of endocrine abnormalities in our population . Methods. 1Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Eleven individuals with 18p- underwent an endocrine evaluation at the Belgium, 3Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Neth- Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center (the “Center”) . This evalua- erlands. tion included anthropomorphics, bone age studies and growth (growth The 17q21 .31 microdeletion syndrome is a new genomic disorder, factors and stimulation testing) and thyroid hormone testing . In addi- characterized tion, a review of the available medical records for 20 additional patients by a 500-650 kb submicroscopic deletion . was completed . Results. Five males and 6 females were evaluated at Patients have a recognizable phenotype including neonatal hypotonia, the Center . The average age was 9 8/ years (range 2 8/ to 18 2/ ) . 12 12 12 mental retardation and characteristic facial features, most notably a Six individuals were <5th centile for height . Three of these were diag- long face, large prominent ears and a tubular pear-shaped nose . nosed with GHD (27% of total individuals evaluated) . Ten of the 11 had We present a patient with a de novo 17q21 .31 microdeletion, identi- normal IGF1 and IGFBP3 levels and essentially normal thyroid results fied by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification with probes (one had a slightly low T4 level, but had normal TSH levels) . Thyroid hybridizing to unique sequences in 2 genes located within this region, and IGF1/IGFBP3 results were not available on the 11th patient . Medi- MAPT and CRHR1 . cal record review of the additional 20 patients revealed that 8 had an This boy was born at term with normal growth parameters . There was endocrine abnormality, including panhypopituitarism (2); precocious marked neonatal puberty (1); autoimmune thyroiditis (1); treatment with growth hormone hypotonia with feeding difficulties and necessity of nasogastric tube (4); and hypothyroidism (1) . Conclusions . Taken together, 11 of the 31 feeding . (35%) individuals with 18p- included in this study had some endocrine Early motor milestones were significantly delayed. IQ testing at the abnormality . Thus, endocrine abnormalities are relatively common in age of 6 revealed mild mental retardation . Dysmorphic facial features individuals with 18p- and physicians should have a low threshold for noted in infancy were epicanthic folds, upslanting palpebral fissures, considering an endocrinology evaluation, especially GHD . mild ptosis, low-set ears, a broad nose and prominent philtrum . As the boy got older, the chin got bigger, there was marked elonga- P02.072 tion of the face and the nose became more pronounced . Subsequent cytogenetic and molecular studies of the 18q deletion syndrome pictures of our patient from age 6 months till 13,5 years illustrate this . in two generations with phenotypic variability At diagnosis age 13,5 we note a very long narrow face, large ears T. P. Vieira1, N. L. V. Campos1, C. M. Monma2, L. D. Kulikowski2, M. I. Melar- and a very prominent tubular pear-shaped nose with broad nasal tip . agno2, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes1; The palate is very high and there is dental crowding . We note tho- 1Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas - SP, Brazil, 2Universidade racic scoliosis, wide-spaced nipples, a right pes cavus, numerous skin Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo - SP, Brazil. moles and a rather severe ichthyosis on hands and feet . He has nasal The 18q- syndrome is one of the most common deletion syndromes, speech and a very friendly nature . with an estimated frequency of 1/40,000 births . This syndrome is most This is the first extensive description of the syndrome’s developing often caused by a terminal deletion of the long arm of chromosome 18 . phenotype . However, individuals with interstitial deletions have also been identi- fied. The phenotype of the disorder varies greatly between individuals, P02.070 but generally includes short stature, microcephaly, midface hypoplasia, cognitive and behavioral patterns associated with 18p- hypertelorism, congenital aural atresia (CAA), foot deformities, mental L. O’Donnell, B. T. Soileau, C. D. Sebold, J. D. Cody; retardation (MR), and hypotonia . Some familial cases with directed Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. transmission of the deleted chromosome have been described . Here, Background. While deletions of 18p- are associated with short stature we describe the cytogenetic and molecular studies of the 18q dele- and minor dysmorphic features, no clear cut cognitive or behavioral tion syndrome in a mother and her daughter . The mother presented patterns have emerged . Included in our longitudinal study of persons microcephaly, developmental delay, hypertelorism, strabismus, high with chromosome 18 differences is a large cohort of persons with chro- palate, submucous cleft palate, bifid uvula, congenital heart disease mosome 18p- . Adaptive behavior assessment measures everyday ac- and facial dysmorphisms . The daughter presented developmental tivities while cognitive measures assess internal cognitive processes . delay, cleft palate, short neck and facial dysmorphisms . Using FISH Currently no information is available regarding the correspondence and molecular analysis with polymorphic short tandem repeats (STR), between adaptive behavior and cognitive development for this pop- the cytogenetic karyotype could be refined showing that: mother and ulation . Methods. The adaptive behavior of 10 individuals with 18p- daughter have the same terminal deletion, the size of the deletion were evaluated using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (Vine- was narrowed and the breakpoints were mapped between the mark- land; Sparrow, Balla & Cicchetti, 1984) and estimates of intellectual ers D18S1313 (18q22 .1) and D18S61 (18q22 .2), the parental origin functioning were gathered using either the Differential Abilities Scales of the deletion in the mother is paternal . This case supports that the (DAS, Elliott, 1990) or the Bayley Scales of Infant Development-Sec- variability in phenotype is not only determined by the size of deletion, ond Edition (Bailey-II, Bailey, 1993) . All scores were converted to stan- once mother and daughter, with similar sized deletion, present differ- dard scores with a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15 . Results. ent phenotypes, suggesting that allelic variation on the haploid portion Intellectual functioning varied from significant cognitive impairment of 18q, genes on other chromosomal regions or environmental factors (N=3) to low average/average intellectual functioning (N= 3) . Adaptive are modulating the phenotype . behavior skill development was commensurate with estimates of intel- lectual functioning in only three of the nine children’s profiles. In the P02.073 remaining six cases, estimates of cognitive development were lower clinical and molecular characterization of deletions, than parental ratings of adaptive behavior . Conclusions. This study duplications, and mutations in the 22q11.2 region supports previous findings of significant cognitive variability within the D. Heine-Suñer1, L. Armengol2, L. Torres-Juan1, M. de la Fuente3, F. Garcia- 18p- population. It provides evidence of significant adaptive skill vari- Algas3, L. Fernandez4, M. Reyero5, M. Juan6, A. Tubau6, A. Perez-Granero3, M. ability and also highlights within subject variability in cognitive and be- Bernues1, N. Govea1, P. Lapunzina4, X. Estivill2, J. Rosell1; havioral development. These findings suggest that for persons with 1Genetics, Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Genes 18p- deletions, it is critical to utilize both cognitive and behavioral mea- & Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation – CRG, Barcelona, Spain,Cytogenetics  3Paediatrics, Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 4Ge- P02.075 netics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Ma- Phenotype of a patient with pure partial trisomy 2p(p21-->pter) drid, Spain, 5Gynecology, Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, M. Akbary1,2, F. Mahjoubi3,1, N. Zolfagary1; Spain, 6Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital Fundació Son Llatzer, Palma de 1Tehran Medical Genetic Laboratory, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Is- Mallorca, Spain. lamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetic Dept., Tarbiat Modaress University, The phenotype of patients with del22q11 .2 is very variable and ranges Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Repub- from the more severe and complex forms of the DiGeorge and Velo- lic of Iran. cardiofacial syndromes, to isolated heart defects or isolated mental We present the case of a 7-year -old boy with additional material on disorders . TBX1 and CRKL are genes localized in 22q11 .2 which have 4q. The father’s karyotype confirmed that the additional segment on 4q been proposed to cause the associated phenotype . We present here was of chromosome 2p origin, resulting in trisomy 2p21 -->2pter . The the results of the characterization of deletions, duplications and muta- karyotype of the proband was found as 46, XY,der(4)t(2;4)(p21;q33) tions in the TBX1 and CRKL genes in prenatal samples, newborn and pat . children with compatible malformations or phenotype . Duplications His father’s karyotype was 46, XY, t(2;4)(p21;q33) . The mother had and deletions were studied by the use of a combination of a home- normal karyotype . The child was found to have dysmorphic facial fea- brew method based on microsatellites, MLPA (SALSA 23 and 250), tures, prominent ears, long fingers, short stature, thenar and hypo- CGH-arrays and FISH . Mutations in TBX1 and CRKL were analysed thenar atrophy, crowded teeth, high arched palate, prognathism, low by sequencing. In total, we have identified 21 patients with a 22q11.2 nasal bridge, large testes, developmental delay, speech delay and sei- deletion (1 .5 and 3 Mb) and one patient with a previously not described zures . This case will be compared with other reported cases of partial 1 Mb duplication . In patients with no deletions or duplications we found trisomy/duplication of 2p . two mutations in TBX1 . The atypical duplication was found in a boy with a ventricular septal defect (VSD) as the sole phenotypic trait . Nei- P02.076 ther his normal parents nor his sister which is also affected by a VSD 47,XYY/48,XXYY karyotype associated with multiple skeletal are carriers of such duplication . The size of the duplication is approxi- abnormalities and congenital heart disease mately 1 Mb and is flanked by LCR22s 3a (B) and 4 (D) a region that L. Mutesa1, G. Pierquin1, J. Vanbellinghen1, A. Hellin1, M. Jamar1, C. De Beau- includes the CRKL gene but not TBX1. fort2, J. Kieffer2, V. Bours1; This work has been supported by the grant FIS 05-1585 from the Insti- 1University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2Luxembourg Hospital Center, Luxem- tuto de Salud Carlos III from the Spanish ministry of Health. bourg, Luxembourg. We report on a 12-year-old boy with congenital scoliosis due to seg- P02.074 mented hemivertebra between tenth and twelfth thoracic vertebrae . He clinical and molecular characterization of 7 patients with had also congenital heart disease (atrial septal defect) and presented 22q13.3 deletion syndrome bilateral synostosis of the proximal radius and ulna associated with M. Palomares Bralo1,2, L. Fernández1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2, E. Galán3, L. Pérez dislocation of both radius heads . Physical examination revealed facial Jurado4,5, B. Rodríguez Santiago6,5, C. Roche7, P. O. Ruiz Falló8, A. Delicado1,9; dysmorphism, mild microcephaly, gynecomastia with morbid obesity, 1Genética Médica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de limitation of supination at the elbows, and moderate mental retarda- Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, tion . Spain, 3Unidad de Genética. Hospital Materno Infantil Universitario Infanta Cris- Cytogenetic studies and FISH analysis showed that he had a de novo tina, Badajoz, Spain, 4Unidad de Genética. Departamento de Ciencias Experi- 47,XYY/48,XXYY karyotype . This case and evidence collected from mentales y de la Salud. Universidad Pompeu Fabra., Barcelona, Spain, 5Centro the literature suggest that congenital skeletal abnormalities and heart de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), defect may occur in the 47,XYY/48,XXYY syndrome more frequently Barcelona, Spain, 6Unidad de Genética. Departamento de Ciencias Experimen- than currently appreciated . The 47,XYY/48,XXYY phenotype may tales y de la Salud. Universidad Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 7Neurología result from compounding affects of the additional X and Y chromo- Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 8Neurología, Hospital somes . Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 9Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, Madrid, Spain. P02.077 In recent years the increasing use of telomere screening has provided severe neurological phenotype in a boy with 48, XXYY karyotype evidences of the presence of subtle abnormalities involving telomeres M. Bordignon, K. Ludwig, L. Salviati, R. Tenconi; in around 5% of patients with idiopathic mental retardation . This fact Servizio di Genetica Clinica, Padova, Italy. has allowed the recognition of new distinct clinical entities such as A 18 month old boy was seen in our clinical genetics unit for further monsomy 1p, 1q, 2q, 9q, 14q, and 22q . In surveys of subtelomeric evaluation after having been diagnosed with 48, XXYY aneuploidy . He screening, deletion of 22q13 .3 is the second most common subtelo- had a history of epileptic seizures, mental retardation, left cryptorchi- meric deletion, after deletion 1p36 .3 . The prevalence of 22q13 .3 dele- dism and a first degree atrio-ventricular block. tion is not yet established . Up to the present moment more than 100 A thorough examination of the boy revealed many of the clinical fea- cases have been reported, and a common phenotype has emerged tures characteristically found in patients with gonosomal polysomies, including global developmental delay, hypotonia, absent to severely as for example the truncular obesity, slight hypogenitalism, mental re- delayed speech, autistic-like behavior, normal to accelerated growth, tardation and facial dysmorphisms (coarse face, mild frontal bossing, and dysmorphic facial features . In spite of the increasing number of brachycephaly, bilateral epicanthic folds and maxillary hypoplasia .) . cases reported, this syndrome remains underdiagnosed due to the dif- However he also presented generalized hypotonia, epileptic seizures ficulty to detect the deletion of chromosome 22 in routine cytogenetic and paroxysmal sharp-waves and polyspikes in the central occipital analysis even at the 550-band level of resolution, and to the lack of a left hemispheral region on EEG analysis; neurological findings which distinct phenotype and the clinical variability observed . have rarely described in patients with 48, XXYY karyotype . Here we describe the clinical and molecular findings in 7 patients The incidence of the 48,XXYY aneuploidy is about 1 in 50,000 new- with monosomy 22q13 . Three of them were detected by subtelomeric borns and initially it had been classified as a variant of Klinefelter screening, other two were fortuitously discovered when FISH was Syndrome. Today it is defined as an independent genetic and clinical used to rule out DGS/VCFS, and two were observed in the karyotype entity . and subsequently confirmed by FISH. As far as we know, this is the first case report of a boy with the 48, All of them where further studied in detail by MLPA, using the specific XXYY chromosomal anomaly presenting epileptic seizures as one of probe mix P188 for 22q13 deletion syndrome, and arrayCGH at ap- the major clinical features . proximately 1 Mb resolution .Cytogenetics  P02.078 Regarding to our patients findings, we suggest that a locus for senso- mental Retardation, Epilepsy and Venous thromboembolic rineural hearing loss and a locus for tracheo-esophageal fistula may Disease in a Patient with a 48,XXYY Karyotype be located in the region of 17q22-q23 .3 . This work was supported by M. Obón1, M. Alsius1, A. Molins2, I. Recas3, A. Bustins4, C. Pascual Mostaza1; GARLA 6808 . 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology. Laboratori Clínic ICS Girona. Hospital U. de Girona Dr. J. Trueta, Girona, Spain, 2Epilepsy Unit. Hospital U. P02.080 de Girona Dr. J. Trueta, Girona, Spain, 3Department of Endocrinology. Hospital An unusual case of ring chromosome 14 with Epilepsy and U. de Girona Dr. J. Trueta, Girona, Spain, 4Department of Haematology, ICO, developmental delay Girona, Spain. A. Nucaro1, M. Falchi2, M. Meloni2, R. Rossino3, T. Pisano2, C. Cianchetti2, D. 48,XXYY syndrome was initially considered a variant of Klinefelter Pruna4; syndrome . Nowadays, it is accepted as a distinct clinical and genetic 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, 2Di- entity . partimento di Neuroscienze, Neuropsichiatria Infantile, University, Cagliari, Italy, We report the case of a 27-year-old man diagnosed with cryptogenic 3Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche e Medicina Clinica, University, Cagliari, partial epilepsy and action tremor in both hands unresponsive to beta- Italy, 4Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Cagliari, Italy. blockers . Due to speech and language delays and mild mental retarda- We present a 10-year-old boy, born to young , healthy and non-con- tion a karyotype analysis was performed, which indicated that all cells sanguineous parents, with an unusual ring chromosome 14 associ- were 48,XXYY . ated to epilepsy and mental retardation. At the age of five months he The patient was born without neonatal complications to a healthy had seizures confirmed by EEG as epilepsy. Seizures were resistant couple with an unremarkable family history . On beginning school, to common antiepileptic drugs . He also had microcephaly, hyper- language delay and learning disabilities were detected . Language telorism , microretrognathia , large auricula , micropenis , hypotonia . therapy helped him to develop complex language skills . He was di- Cytogenetic investigation and FISH studies of the proband revealed agnosed with asthma when he was 5 years old . At 19, idiopathic deep an unusual chromosomal mosaicism 46,XY,r(14)(p13q32)/46,XY,dup vein thrombosis developed in his left leg which required 8 months of r(14),ish (14wcp+) .Over 50 examined metaphases, 48 had a ring chro- oral anticoagulant therapy . mosome 14 and only 2 had a duplicated ring chromosome 14(4%) . Phenotypically tall with eunuchoid habitus, gynecomastia . Craniofacial The abnormality r(14) is a rare cytogenetic disorder with characteris- dimorphism described as a “pugilistic” facial appearance . Hypergo- tic features and episode of uncontrolled seizures . To the best of our nadotropic hypogonadism, small testes and normal penis . Leg ulcers knowledge, this is the first report describing a ring chromosome 14 mo- and varicosities . saicism associated to a duplicated ring chromosome 14 . Array-CGH Behavioural features consist of immaturity, passivity and temper out- analysis will be performed to detect cryptic submicroscopic rearrange- bursts but a friendly and cooperative nature . High overall scores on ments in the ring formation . We carried out this study to search for the adaptive scales in daily living, socialization and communication . His cause of the seizures in our patient . Several hypotheses could be ex- parents have exposed their son to a variety of activities and interests plain these, such as mitotic instability of ring chromosome or telomere and provided consistent intervention and support when needed . position effect in ring chromosomes . We could also hypothesize that The addition of more than one extra X and Y chromosome to a normal 14p telomere silences nearby genes on the q arm and close depen- male karyotype rarely occurs and it has its own distinctive physical dent genes involved in the seizures . and behavioural profile. There are significant variations within each polysomy X and Y group and hence no generalised prognosis can be P02.081 made . Partial trisomy 15q11-13 as a cause of acute onset intractable epilepsy P02.079 M. Michelson1,2, A. Eden3,2, C. Vinkler1,2, M. Yanoov- Sharav1,2, T. Lerman-Sa- A 7-year-old boy with profound mental retardation, peculiar face, gie3,2, D. Lev1,2; tracheo-esophageal fistula and bilateral sensorineural hearing 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Holon, Israel, 2Metabolic Neurogenetic Clinic, loss caused by interstitial deletion 17q22-q23.3 Holon, Israel, 3Pediatric Neurology Unit, Holon, Israel. H. Puusepp1,2, O. Zilina2, K. Männik2, S. Parkel2, R. Teek3,4, K. Kuuse3, A. Kurg2, Various rearrangements involve the proximal long arm of chromosome K. Õunap3,1; 15, including deletions, duplications, translocations, inversions and 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of supernumerary marker chromosome with the inverted duplication of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 3Depart- proximal chromosome 15 . ment of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of The large marker 15, that contains the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS)/ Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Angelman syndrome (AS) chromosome region, is usually associated Microdeletions of the long arm of chromosome 17 are rare . By our with an abnormal phenotype of moderate to severe mental retardation, knowledge, only few cases have been reported involving deletions of seizures, poor motor coordination, early-onset central hypotonia, au- chromosome 17 in region q22-q24. Common findings are microceph- tism and autistic-like behavior and mild dysmorphic features . Positive aly, abnormal face, anomalies of the hands, growth retardation and genetic linkage with 15q region has also been found in patients with severe developmental delay . schizophrenia . Most of the reported cases are of maternal origin . Here we present a 7-year-old boy, who was born normally at term We report here an eight year-old girl with normal intelligence who de- with normal birth weight 3480g and length 50cm, and microcephaly veloped severe intractable seizures at age seven years . Family history (-2 SD). Soon after the birth tracheo-esophageal fistula was diag- was significant for a mother with episodes of acute psychosis. nosed and therefore operated . At the age 7 years clinical evaluation The patient’s leukocyte karyotype revealed 47XX+m . Her mother’s revealed failure to thrive (-2 .5 SD), microcephaly (-5 SD), profound karyotype looked identical . mental retardation, stereotypic movements, peculiar facies - high Array comparative Genomic Hybridization (A-CGH) identified a gain forehead, palpebral fissures slant up, blepharophimosis, ptosis, hy- of 13 BAC clones from 15q11 .2 through 15q13 .1, which was then con- pertelorism, epicanthal folds, strabismus, broad nasal tip, high palate, firmed by Fluorescent In-Situ Hybridization (FISH). This duplicated re- low set and dysplastic ears, and preauricular pits . Additionally he had gion is approximately 5 .6 Mb in size and contains the SNRPN/UBE3A bilateral severe sensorineural hearing loss, kyphosis, scoliosis, spina loci . bifida occulta, contractures of joints, tall fingers, partial syndactyly of Although severe epilepsy has been described in association with rear- II-V fingers and II-V toes, sandle gap of toes, micropenis, cryptorchid rangements of the proximal long arm of chromosome 15, all reported testes, and mild hirsutism . During pediatric evaluations psoriasis vul- cases had mental retardation . garis, asthma, celiac disease, iron deficient anemia and mild hypothy- This is the first report of a patient with intractable epilepsy and nearly reosis was diagnosed. We have applied Infinium-2 genotyping assay normal intelligence, associated with partial trisomy of 15q11-13 . She with Human370CNV-Duo BeadChips (Illumina Inc .), which showed a inherited this marker chromosome from her mother, who has psychi- 5 .9 Mb deletion of chromosome region 17q22-q23 .3 with a breakpoint atric illness . between 48,287,327 and 54,245,662bp. The aberration was confirmed We suggest that this region should be tested by FISH in cases with by real-time PCR analysis . intractable epilepsy, with or without developmental delay/MR .Cytogenetics  P02.082 year-old girl who was found to have trisomy 13 mosaicism at the age Phenotype and 244k array-cGH characterization of chromosome of eight in the course of investigations for mild global developmental 13q deletions: An Update of the Phenotypic map delay . She was born after an unremarkable pregnancy and delivery . M. Stefanova1,2, R. Stoeva3, A. Bisgaard1, B. Dimitrov4, G. Gillessen-Kaes- Her parents first became concerned when she was two-years-old be- bach5, J. Fryns4, H. Rose1, L. Grozdanova3, I. Ivanov3, K. Keymolen2, C. Fager- cause her fine motor and speech milestones were delayed. Currently, berg6, L. Tranebjaerg7,8, M. Kirchhoff1; she is integrated into a regular grade three class where she receives 1Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Center some remedial help; a recent developmental assessment revealed for Human Genetics, Free Flamish University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium, that she is functioning at the level of a six-year-old . She also has 3Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 4Center for Human Genetics, University some gross motor difficulties and decreased coordination. Her gen- of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Campus Lubeck, eral health has been good . Examination revealed that her weight and Schleswig-Holstein University Hospital, Lubeck, Germany, 6Department of height were >97th percentile and that her head circumference was at Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 7Department of Audiology, the 80th percentile . Her facial features were slightly coarse . There was Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 8Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for no other evidence on examination of any physical features associated Functional Genomics, Institute of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The Panum with trisomy 13 . The patient’s karyotype was done on a blood sample Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark. and revealed that 10 out of 20 cells analyzed were trisomic for chromo- Genotype-phenotype correlation studies of partial deletions of the long some 13 (ie . 50%) . This case supports the previously suggested idea arm of chromosome 13 have been reported previously, each focusing that the percentage of trisomic cells, which is thought to decrease with on few particular major anomalies, such as brain, eyes, inner organs, age, correlates poorly with intellectual functioning . hands and feet, genitourinary or anorectal defects . Chromosome regions critical for some of the major malformations, however, vary P02.085 noticeably and await precise delineation . Besides, data about the dys- Detection of Y chromosome and trisomy 8 mosaicism in a twelve morphic profile are limited. In order to update the phenotypic map for year old girl with turner syndrome chromosome 13q deletions, we applied high resolution 60-mer oligo- K. Koronioti1, P. Apostolopoulos2, A. V. Divane1; nucleotide-based microarray containing 244 .000 probes with a median 1Department of Cytogenetics, Locus Medicus, Diagnostic Centre, Athens, spacing of 7 .4 kb to 16 .5 kb (Agilent Technologies, USA) to determine Greece, 2In Vitro, Diagnostic Laboratory, Athens, Greece. the exact breakpoints of such deletions in 14 patients . We linked the Most Turner syndrome (TS) patients show no evidence of Y chromo- genotype to the patient’s phenotype and were able to refine the small- some sequences . According to different authors some TS patients est deletion region linked to microcephaly (13q33 .3-q34), Dandy-Walk- may have Y chromosome material present in a few cells that are not er malformation (DWM) (13q32 .2-q33 .1), corpus callosum agenesis detected by standard cytogenetic analysis. The rationale of identifica- (CCA) (13q32 .3-q33 .1), the associated occurrence of both DWM/CCA tion of this low level mosaicism is of clinical importance due to the (13q32 .2-q33 .1), meningocele/encephalocele (13q31 .3-qter), ano-/mi- patient’s increased risk of developing gonadoblastoma . crophthalmia (13q31 .3-13qter), cleft lip/palate (13q31 .3-13q33 .1), lung Here we report conventional and molecular cytogenetic investigations hypoplasia (13q31 .3 - 13q33 .1), anal atresia/hypospadias/penoscro- in a case of mosaic sex chromosome aneuploidy combined with mosa- tal inversion (13q33 .1-13q34), thumb a-/hypoplasia (13q31 .3-q33 .1 ic trisomy 8 and the presence of low level Y mosaicism . A 12 year-old and 13q33 .3-34) . ‘Typical’ 13q-dysmorphic facial features were as- girl was presented with short stature, gonadal dysgenesis and minor signed along the chromosome, thereby mapping, the prominent nasal craniofacial dysmorphic features . columella between 13q31 .3 and 13q33 .3 . Our analyses support the Standard chromosome analysis on peripheral blood lymphocytes hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of more than one locus within the showed the presence of three cell lines, whose karyotypes were 45,X 13q21 .1-qter region is responsible for brain anomalies and neural tube [93%], 47,XY,+8 [5%] and 46,XX [2%] . FISH analysis was performed defects . In contrast to previous reports of carriers of 13q32 band dele- using as probes an alpha satellite for X chromosome (CEPX, Xp11 .1- tion as the most seriously affected patients, we present such individu- q11 .1), a satellite III for Y chromosome (CEPY, Yq12) and an alpha als with a long-term survival . satelitte for chromosome 8 (CEP 8, 8p11 .1-q11 .1) . The results of FISH analysis were in concordance with those of conventional cytogenetic P02.083 analysis showing a slight increase in the percentage of interphase clinical features of a case with trisomy 10q and monosomy 3p nuclei revealing trisomy 8 and Y chromosome mosaicism (8% FISH resulting from a maternal balance translocation: A case report versus 5% standard cytogenetics) . and review of clinical features The importance of systematic search for hidden Y chromosome mo- F. Mahjoubi1,2, M. Akbary3, S. Karemee4, G. Babanohammadi4; saicism in patients with TS is justified by the possibility of developing 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 23Tehran Medical Genetic Laboratory, gonadoblastoma and it is necessary for the appropriate clinical man- Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetic agement of the patient . Dept., Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 43Tehran Medical Genetic Laboratory, Tale- P02.086 ganee St, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. isolated bilateral Ulnar Agenesis due to 4q34.1 deletion in a Here we describe clinical and cytogenteic data on 2 year female child young male patient with partial trisomy for the distal part of the long arm of chromosome S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2, M. Holder-Espinasse1,3, B. Maisonneuve4, A. Mezel5, B. 10 (10q22-->qter) and a concomitant monosomy 3(p25-->pter) as a Herbaux6,3, F. Escande7, J. Kerckaert8, J. Andrieux9; result of a maternal balanced reciprocal translocation . Her karyotype 1Génétique clinique, CHRU, Lille, France, 2faculté de médecine, Université Lille was ascertained as 46,XX,der(3)t(3;10)(p25;q22) . The father had nor- 2, Lille, France, 3Faculté de médecine, Université Lille 2, Lille, France, 4Centre mal karyotype . The mother had an apparently balanced translocation de rééduccation Marc sautelet, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France, 5Service de chirugie involving chromosome 3 and 10 [46,XX,t(3;10)(p25;q22)] . To our best et orthopédie de l’enfant, CHRU, Lille, France, 6service de chirurgie et ortho- knowledge, this is the second reported case of partial trisomy 10q and pédie de l’enfant, CHRU, Lille, France, 7Génétique moléculaire, CHRU, Lille, partial trisomy 3p and first reported case from Iran. Clinical features of France, 8plateforme de génomique, Lille, France, 9Plateforme de génomique, this case and a few published cases will be reviewed briefly. CHRU, Lille, France. Ulna a- or hypo-plasia is a rare condition, mostly occurring associated P02.084 with other malformations as in Schinzel-Ulnar-Mammary, Weyers, or trisomy 13 mosaicism in a nine-year-old girl with mild global Femur-Fibula-Ulna syndromes . If isolated the disease is very uncom- developmental delay mon and, to our knowledge, remains unexplained . We describe a 3 L. E. Kim; years old male patient with bilateral isolated ulna aplasia and 4q34 .1 McMaster University Medical Centre, Hamilton, ON, Canada. deletion diagnosed by Array-CGH . Trisomy 13 is associated with mental retardation and a variety of con- This patient was the first child of young, healthy and non consanguine- genital abnormalities . Survival past infancy is rare because of the life- ous parents . He had a healthy young sister . The pregnancy was un- threatening medical issues associated with this condition . The phe- eventful . He was born at term . He had aplasia of both ulnas with bilat- notype of mosaic trisomy 13 is extremely variable . I report on a nine- eral but asymmetrical absence of post-axial rays . Only the thumb wasCytogenetics 0 present on the right side, but the first two pre-axial rays were present camptodactyly and syndactyly were noted . Brain MRI showed ven- on the left . Both elbows were abnormal with unusual upper extremities triculomegaly, cerebellar hypoplasia and bilateral anterior optic nerve of the radius, and lower extremities of the humerus . No other malfor- hypoplasia . Array CGH was performed after birth in order to determine mation was observed even in the lower limbs . Karyotype was normal: the precise 10p deletion, and revealed a proximal deletion: 10p11 .2- 46,XY . At 3 years of age the patient has normal growth and psychomo- p12 .1 . tor development . Conclusion: We report a patient with prenatally detected unreported Array-CGH demonstrated in the patient a 4q34 .1 de novo deletion, en- proximal interstitial 10p deletion, with multiple congenital abnormali- compassing some candidate genes . Further studies are pending and ties, including conotruncal cardiac malformation, deafness, cerebral will be discussed . malformations and specific dysmorphia. P02.087 P02.089 case report: Waardenburg syndrome and chromosme 13q molecular cytogenetic characterization of an interstitial deletion 14q24q32 deletion in a girl with corpus callosum hypoplasia F. Faletra1, V. Petix2, A. Fabretto1, V. I. Guerci1, F. Marchetti3, F. Patarino3, V. i. ouertani1, m. chaabouni1, l. kraoua1, f. maazoul1, i. chelly1, l. ben jemaa1, m. Pecile2, P. Gasparini1,2; le lorch2, h. chaabouni1; 1Genetica Medica-Dipartimento Scienze e Riproduzione dello Sviluppo, Trieste, 1department of congenital and hereditary disorders, tunis, Tunisia, 2department Italy, 2Genetica Medica, IRCCS Ospedale Infantile “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, of cytogenetics, embryology and feotopathology, paris, France. Italy, 3Clinica Pediatrica, IRCCS Ospedale Infantile “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Interstitial deletions of 14q including the q31 region are uncommon . Italy. Only 15 cases were reported . Waardenburg-Shah syndrome (WS4; MIM 277580) is a disorder of the We report on a 3 year-old Tunisian girl with an interstitial deletion of the embryonic neural crest that combines clinical features of Waardenburg long arm of chromosome 14 diagnosed by standard karyotype . syndrome and Hirschsprung disease .The phenotype can be caused The girl presented with dysmorphic features, developmental delay and by mutation in the endothelin-B receptor gene (EDNRB), in the gene hypoplasia of corpus callosum . Using Fluorescent In Situ Hybridiza- for its ligand, endothelin-3 (EDN3) or in the SOX10 gene . tion technique (FISH), we characterized the deletion boundaries corre- We report a case of a 3 years old patient with hypotonia, mild psycho- sponding to the Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes (BAC): RP11-501I4 motor and speech delay, and dysmorphic features . He was born a term and CTD2348N10 . with a normal pregnancy . At one month he suffered of recurrent vomit- The karyotype was interpreted as46,XX,del(14)(q24 .3q32 .2) covering ing caused by hypertrophic pyloric stenosis . During the recovery were nearly 24Mb . found also abnormal values of γGT and transaminases. The ERCP Our patient shares with the previously reported 14q31 deletions some and biopsy did reveal any hepatic involvement neither biliary obstruc- similar features such as microcephaly, hypotonia, ears abnormalities, tion . Moreover, a NMR was performed because of hypotonia and strabismus, hypertrichosis and carp mouth . mental retardation and corpus callosum agenesis was evidenced . An She presents a corpus callosum hypoplasia on cerebral MRI which the ABR exam revealed also a monolateral sensorineural hypoacusia . The first time reported in association to such deletion. patient presents with heterochromia irides, wide nasal bridge, short However, the hypoplasia of corpus callosum is described only in our nose with smooth philtrum, mild retrognatia and legs’ hypopigmented patient . We propose that the deled region in our patient could present skin patches . For the clinical signs a syndrome was suspected and a a candidate gene for this cerebral abnormality . standard karyotype was performed . The analysis indicate an interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 13. To better define the chro- P02.090 mosomal anomaly we performed a CGHArrays . The result showed the A 0.43 mb region within the 1q44 commonly deleted in three presence of a 12,5 ± 1,9 Mb deletion at 13q31 .1 à q21 .32 region . The patients with microcephaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum deletion involves the EDNRB gene, linked to WS4 . Because of the A. Caliebe1, J. I. Martin-Subero1, J. J. S. van der Smagt2, H. Y. Kroes2, R. van ’t presence of the other signs that don’t fit with WS4 phenotype, we are Slot2, R. J. Nievelstein3, K. Alfke4, U. Stephani5, R. Hochstenbach2, R. Siebert1, trying to correlate the clinical features with the deleted genes . M. Poot2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Kiel, Germany, 2Department of Medical Genetics, P02.088 Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatric Radiology, Utrecht, The Prenatal detection of an interstitial 10p deletion: case report Netherlands, 4Department of Neuroradiology, Kiel, Germany, 5Department of L. Lecerf1, S. Whalen1, J. Levaillant2, N. Chevalier2, L. Druart3, M. Portnoï4, M. Neuropediatrics, Kiel, Germany. Goossens1, I. Giurgea1; Complex congenital phenotypes involving mental retardation and 1INSERM U841, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 2Service de gynécolo- developmental delay frequently result from structural genome aber- gie-obstetrique, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil, Créteil, France, rations such as interstitial or subtelomeric microdeletions . Although 3Dpt de cytogénétique, Laboratoire LCL, Paris, France, 4Dpt de cytogénétique, some of these aberrations may lead to recognizable phenotypes, a Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France. high degree of phenotypic variability often complicates a comprehen- Background: Partial 10p monosomy is a rare chromosomal abnor- sive clinical and genetic diagnosis . We describe three patients who mality, with approximately 50 reported patients . Phenotypic spec- share developmental delay and mental retardation, including retarded trum of patients with chromosomal rearrangements of that region is development and limited speech abilities, hypotonia, febrile seizures or wide. A critical haploinsufficiency region for DGS/VCFS (ressembling epilepsy, hypertelorism, an abnormal corpus callosum and other CNS Di George syndrome) has been described in certain patients with anomalies . By high resolution oligonucleotide and SNP array-based 10p13p14 deletion . This region encompasses two different loci, HDR1 segmental aneuploidy profiling we detected in chromosomal region (hypoparathyroidism, deafness, renal dysplasia) and DGCR2 (cardiac 1q44 three overlapping deletions of 1 .250, 4 .210 and 9 .436 Mb in size . defect, T cell deficiency), but the phenotype-genotype correlation is The three patients share a 0 .43 Mb interstitial deletion, which contains not clear . No cases of deletions more proximal that these loci have the FAM36A, HNRPU and the EFCAB2 genes . This region does not been reported . contain AKT3 and ZNF238, two previously proposed candidate genes Case report: We report a prenatally diagnosed interstitial deletion of for microcephaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum . Therefore, we 10p in a male patient . Antenatal karyotype was undertaken after ce- conclude that the HNRPU gene, which is deleted in all deletion 1q44 rebral ventriculomegaly and ventricular septal defect (VSD) were de- patients reported thus far, may represent an additional candidate for tected . An interstitial 10p deletion was diagnosed, with normal FISH the core features of the terminal 1q deletion syndrome . Since only one of DGCR2 locus . Few days later, the patient was born, at term, with of the two patients with deletions including the ZNF124 gene showed normal growth parameters . At 13 months of age, growth was on -1 .5 a Dandy Walker Malformation, mere hemizygosity for this gene seems SD with postnatal microcephaly . He had delayed psychomotor devel- not to be sufficient to cause this anomaly. opment, axial hypotonia and peripheral hypertonia . Facial dysmorphia included bilateral ptosis and epicanthus, anteverted nares, dysplastic ears and Cupid’s bow upper lip . Severe bilateral deafness, perimem- branous VSD, bilateral cryptorchidy, chorio-retinal coloboma and toeCytogenetics  P02.091 18 (three cases), 20 and X were also identified and two of them were Identification of a rare cytogenetic aberration of chromosome 5 neocèntric (those derived from chromosomes 3 and 20) . In two cases, identified by fluorescent in situ hybridization we detected at least 4 sSMC derived from the same chromosome but L. Losonczi, M. Dobos, J. Szabó, J. Szabolcs, T. Bense, G. Fekete; with different morphologies . In one they derived from chromosome 2nd Department of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary. 9 and in the other they derived from chromosome X . In general, we Introduction: We report a rare cytogenetic aberration of chromosome found according with the literature that the presence of euchromatin in 5 . the de novo sSMC is linked with an abnormal phenotype . Case report: Our patient, after delivered from second, with polyhy- Conclusion The use of combined molecular cytogenetic techniques re- dramnion complicated pregnancy, had bradycardia and cyanosis . His vealed that the incidence of non acrocentric sSMC is probably higher gestational age was 39 weeks, and the birthweight was 2910 grams . than expected . After delivery he had to be ventilated for some minutes . He got anti- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: This work was supported by MCYT (SAF biotics because of perinatal infection . During feeding he became cya- 2003-03894) and CIRIT (2005, SGR-00495) and Generalitat de Cata- notic . Echocardiography revealed 10 mm wide second type atrial sep- lunya (Grant 2002FI00281) tal defect . Neurological investigations revealed generalized hypotonia . Other characteristic finding was the baby’s strange crying. Some mi- P02.094 nor anomalities could be detected, such as low and back sitting ears, Familial chromosomal rearrangement with an extra micro short palpebral fissure, abnormal shape of the cranium, and clubbed derivative 22 compensating a 22q11.2 deletion fingers. In the family-history was no abnormality. Because of minor ab- J. Nevado1,2, M. A. Mori1,2, L. Fernández1,2, P. D. Lapunzina1,2, B. Garcia3, M. L. normalities and congenital heart defect cytogenetic investigations was De Torres1,2; done . The cytogenetic investigation with G bands and FISH revealed 1Hospital Universitario la Paz, Genética Médica, MADRID, Spain, 2CIBERER, the duplication of the cri du chat region [46,XY,dup(5)(p15 .2 p15 .3)] . Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Universitario Príncipe de Asturias, Bioquímica Clínica, Parents’ karyogram was normal . This type of cytogenetic abormality Unidad de Genética, Alcalá de Henares (MADRID), Spain. of chromosome 5 is rare, 9 cases have been reported until now, with We described a non-consanguineous couple (33 year-old) that under- similar clinical and cytogenetic findings. The feeding of the infant was went amniocentesis for prenatal cytogenetic studies (in the 15th gesta- difficult, suffered often from infections, had failure to thrive. Because of tional week) due to the man is carrying an unusual rearrangement with the wide ASD the cardiac function became worse, severe pulmonary an extra micro-chromosome, which renders a high probability to have hypertonia developed . He died at the age of 6 months, with symptoms cases of 22q11 .2 deletion syndrome in the family . His karyotype is: 46, of circulatory insufficienty.Conclusion: A rare cytogenetic aberration of XY [22%] /47, XY, + mar [78%] . ish del (22) (q11 .2 q11 .2) (D22S987E- chromosome 5 is described, which help to understand the genotype- D22S976E-)/ ish del (22) (q11 .2 q11 .2) (D22S987E-D22S976E-), + phenotype correlation in patients with 5p duplication . mar . ish der (22) (D22S987E-D22S976E+) . The prenatal cytogenetic study, including FISH, in amniotic fluid (43 P02.092 cells studied from three independent cell cultures) and cord blood (100 A submicroscopic 5q11.2 deletion in a girl with autism, mild cells studied) showed a deletion in region 22q11 .2: 46, XY . ish del (22) mental retardation and mild facial dysmorphism (q11 .2 q11 .2) (D22S987E-D22S976E-) . No trace of an extra micro- H. Peeters1, A. Crepel1, K. Devriendt1, P. De Cock2, J. Vermeesch1, J. P. Fryns1; chromosome was found . In the Genetic counselling clinics the couple 1University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium, was told about the consequences of 22q11 .2 deletion syndrome and 2University of Leuven, Child Neurology Department, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. they decided termination of the pregnancy . We report on a female patient with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), An important remark in this family is that, members who are carrying mild mental retardation, mild facial dysmorphism and a submicrosco- the extra chromosome are phenotypically normal because they are pic 5q11 .2 deletion detected by 1-Mb array CGH . In addition, a 2Mb chromosomically balanced at this region . Thus, it must be important to maternally inherited duplication on Xp22 .31 (RP11-483M24->RP11- rule out the 22q11 .2 deletion, using FISH and/or MLPA, in members of 323F16) was detected . Chromosomal imbalances (deletions or dupli- the family with apparently normal number of chromosomes . cations) appear to be present in about 25% of patients with syndromic ASD . The deletion in the present patient is approximately 8 Mb in size P02.095 and is flanked by the clones CTD-2276024 and RP11-210O14. Inter- Autistic features with speech delay in a girl with an ~1.5 mb estingly, a similar but possibly slightly smaller deletion on has previ- deletion in 6q16.1, including FUt9 and GPR63 ously been described in a boy with profound speech delay, obses- K. W. Derwinska1,2, J. Bernaciak1, E. Obersztyn1, E. Bocian1, P. Stankiewicz1,2; sional play and echolalia (K Prescott et al. 2005) . In contrast to the 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Dept. of Molecular & Human patient we describe, this boy presented additional malformations like a Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. cardiac defect (tetralogy of Fallot), a bifid uvula, velopharyngeal insuffi- Recent studies have shown that up to 40% of the apparently balanced ciency and short stature . Since autistic behaviour is the only consistent reciprocal chromosome translocations in patients with abnormal phe- finding in 2 patients with a similar deletion 5q11.2, the location of this notype can be accompanied by a chromosome imbalance . We present deletion may identify a gene that is implicated in autism spectrum dis- a 10-year-old girl with mild mental retardation, abnormal EEG, and au- orders . Furthermore our observation illustrates that array-CGH should tistic behavior, who began to speak at 5 years . She had no dysmorphic be considered as an essential aspect in the genetic analysis of patients features and her brain MRI was normal . Karyotype analysis revealed with syndromic ASD . a de novo apparently balanced translocation t(6;14)(q16;q22) . Whole genome array CGH analysis with ~385,000 oligonucleotide probes P02.093 (NimbleGen) identified an ~1.48 Mb deletion in 6q16.1. FISH with Non acrocentrics ssmc: thirteen new cases BAC clones mapping within and directly flanking the deleted segment M. Santos, A. Escalona, C. Hernando, C. Fuster; showed that the deletion arose at the translocation breakpoint . Inter- Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain. estingly, autism has been linked previously to chromosome 6q16 . The Context Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are com- deleted segment harbors FUT9, GPR63, FHL5, KLHL32, c6orf66, and mon findings in Prenatal and Postnatal Diagnosis. So far, the genetic AK091365 and two predicted genes c6orf167 and KIA0776 . GPR63 origin of these sSMC usually remained unknown . Recently the use of is expressed almost exclusively in the brain and encodes a G-pro- several technologies based on FISH has allowed an important prog- tein-coupled receptor for sphingosine 1-phosphate . The fucosyltrans- ress toward this goal . ferase 9 gene, FUT9, is highly conserved among humans, mice, rats, Objective To characterise 50 sSMC detected in unrelated patients with and hamsters and is highly expressed in brain during embryogenesis . constitutional genetic disorders, mental retardation or infertility . FUT9 is considered to be involved in cell-cell interactions, differentia- Methodology G-banding, HR-CGH and FISH (M-FISH, BACs) tion, and neurodevelopmental processes. Our data confirm previous Results Acrocentric sSMC were detected in 74% (37/50) of cases . observations that copy-number variation is a significant factor respon- Inv dup(15) was the most commonly detected sSMC followed by inv sible for autistic spectrum behavior and speech delay . dup(13 or 21) . Non acrocentric sSMC were detected in the rest of cases (26%, 13/50) . sSMC derived from chromosomes 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 17,Cytogenetics  P02.096 rivative chromosome 1p[46,XY,der(1)t(1;?)(p36,1;?)] which was pater- Delineation of a critical Region on chromosome 18 for the nally originated:46,XY,t(1;8) (p36,1;p21,3)]. FISH confirmed transloca- del(18)(q12.2q21.1) syndrome tion between chromosomes 1 and 8; fetal karyotype was interpreted as K. Buysse1, B. Menten1, A. Oostra2, S. Tavernier3, G. R. Mortier1, F. Speleman1; partial monosomy 1p/partial trisomy 8p . Adjacent-1 segregation mode 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Cen- was suggested . Parents decided to terminate the pregnancy . Fetus ter for Developmental Disorders, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, presented facial dysmorphism, limb abnormalities, cerebellar hypopla- 3M.P.I.G.O. ‘t Vurstjen, Evergem, Belgium. sia, ventriculomegaly, bilateral choroid plexus cysts, lung defects . Array CGH has been instrumental in the identification of submicrosco- Case2:Amniocentesis was performed due to fetal abnormalities: cleft pic chromosomal aberrations leading to mental retardation and con- lip/palate, tetralogy of fallot, ASD, single artery/vein of umbilical cord . genital abnormalities (MR/MCA), the delineation of new microdeletion Cytogenetics revealed unbalanced chromosomal translocation:46,XY, syndromes and the identification of genes implicated in MR/MCA syn- der(15)t(10;15) (q22,2;q11,2), paternally derived [46,XY,t(10;15)(q22,2 dromes . An important step prior to assigning particular phenotypic fea- ;q11,2)] . Adjacent-2 segregation mode was suggested . FISH analysis tures to particular genes is the delineation of critical regions for these confirmed der(15)t(10;15). Pregnancy ended spontaneously after am- specific clinical features. To this purpose, smaller interstitial deletions niocentesis . The fetus couldn’t be investigated . can be particularly important. In some syndromes, haploinsufficiency Case3:Amniocentesis was performed because of positive mater- of a single gene appears to be responsible for most of the phenotypic nal serum triple screening . Cytogenetics revealed a surnumerary features, as is the case for the EHMT1 gene in the 9q34 subtelomeric chromosome(47,XY,+mar) . Parents were karyotyped . The mother deletion syndrome . In contrast to distal 18q deletions, proximal intersti- showed balanced reciprocal translocation:t(2;14)(p23;q23) . Surnu- tial deletions encompassing chromosome band 18q12 .3 and parts of merary chromosome was identified as part of chromosome 14 (FISH neighboring bands (q12.2→q21.1) have been reported less frequently. analysis) . Fetal karyotype was interpreted as:47,XY,+der(14)t(2;14)(p Up to now, 24 patients carrying such deletions were described . Ac- 23;q23)mat; partial trisomy 2p/partial trisomy 14q due to 3:1 segre- curate genotype-phenotype correlations are only possible for those gation was suggested . Pregnancy was terminated . Extensive clinical cases for which breakpoints have been molecularly defined. evaluation showed fetal dysmorphism and open cranial sutures . Here we describe a boy with a submicroscopic deletion of less than 1 .8 Mb of subband 18q12 .3 . The phenotypic features of the proband cor- P02.099 respond well with those observed in patients with larger cytogenetically male pseudohermaphroditism: a case report detectable deletions encompassing chromosome band 18q12 .3 . The N. Andreescu, V. Belengeanu, D. Stoicanescu, S. Farcas, C. Popa, M. Stoian; deletion has been characterized at the molecular level which is impor- University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. tant for defining small regions and eventually specific genes associat- Male pseudohermaphroditism is characterized by the presence of 46, ed with specific phenotypic features. The deletion enabled us to define XY karyotype, exclusively male gonads and ambiguous or female ex- a critical region for the following features of the del(18)(q12 .2q21 .1) ternal and/or internal genitalia, caused by incomplete virilization dur- syndrome: hypotonia, expressive language delay, short stature and ing prenatal life . We report the case of an infant, in whom physical behavioral problems . examination showed ambiguous external genitalia and some dysmor- phic features . Cytogenetic investigation was performed for the correct P02.097 assignment of the gender and chromosome analysis in blood lympho- A novel sex determining locus in a 46,XX-sRY negative sex cytes revealed male genetic sex . The ambivalent aspect of the ex- reversal patient carrying a t(8;19)(q22.1;q13.1) ternal genitalia, the gonads that are exclusively testes together with N. Najera, J. Berumen, S. Kofman, J. Perez, G. Queipo; the result of the cytogenetic analysis showing male genetic sex, led Hospital General de Mexico/Facultad de Medicina, Mexico City, Mexico. to the diagnosis of male pseudohermaphroditism . A multidisciplinary The sex determining genes SRY and SOX9 are required to initiate approach involving pediatricians, specialists in the field of endocrinol- and maintain testicular development . However, genetic interactions ogy, genetics, surgery and psychiatry is necessary in order to reach controlling the earliest steps in gonadal development remain poorly a prompt and correct diagnosis and treatment . In conclusion, careful understood . The molecular abnormalities underlying a high proportion examination of the external genitalia of every newborn should be sys- of XX maleness remain undiscovered . Using of high density SNP ar- tematic . Early diagnosis of a disorder of sexual development is of great ray in sex reversal patients could be useful to characterize the etiol- importance as is the appropriate gender assignment . The most impor- ogy of the abnormal gonadal development and provide new molecu- tant decision will be the choice of sex assignment, which will depend lar insights into the normal regulatory network in the testis and ovary on many complex factors . Birth registration should be postponed until development . We performed SNPs microarray genotyping (Affymetrix the diagnostic evaluation enables the most appropriate choice of sex geneChip 500k) to investigate homozygosity mapping and LOH in a for rearing . The clinical management will help the child and the family nuclear family (mother, father, siblings) of a 46,XX-SRY negative male deal effectively with this disorder . carrying a t(8;19)(q22 .1;q13 .1) . In addition we analyzed 10 sporadic SRY negative XX male . The results were also compared with the In- P02.100 ternational HapMap . The analysis of the break points in the patient PcR based technique for sex selection in cattle revealed in chromosome 19 three intervals with 59, 89, 25 and 15 E. Arbabai1, F. Mahjoubi1, M. Eskandainasab2, M. Montazeri1; homozygous SNPs and three regions containing 83, 73 and 57 LOH 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Zanjan university, Tehran, Islamic SNPs located in chromosome 8 . Analysis of the data revealed four sex Republic of Iran. determining genes candidates, we present and discuss the genomic Embryo sexing is an important way for sex selection of offspring . This data and the analysis performed in order to identify a novel locus in- is a potential method to considerably improve animal breeding and the volved in the testicular development in humans . efficiency of dairy and meat production. A novel repeated sequence specific to male cattle has been identified and named S4. S4 is a 1/5 P02.098 Kb repeating unit and which also contains various internal repeated Prenatally diagnosed recombinant offsprings resulting from sequence . S4 is localized on the long arm of the Y chromosome in the adjacent-1, adjacent-2, 3:1 segregation modes of reciprocal region of ZFY genes . translocations:fish and cytogenetic studies Aim: The objective of this study is to identify embryo sexing by a simple O. Sezer, F. Ekici, B. Ozyilmaz, M. Tosun, M. Ceyhan, O. Aydın, I. Kocak, G. and precise PCR method . Ogur; Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from the whole Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey. blood samples. Two sets of specific primers were designed Balanced translocation carriers can have recombinant offsprings due Result: By this PCR based methods we could differentiate between to adjacent-1, adjacent-2, 3:1 and 4:0 segregation modes . Here, we female and male genomic DNA . report three prenatally diagnosed recombinant fetuses resulting from Discussion: With this technique we can distinct males from females . balanced parental translocations . This method has the potential to be employed for embryonic sex se- Case1:Amniocentesis was performed because of bilateral choroid lection . plexus cysts and hyperechogenic bowel . Fetal karyotype showed a de-Cytogenetics  P02.101 proper genetic counseling . Therefore we recommend performing mo- case report: A case of a rare translocation of sRY region of the lecular cytogenetic (FISH) in cases of male infertility or male genital Y chromosome to the short arm of the X chromosome ambiguity . V. Radoi, L. Neagu, D. Mierla, D. Jardan; Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. P02.104 The 46, XX karyotype male syndrome is a rare sex chromosome dis- A 14 bp deletion in the sry gene associated with xy sex reversal order occurring in less then 1 in 25 000 individuals . It mostly results E. Margarit1,2, R. Queralt1, M. Guitart3, E. Gabau3, R. Corripio3, A. Soler1,2, A. from unequal crossing-over between the X and Y chromosomes during Sánchez1,2; meiosis . Here we report a two weeks old boy with bilateral cryptorchi- 1Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics.and IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, Barce- dism and penile hypospadia . Chromosomal analysis revealed a 46, XX lona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades karyotype and the FISH test showed the presence of the SRY region Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Consorci Hospitalari Parc Taulí, of the Y chromosome translocated to the short arm of the X chromo- Sabadell, Spain. some . SRY gene located in this region is the main gene responsible Sex-reversed XY females can arise from different mechanisms . About for gonadal differentiation in the male and it is essential for the normal 15% of the XY females with pure gonadal dysgenesis are found to development of male genitalia. This report confirms the value of karyo- have mutations in the testicular determinant gene SRY (Sex Reversal typing and FISH analysis in the cases of ambiguous genitalia . on chromosome Y), specially affecting the high mobility group con- served region HMG box . The SRY gene is located at Yp11 .31 and P02.102 induces male sexual differentiation in human embryos from the 6th mosaicism characterization in male with 46,XX SRY positive week of gestation . The failure of this process cause gonadal dysgen- karyotype esis in complete or incomplete form, depending of the presence or O. M. Khurs, A. D. Polityko, N. V. Rumyantseva, I. V. Naumchik; not of testicular tissue remnants . Here we present a female 15 years Republican Medical Center “Mother and сhild”, Minsk, Belarus. old with no pubertal development, hypergonadotropism, obesity and 46,XX “male syndrome” is rare chromosomal disorder in human that diabetes, showing a 46,XY karyotype . The existence of the SRY gene occurs at about 1 in 20 000 - 25 000 males . The SRY gene, located was confirmed by PCR. Sequencing of SRY revealed a deletion of 14 at p11 .3 chromosome Y, plays a key role in human sex determination nucleotides in the coding sequence of the gene (2188delAAAGCTG- and is responsible for the reproductive system morphogenesis . Most TAACTCT), located in the 5’ region upstream of the HMG box . The 46,XX male individuals with normal genitalia and karyotype 46,XX are deletion of these nucleotides origins a stop codon that will give rise to a SRY positive . This chromosomal aberration arises due to an unequal severely truncated protein . This defective SRY protein lacks the entire recombination between Xp and Yp terminal region during paternal DNA-binding HMG domain and will therefore most likely be non-func- meiosis . tional. Only four different deletions have been previously identified in Here we present a case of an infertile (azoospermia) 32 years old the SRY gene (HMGD database) associated to XY sex-reversal . male, who has normal masculinization of the external genitalia . A stan- dard cytogenetic study revealed the karyotype 46,XX in 25 analyzed P02.105 metaphases . molecular analysis of SRY identifies familial and de novo FISH analysis using LSI SRY probe Spectrum Orange (Vysis) showed mutations in 46,XY females with different phenotypes of gonadal the presence of single SRY gene signal in 50 metaphases studied . dysgenesis The subsequent FISH using chromosome X WCP probe Spectrum Or- J. M. S. Goncalves1, D. Gomes1, J. Silva1, A. Parreira1, A. Medeira2, T. Kay3, T. ange (Vysis) has demonstrated the localization of SRY signal on p-arm Oliveira4, L. Cortez5, J. Cidade Rodrigues6; of chromosome X, and constitutional karyotype abnormality was in- 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde, Centro de Genética Humana, Lisbon, Portugal, terpreted as 46,XX .ish der(X)t(X;Y)(p22 .3;p11 .3)(SRY+) . Furthermore 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Stª Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Serviço the analysis of 184 metaphases has allowed to ascertain the mosaic de Genética Médica, Hospital de D Estefânia, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Maternidade status of the karyotype in lymphocytes: 45,X .ish (wcpX×1)[4]/47,XXX . Júlio Dinis, Porto, Portugal, 5Serviço de Endocrinologia, Hospital Curry Cabral, ish (wcpX×3)[3]/48,XXXX .ish (wcpX×4)[1}/46,XX .ish (wcpX×2)[176] . Lisbon, Portugal, 6Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal. The results obtained demonstrate the advantage of FISH for detect- In human males, normal testicular determination is firstly triggered by ing low-grade mosaicism in patients with anomalies of sex chromo- the action of the SRY protein, which is encoded by a single exon-gene somes . (SRY) located on Yp11 .3 . SRY has a high-mobility group (HMG) do- [Supported in parts by DAAD 325/2003, DFG WER 17/01/04] . main, which is able to bind and bend DNA . De novo point mutations in SRY that arise mainly in the HMG box domain, were identified in 46,XY P02.103 female patients with complete gonadal dysgenesis (CGD) . However, clinical, cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic study of three even very rarely, familial SRY mutations were already described . XX male cases Here, we describe eight 46,XY female patients with mutations in the H. A. Hussein, I. I. Mazen; SRY gene, seven with CGD and one with ambiguous external genita- National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. lia . Molecular studies were performed using four sets of primers, from 46,XX male is a rare disorder that occurs at about 1 in 20,000 males . It nucleotides -323 to +950 of the SRY. PCR amplified DNA fragments is due to accidental recombination between the short arm of the Y chro- were analysed by SSCP or DHPLC, and subsequently sequenced mosome and the short arm of the X in paternal meiosis .This results in when appropriate . translocation of the SRY gene from the Y to the X chromosome . In two patients with CGD, a microdeletion including all SRY cod- Aim of this study is to report and highlight the value of cytogenetics ing region was found . In the remaining six patients the following and (FISH) analysis for males with 46, XX Karyotype, since the phe- point mutations were detected: c .53G>A(p .S18N); 89G>T(R30I); notype dose not always correlate with the presence or absence of Y c .169C>T(E57X); 224G>T(p .P63A) . While the last two, were not de- sequences in the genome . scribed before, and are de novo mutations, c .53G>A(p .S18N) and In this report we present clinical, cytogenetic and molecular cytoge- 89G>T(R30I) were also found in both patient’s fathers . 89G>T(R30I) netic data of three patients referred to human cytogenetics department was also detected in a first degree cousin (phenotypically nomal) of from Clinical genetic department . Two patients presented with infertility one of the female patients with CGD . None of the above mutations with normal male external genitalia and one patient was presenting were found in more than 100 phenotypically normal unrelated males . with ambiguous genitalia . Ultrasonography revealed no müllerian de- We evidence, that while some SRY mutations may be the cause of rivatives in the three patients . complete gonadal dysgenesis, others are associated with phenotypic Cytogenetic results for the three cases revealed 46, XX karyotype . heterogeneity, supporting the existence of modifier genes implicated FISH analysis showed the presence of SRY gene on the short arm of in sex determination . X chromosome in cases numbers 1& 2 and it absence in case number 3 . Analysis of these results illustrated that combined conventional cyto- genetic and FISH techniques are essential for accurate diagnosis andCytogenetics  P02.106 P02.108 Aneuploidy of chromosome 21 in the Alzheimer’s disease brain cytogenetic effects of doxazosina a alpha-blocker Y. B. Yurov1,2, I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3; antihypertensive drug: sister chromatid exchanges and 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- micronuclei frequencies before and after pharmacological tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, treatment Russian Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, I. Arrieta Saez1, O. Peñagarikano2, M. Télez1, M. Barasoain1, I. Huerta1, J. Germany. Ramírez1, B. Criado3, P. Flores4, A. González5; Apart from single gene mutations, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is sug- 1Dpto Genetica, Antropología Fisica y Fisiologia animal Facultad de Ciencia y gested to be associated with mosaic aneuploidy of chromosome 21 . Tecnología, Bilbao, Spain, 2Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, This hypothesis has been repeatedly supported by studies of AD blood United States, 3High School Da Maia, CESPU, Porto, Portugal, 4Dpto de enfer- lymphocytes and skin fibroblasts. However, the diseased brain has mería, Escuela de Enfermería, Bilbao, Spain, 5Dpto Medicina Interna, Facultad not been directly studied . We have performed molecular cytogenetic de Medicina, Bilbao, Spain. studies by interphase chromosome 21-specific multicolour banding on Arterial hypertension is a health problem representing one of the most cells of AD brain samples derived from the cerebral cortex, hippocam- frequent diagnoses in the population at large in terms of prevalence pus and cerebellum . The analysis was performed through evaluation and incidente . Drug treatment of hypertension may last for decades . of about 14000 intephase nuclei . Control samples exhibited mean rate Long-term treatment require documentation of long-term safety and of aneuploid cells to be about 0 .7% (all brain areas) . The average rate efficacy, including sensitive indices of genotoxic damage. of aneuploidy achieved 4% in the AD hippocampus, 3 .5% _ in the AD In our previous works Sister Chromatid Exchange (SCE) and Micro- cerebral cortex, and 0 .9% _ in the AD cerebellum . Aneuploidy mani- nuclei (MN) assays were aplied to asses the genotoxicity of atenolol a fested more frequently as chromosome 21 monosomy, but the propor- beta-blocker antihypertensive drug and nimodipine a calcium antago- tion of cells with additional chromosome 21 was also significant. The nist antihypertensive in culture peripheral lymphocytes of treated pati- monosomy-to-trisomy ratio was about 2:1. AD brain exhibited signifi- entes and control individuals . The results showed no genotoxic effect cant increase of chromosome 21 aneuploidy in the hippocampus and of nimodipine, however a statistical significant increase in the frequen- cerebral cortex . Interestingly, these two areas are known to be more cy of MN was detected in patients treated with atenolol . Aplication of affected by neurodegenerative processes featuring AD . Together, this FISH with an alphoid stellite probe revealed also a statistical significant suggests a correlation between molecular cytogenetic and neuropa- higher percentage of centromere positive MN . thology data . We hypothesize that increased aneuploidy rates in the We report here our data from a study of the genotoxic potential of AD hippocampus and cerebral cortex are the results of mitotic errors Doxazosina The pharmacological aplication of the antihypertensive during adult neurogenesis. Our data shows that specific areas of the Doxazosina is due to their ability to blocker alpha receptors . This an- senecent brain can be selectively affected by acquired aneuploidy . An- tihypertensive was tested for its ability to induced SCE and MN in cul- euploidization of specific brain areas is, therefore, a genetic process tured human peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients before and after that is likely involved in the pathogenesis of AD . pharmacological treatment, so that the patient is control himself . The results of the study revealed that the frequency of SCE did not P02.107 show significant differences. However a statistical significant increase Evaluation of micronuclei and nondisjunction frequencies in in the frecuency of centromere positive MN was detected, thus indicat- workers exposed to internal plutonium by cytokinesis-blocked ing more frequent envolvement of aneuploidy phenomena in the origin binucleated cells assay of Doxazosina-induce MN . S. A. Vasilyev, V. A. Timoshevskiy, I. N. Lebedev; Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. P02.109 Damage or dysfunction of any component of mitotic segregation com- chromosome instability in the ataxia telangiectasia cerebellum plex by mutagens can lead to mistakes in chromosome number . One I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3, A. D. Kolotii2, Y. B. Yurov1; of the most reliable methods of aneugenic influence detection is FISH- 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- analysis of cytokinesis-blocked binucleated cells . Detection of micro- tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, nuclei in these investigations is an indicator of clastogenic effects . We Russian Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, have tested abilities of this approach on a group of Siberian Chemical Germany. Plant (SCP) workers exposed to internal plutonium . We have formed Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a chromosome instability (CIN) syndrome groups of exposed individuals - SCP workers with incorporated plu- associated with progressive neuronal degeneration affecting exclu- tonium (10-276 nCi) - 70 individuals, and control set - people living in sively the cerebellum . Molecular basis of cerebellar neurodegenera- Seversk and not exposed of nuclear-chemical agents - 50 individuals . tion in AT is unknown, but hypothesized to be closely linked to the loss In preliminary analysis we have demonstrated that missegregation fre- of genome integrity in the cerebellar neural cells manifesting as CIN . quencies for chromosomes 7 and 12 was 0 .2% for each chromosome Here, we monitored CIN in the AT brain by interphase chromosome- in cells of 27 SCP workers, and 0 .1% and 0 .075% in 8 individuals specific multicolour banding allowing analysis of interphase chromo- from control group, respectively. Significantly increased frequency of somes in their integrity . We found stable 2-4-fold increase of stochastic nondisjunction in exposed group was noted for chromosome 12 only aneuploidy involving whole chromosomes 7 and 14 in the cerebellum (p=0 .03) . However, tendency to increase of missegregation of chromo- of the AT brain as to controls . Additionally, dramatic 5-40-fold increase some 7 (p=0.06) was observed. Significant differences in frequencies of CIN involving chromosome 14 (aneuploidy (including supernumer- of micronuclei in exposed and control groups (0 .77 and 0 .74 %, re- ary rearranged chromosomes) and non-random chromosome breaks) spectively) were not found . Since we have carried out only a prelimi- as to other brain areas has been revealed . The latter was found to nary study of abnormal chromosome number frequency it is early to progress with the age of patients . Paradoxically, the longevity of AT make conclusion about aneugenic influence of incorporated plutonium. patients was in direct proportion to CIN levels in the cerebellum . We However, we can suggest that this approach is sufficiently informative hypothesize that aneuploidization and acquired CIN may result from and sensitive for frequency detection of abnormalities which lead to autoactivation of aberrant processes triggered in response to progres- genomic mutations . Subsequent analysis of segregation abnormalities sive neuronal degeneration . Newly generated neural cells, being ge- provides some clues to the quantitative features of aneuploidy induc- netically abnormal, nevertheless, partially substitute the loss of cells tion by internal plutonium . in the cerebellum and play an ameliorative role in stabilization of the diseased brain homeostasis . We suggest CIN in the AT cerebellum to be involved in processes that mediate either neurodegeneration or endogenous neuroprotection . The way CIN is progressed, can be, therefore, proposed as definitive for the course of neurodegeneration and for cerebellar dysfunction in AT patients .Cytogenetics  P02.110 on the fusion of human chromosome 2 and the reciprocal translocation CSMD, a candidate gene for autism found in two patients with t(5;17) in the gorilla . autistic disorder and balanced translocations We analysed the nuclear topology of breakpoint flanking loci in pre- C. Floris1, S. Rassu2, L. Boccone3, D. Gasperini3, A. Cao1, L. Crisponi1; and post-meiotic cells from cryo-sections of Rhesus macaque testis 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia INN-CNR, Monserrato (CA), tissue, where the fixation of chromosomal rearrangements is expected Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Università degli to occur. Chromosome 5 and 17 breakpoint flanking BAC clones did Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Ospedale Regionale per le Microcitemie, Clini- not co-localise, but were positioned toward the nuclear centre and ca Pediatrica II, Azienda U.S.L. 8, Cagliari, Italy. at the chromosome territory surface. Both findings can be correlated The study of chromosomal rearrangements associated with abnormal with their rather gene-dense local genomic environment . The result- phenotypes has proven to be a powerful method for the identification ing short distances between the two loci may have acted as probabi- of disease-related genes . Recent studies estimated a rate of 3-5% of listic trigger for evolutionary rearrangements of gene-dense genomic cytogenetic abnormalities involving many different chromosomes in regions, even more if these reside exposed at the territory surface . autistic spectrum disorders (ASDs) . We report here on two unrelated Indeed, in silico analysis indicates that the majority of breakpoints in males with de-novo translocations, autistic behaviour and psychomotor great apes characterized so far reside in genomic environments with delay . They carry balanced chromosome translocations, respectively a elevated local gene density compared to the average of the respective t(5;8)(q14 .3;q23 .3) and t(6;8)(q13;q23 .2) . A detailed physical map cov- chromosome . ering the regions involved in the translocations was constructed and In the light of these results it was surprising to find chromosome 2 FISH analyses were carried out using BAC clones mapping on chro- fusion point flanking BAC clones localized in the nuclear periphery. mosomes 5q14.3, 6q13 and 8q23. We fine mapped the two transloca- Despite this, the two loci were frequently positioned in close physical tion breakpoints on chromosomes 8 identifying their positions within a proximity in Rhesus macaque spermatocytes, and even to a higher short 5 Mb genomic region . The results of these analyses showed that degree in spematogonia . breakpoints on chromosomes 8 in both patients do not interrupt any In conclusion, non-random nuclear positioning of genomic loci during known gene but both map in a region containing the CSMD3 gene . meiosis may have triggered these two evolutionary rearrangements . No genes were interrupted on chromosomes 5q14 .3 and 6q13 . Tak- These triggers may be probabilistic, as shown for the t(5;17), or spe- ing into account that CSMD3 is expressed in fetal and adult brain, our cific side-by-side arrangements in the case of the fusion of human observations suggest that this gene is a good candidate for the patho- chromosome 2 . genesis of ASDs . To exclude an over-expression or under-expression of CSMD3 leaded by the rearrangement, we verified the expression P02.113 of this gene in the leukocytes of the translocated patient by RT-PCR, chromosomal mosaicism of the skin: A preliminary study but any transcript was detected . Future studies, including mutational M. Pérez-Iribarne1,2, C. Fons3,2, M. González-Enseñat4,2, A. Vicente4,2, I. Plen- analysis of CSMD3 in a large number of patients affected by autism sa1,2, P. Poo3,2, M. Pineda3,2, C. López1,2, T. Zabala1,2, E. Geán1,2; and behavioural studies on a Csmd3 knockout mouse, will be neces- 1Secció Genètica, Esplugues (Barcelona), Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, sary to confirm or decline this hypothesis. Esplugues, Spain, 3Servei Neurologia, Esplugues (Barcelona), Spain, 4Servei Dermatologia, Esplugues (Barcelona), Spain. P02.111 Introduction : The concept of cutaneous mosaicism has now been cytogenetic study of the BPEs cases proved by numerous studies . It seems likely that the two skin types M. Kumar1, M. Tanwar1, P. Gupta2, N. Pushkar2, R. Kumar1, R. Dada1; represent two different genotypes, even though this has been remark- 1Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Deptt. of Anatomy, All ably difficult to prove. Our aim is to describe the neurocutaneous India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. Rajendra symptoms and skin chromosomal mosaicism spectrum in a series of Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 14 pediatric patients . New Delhi, New Delhi, India. Patients and Methods: We have reviewed the karyotype of cultured Blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a fibroblasts from 75 pediatric patients, who presented skin lesions sug- rare genetic disorder with autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance gestive of pigmentary mosaicism, studied in our institution from August with a frequency of 1 in 50,000 . Patients with BPES have a combina- 1998 to October 2007 . Biopsies were obtained from both hypopig- tion of congenital anomalies as small palpebral fissures, epicanthus mented and hyperpigmented skin . Conventional chromosome banding inversus, low nasal bridge and congenital ptosis . Other features like studies were performed and karyotyped (ISCN, 1995) . microphthalmos, anophthalamos, microcornea, hypermetropia, diver- Results: We reported 14 patients with skin mosaicism: three boys and gent strabismus, high arched palate, cup shaped ears, mental retar- eleven girls . Six of them presented numerical abnormalities: three dation and infertility in females has been reported . BPES has been cases with diploid/triploid mosaicism, two patients with a marker chro- categorized into two types: type I associated with primary ovarian fol- mosome (one of them with persistence of the marker in peripheral licle and type II involves only eye malformation in both sexes . Pen- blood karyotype); and one patient with a chromosome 20 trisomy and etrance is 100% in type I (transmission by males only) and 96 .5% in West syndrome . The rest of patients (n=8) had structural chromosomal type II (transmission through both sexes) . Review of reported cases abnormalities, with different chromosomes involved . All of them had concluded that a locus for eyelid development is situated at 3q . Vari- typical linear cutaneous lesions except a two-year-old girl with Pal- ous reports linked the deletion in 3q21, 3q22, 3q23, 3q24, 3q25 and lister-Killian syndrome . translocations t(3:7)(q26-qter:q+), t(X:3)(p22:q21), t(3:8)(q23:p22 .1) to Conclusion: There is an association between chromosomal mosaicism the BPES . We analyzed 10 cases of BPES by GTG banding . Six were and hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation especially following males with mean age of 24 years and four were females with mean Blaschko lines. We did not find in all patients direct correlation be- age of 27 years . Different deletions and translocation of chromosome tween a specific chromosomal abnormality and neurological affection. 3 has been linked with the BPES but there is no case reported with Patients with atypical cutaneous lesions or with neurological symp- 3q26-28 and 5q31 .3-33 .2 deletions which we found in two cases . We toms could be candidates to perform a skin karyotype even though also found 3qter deletion which has already been linked to the BPES . blood karyotype is normal . These findings represent severe manifestation of the disease. BPES is a heterogeneous entity, and evaluation and counseling of affected P02.114 individuals should be undertaken with caution . cytogenetic effects in somatic cells of irradiated individuals with developed thyroid gland cancer P02.112 E. Dyomina; Are evolutionary chromosome rearrangements triggered by non- R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology random nuclear neighbourhoods? of NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. S. Mueller, F. Grasser, T. Cremer, M. Neusser; Essential growth of thyroid gland cancer (TGC) among population of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. extensive territories of Ukraine, Russia and Byelorussia suffered after We investigated whether non-random nuclear neighbourhoods may “iodine stroke” testifies that thyroid gland pathologies - one of the most have triggered evolutionary chromosome rearrangements, focussing expressed health consequences of the Chernobyl accident . Data ofCytogenetics  biologic (cytogenetic) indication of radiation injury may specify radio- mosomal anomalies, of those 17(70 .8%) were autosomal trisomies, genic character of TGC . Results of radiation epidemiological and cyto- 4 (16 .6%) were structural anomalies, 2 cases (8 .8%) were triploidies genetic examinations at liquidators of the Chernobyl accident conse- and 1 case was a mosaic 46,XY/47,XY +mar . There were 46 chromo- quences have confirmed the radiogenic character of TGC developed somal anomalies among the cases of postneonatal death, of those at the group of radiated persons . 39(84 .8%) were autosomal trisomies, 5 cases of structural anomalies Increase in frequency of malformations among endocrine pathologies and 2 cases of mosaics with chromosomal markers . from 1,4 % in 1993 up to 8,9 % in 2001 (more than in 6,3 times) was The best combination for metaphases obtention was fascia and skin . registered . The frequency of chromosomal anomalies was 4 .5% (70/1558) very It was revealed the correlation of frequency of chromosomal aber- similar to unselected studies, but if we consider only the perinatal rations - radiation markers (dicentrics and rings) in peripheral blood deaths was 2 .9%(24/835) which is lower when compared with un- lymphocytes with radiation doze (correlation coefficient - 6,0) in the selected studies ( 5 .9%) . Will be discussed the results comparing with remote terms after accident in this group of patients . unselected studies . Mean value of chromosomal aberrations frequency at group of TGC patients living in territories with high density of radioactive pollution P02.117 exceeds more than 2 times spontaneous level value . chromosomal mosaicism in spontaneous abortions: a case- Assignment to TGC patients thymine preparations is recommended in control study of 500 consecutive chorionic villus samples by connection with the radioprotective action registered on level of chro- interphase FisH (i-FisH) mosomal aberrations in somatic cells, and also with the purpose of S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov1,2, A. D. Kolotii1, E. A. Kirillova3, V. V. Mon- improvement of quality of patient life based on effective hormonal ho- akhov2, I. A. Demidova1,2, A. K. Beresheva1,2, V. S. Kravets1, O. S. Kurinnaya1, I. meostasis rehabilitation after erasion of thyroid gland . V. Soloviev2, Y. B. Yurov1,2; 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Rosmedtechnologii, Moscow, Rus- P02.115 sian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, individual chromosomal radiosensitivity of human lymphocytes Russian Federation, 3Woman’s Medical Center, Moscow, Moscow, Russian as a parameter of cancer risk Federation. N. Ryabchenko, E. Dyomina; Spontaneous abortions (SA) commonly arise from chromosomal R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology abnormalities, which are usually assessed by standard cytogenetic of NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. techniques. This suggests significant underestimation of chromo- Cytogenetic methods based on chromosome aberrations analysis somal mosaicism and application of interphase molecular cytogenetic (G2-assay) make it possible quantitative estimation of radiation effects techniques (i .e . FISH) for uncovering the true occurrence of mosaics on human organism taking into account its individual peculiarities and among SA . We have analyzed 500 consecutive chorionic villus sam- thus to estimate its IR . The main basis for application of cytogenetic ples derived from SA by interphase FISH (I-FISH) with DNA probes methods in radiobiology are high radiosensitivity of human PBL and for chromosomes 9, 13/21, 14/22, 15, 16, 18, X and Y . Chromosome formation of stage specific radiation-induced chromosomal aberra- abnormalities were found in 50% of cases . We detected aneuploidy tions . From the other hand elevated levels of chromosomal aberrations in 39 .6% of samples (aneuploidy of chromosome 16 - 10%; mono- are considered to be the proven markers of cancer development in the somy of chromosome X - 8 .2%; polysomy of chromosome X - 5 .2%; calculations of cancer risk after exposure to ionizing radiation . The aim aneuploidy of chromosome 13 or 21 - 5%; aneuploidy of chromosome of the presented work was evaluation of chromosomal radiosensitivity 14 or 22 - 4 .6%; aneuploidy of chromosome 15 - 3 .2%; aneuploidy of healthy individuals and determination those with the increased sus- of chromosome 18 - 2 .2%; aneuploidy of chromosome 9 - 1 .2%) . ceptibility to radiogenic pathologies . Polyploidy was found in 10 .2% of cases . One case was a chimera On the basis of the obtained “stage-effect” and “dose-effect” depen- with multiple aneuploidies (case reported in Vorsanova et al ., 2006) . dencies for chromosomal aberrations modifications of G2-assay were Multiple chromosome abnormalities manifested as aneuploidy involv- developed. Analysis (in the first mitosis) of chromosomal aberrations ing both autosomes and sex chromosomes was detected in 3 .7% of levels induced by G2 irradiation (1,5 Gy) of PBL cultures of 110 healthy cases . Chromosomal mosaicism (aneuploidy/polyploidy affecting at individuals revealed their high interindividual variability . The highest least 5% of cells) was detected in 23 .6% of all cases and 47 .6% of differences were registered for chromatid breaks which predominated cases with chromosome abnormalities . To the best our knowledge, the in the spectrum (CV= 37,5%) . Statistical analysis of the distributions present set of SA samples is the largest one analyzed by I-FISH . Our of the obtained individual cytogenetic parameters indicated bimodality data demonstrate that chromosomal mosaicism is highly frequent and and make it possible to reveal 12% individuals with increased chro- provide evidence that chromosomal mosaicism is better to study by mosomal radiosensitivity . Cytogenetic evaluation of individual chromo- I-FISH, rather than alternative approaches . Supported by Philip Morris somal radiosensitivity based on G2-assay has its perspectives in the USA . formation of groups with increased risk of radiogenic cancer develop- ing and its primary prophylactics among healthy population . P02.118 chromosomal translocations in couples with recurrent P02.116 miscarriage - a retrospective study clinical cytogenetics study in Pediatric Pathology: A C. Gug1, I. Cioata1, A. Cretu1, G. Budau1, M. Cartis1, L. Stelea1, F. Dorneanu1, comparison with Unselected studies M. Munteanu1, D. Hutanu1, N. Milos1, L. Sabau2; J. M. Pina-Neto, D. Ortolan, L. F. Mazzucatto, V. Bitar, L. C. Peres; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. 2University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania. We studied 1558 pediatric autopsies . 33 .1% had congenital anomalies Studies have shown that couples with reproductive loss have a high . Cytogenetic evaluation was successfully performed in 298 . Based frequency regarding chromosomal translocations (of 3% for females on clinical criteria, karyotyping was performed in cases of isolated mal- and 2% for males) . This study presents the results of conventional cy- formations and in cases of two malformations when presenting minor togenetic analysis in 700 couples referred to our genetic center . Chro- anomalies and in cases of multiple congenital anomalies except in mosomal analyses were performed using Giemsa-banding according those cases due known monogenic disorder . to standard procedure on peripheral lymphocytes . Each couple has The distribution by age was: 142(47 .6%) perinatal deaths, 37(12 .4%) received genetic counseling. Translocations have been identified in 23 late neonatal, 87(29 .9%) postneonatal , 26(8 .7%) preschool age , cases, 11 in male patients and 12 in female patients . Two Robertsonian 3(1%) school age , and 1(0 .3%) an adolescent . translocations trob(13;14) have been found in male patients, in differ- We collected blood from superior sagittal sinus, skin and fascia from ent families and 5 types of balanced translocations, on a number of 9 the rectus abdominis muscle . male patients: t(2;21)(q34;p11 .2) one case, t(4;16)(q34;q24) one case, We studied 206 cases of isolated malformations and 34 with two mal- t(2;17)(p22;q21) one case, t(7;15)(q14;q27) one case, t(7;14) one formations and none presented any chromosomal anomaly . In the case, t(7;18)(p13;q11) one case, t(1;5)(q23;p12) three cases in one 256 cases of multiple anomalies were detected 70 with chromosomal family. In women patients, we have identified one case of Robertsonian anomalies . Among the cases of perinatal death there were 24 chro- translocation, trob(13;22), and 9 different types of balanced transloca-Cytogenetics  tions in 11 persons: t(1,5)(q42 .2;q35 .2) one case, t(8;16)(q22 .2;q13) P02.121 one case, t(8;X)(q24 .2;q26) one case, t(7;10)(p22;p12 .1) two chromosome 9: Deletion Duplication of chromosome 9 cases, t(8;11)(q22 .3;q13 .5) two cases, t(5;8)(31 .2-ter) one case, Phenotype karyotype correlations case Reports brief review t(17;20)(q12;q11) one case, t(6,11,12) one case, t(3;6)(q21;q23 .2) one D. S. Krishna Murthy; case . The frequency of translocations in our study is similar with those Microtest Innovations Pvt Ltd, Bangalore, India. present in other studies, and was almost equal in males and females . Chromosme 9 is exhibits marked heteromorphism and pericentric in- Knowing the fact that one person is a translocation carrier confirms the version . Deletion of chromsome 9p presents with characteristic phe- etiology of recurrent miscarriage, and allows us to determine the risk notype soccassionally with overlapping features of Down syndrome . of recurrence . These couples received the recommendation to perform Terminal deletion of 9- was first reported by Alfi et al., Deletion 9p is amniocentesis in future pregnancies . Both genetic counseling and cy- a rare syndrome. We report here clinical and cytogenetic fidnings in togenetic analysis should be performed before the application of an two cases of deletion 9p and two case sof partial trisomy 9 . resulting assisted reproductive technology . familial translocation (t8p9q)mar and a balanced de novo translocation t(Yq;9p) . P02.119 The clinical finding is correlated with karyotypes and compared with Identification of chromosomal aberrations in Maruthamalai hills, other reported cases in the literataure . coimbatore city, india A brief review of literature of deletion duplication of chromosome 9 will L. Balasubramanium, V. Balachandar, R. Sangeetha, K. Suresh, K. Sasikala; be presented . Human Genetics Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. P02.122 The aim of the study was to identify dwellers risk of irradiation expo- combined interstitial duplication 11q22q23 and deletion of sure in the Maruthamalai hills, Coimbatore . The present study analyzed 11q24.3: report of a case. levels of chromosomal aberrations, a well-known biomarker of early A. Plaja1, A. Escalona2, T. Vendrell1, B. Fernández1, A. Fernández1, M. Carbon- biological effects and a predictor of cancer risk . Cytogenetic analyze eras1, C. Fuster2; has remained the most suitable assay for the evaluation of the genetic 1Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica. Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelo- damage induced in somatic cells by clastogens present both in occu- na, Spain, 2Unitat de Biologia Cel·lular i Genètica Mèdica. Facultat de Medicina. pational and environmental settings . Present study seems to be novel Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. to use for the evaluation of genetic damage in dwellers of Maruthama- Background: Detection of abnormal karyotypes with associated clinical lai hills, simultaneously the conventional cytogenetic analysis as well manifestations is an important tool for the identification of chromosome as identify the radiation level by assessing the thermo luminescence regions with genes that confer susceptibility to genetic disorders . dosimetry (TLD) . TLD were sent by mail to residents who requested Objective: Identified the extra material present in a de novo 46,XY,add the radiation survey . In the present study 54 experimental subjects (11)(q24 .1) karyotype from a chid with mental retardation, ocular mal- were selected and equal number of controls also selected . After sign- formations, mild dimorphic faces, thrombocytopenia and hypogamma- ing a consent form, both cases (experimentals and controls) provided globulinemia . a blood sample (5 ml) to establish cell cultures . Using the conventional Methodology: Conventional cytogenetics, High Resolution Compara- cytogenetic analysis, chromosomal- type and chromatid - type aber- tive Genome Hybridization (HR-CGH), FISH with BAC probes . rations were observed in some experimental cases . Dicentrics and Results: The HR-CGH profiles showed the gain of 11q22q23 and dele- acentric fragments are unstable types of aberrations but in the present tion of 11q24 .3 chromosome bands . Revaluation of G-banded chromo- study have not observed any of this aberration in experimentals . some spreads and FISH with BAC probes across the region confirmed Finally, present study may conclude that low-doses of ionizing radia- CGH results . tion are exposed do not represent by themselves any significant risk of Conclusion: Partial 11q trisomy is unusually in Prenatal and Postnatal genetic damage as measured by the conventional cytogenetic analy- Diagnosis . In most cases is associated with 11q/22q translocation and sis . a 3:1 meiotic disjunction with 47 chromosomes . The presence of the pure dup (11)(q22q23) in our patient provide an opportunity to delin- P02.120 eate the phenotypic features due this partial trisomy, since deletion of clinical manifestation of chromosome 2 long arm deletion: 11q24 .3 associated phenotypic features are well known . report of five cases presentation of four cases This work was supported by MCYT (SAF 2003-03894) L. Míguez Alvarez1, A. Escalona2, M. Santos2, C. Hernando2, A. González- Meneses3, A. Plaja4, C. Fuster1; P02.123 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica. Unidade de Diagnose Hidden chromosome instability in peripheral blood lymphocytes Prenatal. Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Uni- of unexposed and irradiated persons revealed by means of “G2 tat de Biologia Cel·lular i Genètica Mèdica. Facultat de Medicina. Universitat bleomycin sensitivity assay” Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unidad de Dismorfología. Hospital M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, Y. B. Dibskaya, L. R. Pedan; Virgen del Rocío de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain, 4Unitat de Genètica. Hospital Ma- Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. terno-Infantil de la Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. With help of modifying “G-bleomycin sensitivity assay” (treatment 2 Terminal and interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 2 of human peripheral blood lymphocytes culture in late post-synthetic belongs to the most common structural chromosomal aberrations . phase of mitotic cycle by bleomycin in concentrations 0,05 and 5,00 Clinical manifestations of this syndrome comprise: global psychomo- mcg/ml) the investigation of hidden chromosome instability in 9 un- tor delay, moderate to severe mental retardation with specific facial exposed donors and in 32 persons with different intensity of radiation dimorphism. We report the characteristics of clinical features in five exposure (Chernobyl liquidators including patients with acute radiation cases of terminal or interstitial deletions in 2q32 .2q35, 2q33q34, 2q36, syndrome - ARS) had been fulfilled. Main criterion of chromosomes’ 2q37 and 2q37.3 identified in conventional G banding, fluorescent in sensitivity to bleomycin exposure total frequency of chromosome aber- situ hybridization (FISH) and High Resolution Comparative Genome rations had been considered . In all examined groups individual levels Hybridization (HR-CGH) techniques . In one case the deletion of sub- of chromosome injuries under identical mutagenic exposure varied in telomeric region of chromosome 2 (2q37 .3) was added to 2q34q37 .2 wide range and didn’t depend on their initial values in intact cultures . duplication . A comparison was made of clinical symptoms present in In control donors and in 10 liquidators with low radiation exposure the our patients with relevant data concerning other cases of 2q monoso- mean-group frequencies of induced chromosome aberrations were my reported in literature in order to establish an accurate phenotype- quite the same under both testing concentrations of bleomycin . Among genotype correlation and proper genetic counselling of these families . control donors and liquidators three by three hypersensitive persons had been identified with aberrations’ rates 35.0, 34.0, 16.0 and 34.5, 20 .0 19 .3 per 100 cells, accordingly that can be considered as geneti- cally caused phenomenon . In 19 ARS patients increased mean-group frequencies of aberrations induced by bleomycin in both concentra- tions had been revealed - 16 .80±0 .50 (8 .7 - 38 .2) and 28,04±0,63 (6 .0Cytogenetics  - 60 .0) per 100 cells accordingly . In this group 13 persons with hidden drome . Some of the regions described here were previously described chromosome instability (from 22 .2 till 60 .0 aberrations per 100 cells) in other patients with MR . Our results indicate that a considerable pro- had been found . The data received permit to assume that high radia- portion of genes involved in neuronal pathways show variability in copy tion doses even in delayed terms following irradiation can modify in- number and that de novo events might be related to the aetiology of herited human chromosomes susceptibility to mutagen exposure . MR . Further investigation in larger cohorts of patients should allow a definition of the potential role of genomic variability in MR. P02.124 chaotic banding pattern of a chromosome 3 in a patient with P02.126 mental retardation Cryptic deletion Xp21 with the loss of the genes DMD, GK and M. Martinez-Fernandez1,2, L. Rodriguez1,2, T. Liehr3, K. Mrasek3, M. Martinez- NR0B1 in a female child with mild psychomotor retardation and Frias1,2,4; stereotypies 1Joint Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, D. Orteschi1, G. Marangi1, V. Leuzzi2, E. Tabolacci1, G. Neri1, M. Zollino1; Spain, 2Estudio Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congénitas (ECEMC) 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, del Centro de Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas (CIAC), Instituto de Italy, 2Department of Child Neuropsychiatry, Università “La Sapienza”, Roma, Salud Carlos III, Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Madrid, Spain, 3Institut für Italy. Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Friedrich Schiller Universität Jena, Jena, We present the case of a female child at age of 21 months who pre- Germany, 4Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad sented the following clinical features: delayed motor milestones, hy- Complutense, Madrid, Spain. potonia, lethargy during the first months of life, attention deficit, motor Constitutional complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) are very limitations (i.e. running difficulties), stereotypies and some autistic fea- unusual, and most of them involve more than one chromosome . As far tures, sleep disturbance, hyperCKaemia . Her psychomotor develop- as we know there are only eight published cases having a CCR involv- ment improved significantly after the age of 1 year. ing four or more breakpoints within a single chromosome . By the mean of Array-CGH analysis (BAC-array at an average resolu- Here we present an intrachromosomal CCR in a chromosome 3 hav- tion of 1 Mb) we revealed a de novo deletion of about 4,5 Mb on chro- ing five breakpoints, which was found in a patient without major con- mosome Xp21, with the complete loss of the genes DMD (dystrophin), genital defects but presenting mental retardation . GK (glycerol kinase), NR0B1 (nuclear receptor subfamily 0, group B, The patient was a 30-year-old male, product of the second pregnancy member 1) and, probably, of part of the gene IL1RAPL1 . The dele- of healthy and non-consanguineous parents . He was born at 42 weeks tion arose on paternal X-chromosome . A random X-inactivation pattern of gestation by normal vaginal delivery . Few hours after birth, he suf- was found . fered a hypoxia episode without an apparently cause, that required Clinical-pathogenetics features are discussed, mainly with regard to oxygen therapy . His evolution showed psychomotor delay . the early onset of signs of dystrophinopathy in a female patient with an The patient was referred to us for diagnostic evaluation at the age of heterozygous deletion of the gene DMD and to the possible phenotyp- 30 years, refering mental retardation and a previous karyotype with ic causal role of the gene IL1RAPL1, whose mutations in hemizygous an inversion in chromosome 3 with breakpoints in p12-q32 . We per- males has been reported in literature as responsible of some cases of formed a high resolution G-band karyotype and found a chromosome X-linked mental retardation . 3 with a chaotic banding pattern . This alteration was “de novo” . Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with subtelomeric probes P02.127 3p/3q showed that they were located at normal position . FISH with Proximal interstitial deletion in the short arm of chromosome 3: WCP3, showed the derivative chromosome 3 homogeneously stained, a report of a child whose mother carries a balanced reciprocal demonstrating the intrachromosomal nature of the rearrangement . translocation t(7;14)(p32;q32) Multicolour-banding FISH was performed and revealed the presence C. Vinkler1, M. Michelson1, T. Lerman-Sagie2, D. Lev1; of five breakpoints. 1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Pediatric We postulate the different steps that happened to generate the chaotic Neurology Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. banding pattern of this CCR . Proximal 3p deletion is a rare condition . To date, 14 patients have been ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . This work was supported by a Grant described . This recognizable phenotype consists of growth retarda- PI020028 (FIS), Spain and the Evangelische Studienwerk e .V . Vil- tion, developmental delay, hypotonia and dysmorphic features (pla- ligst . giocephaly, broad forehead . Broad nasal bridge, low set ears, long philtrum) . P02.125 We describe a boy with a de novo interstitial deletion at band 3p13p12 .3, comprehensive copy Number Variant (cNV) analysis of who presented with a phenotype similar to the previously described neuronal pathways genes in mental retardation cases . However, his mother carries a balanced translocation involving A. Brunet1, E. Saus1, M. Gratacòs1,2, L. Armengol1, E. Gabau3, M. Guitart3, X. different chromosomes,t(I7;14)(p32;q32) . Estivill1,2,4; The patient was born at 36 weeks gestation and was diagnosed with 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERESP, Barce- hypotonia, feeding difficulties, dysmorphic features and ASD. Brain CT lona, Spain, 3Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 4Pompeu Fabra showed partial agenesis of the corpus callosum . G-banded metaphase University, Barcelona, Spain. chromosomes revealed a normal karyotype 46,XY . Cryptic copy number variants (CNVs), including deletion and duplica- At the age of five years, he came for genetic reevaluation. He has tion, translocation and inversions, in chromosomes have been identi- psychomotor retardation, severe speech delay and he suffers of sei- fied in about 10% of patients with mental retardation (MR) of unknown zures . He has dysmorphic features similar to those described in other origin . The aim of this work is to perform a comprehensive screening patients with proximal 3p deletion . CGH microarray analysis was per- of CNVs that contain genes related to neurodevelopment . We selected formed using 4685 BAC clones (Signature Genomics Laboratories, 364 genes involved in neuronal pathways and used the Database of Spokane,WA) . An interstitial deletion at the short arm of chromosome Genomic Variants to identify genes predicted to be in CNVs (n=75) . 3p13p12.3 was identified. FISH analysis, confirmed the microdeletion We designed four Multiple Ligation Probe Amplification (MLPA) assays on the patient’s karyotype, but not on the parents’ karyotype . to detect variations in copy number between patients and controls . We Although the mechanism underlying this cytogenetic event is not un- studied 93 children with unexplained MR and normal karyotype and derstood, we suggest that offsprings of balanced reciprocal transloca- 332 control samples . We discovered 13 CNVs in MR patients, 5 of tion carriers, may be more prone to other cytogenetic abnormalities which were not present in controls . When available, parental samples warranting further investigation . were also analysed by MLPA to assess the inheritance of the CNV . We found 6 genes located in de novo genomic alterations correspond- P02.128 ing to four different genomic loci: 1q42 .1 (DISC1 and TSNAX), 3p26 .1 Accuracy of analysis in cytogenetics (GRM7 and CNTN6), 7q31 .33 (GRM8) and 17q21 .31 (MAPT) . The R. J. Hastings1, O. Bartsch2, G. Floridia3, K. Held4, B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, C. locus on chromosome 17q21 .31 has been validated by CGH-array Ramos5, M. Rodriguez de Alba5, K. Simola6,7, D. Taruscio3, R. Howell1; and coincides with the recently described 17q21 .31 microdeletion syn- 1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Universitaet Mainz, Mainz,Cytogenetics  Germany, 3Instituto Superiore di Sanita, Rome, Italy, 4Fertility Centre, Hamburg, tion between chromosomes 2q37.1 and 20p13. The final karyotypic Germany, 5Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 6Tampere University Hospi- and FISH results were interpreted as 46,XX,der(2)t(2;20)(q37 .1;p13) . tal, Tampere, Finland, 7Labquality Ltd, Helsinki, Finland. ish der(2)(2ptel+,2qtel-,20ptel+)dn, leading to trisomy of 20pter and Cytogenetic tests are undertaken to ascertain a specific syndrome/dis- monosomy of 2qter . Due to the severity of her condition she under- order, exclude a chromosomal cause for multiple miscarriages, define went cardiac surgery, but failed to survive . More than 60 cases of 2q37 gender, or whether a pregnancy is chromosomally abnormal . For most terminal deletion have been reported so far with features ranging from patients a genetic test is only performed once in a lifetime and it is es- developmental delay, mental retardation, dysmorphism, autism, car- sential, therefore, that patients receive an accurate result . diac or renal abnormalities etc . A subset of patients with this distal A measure of the accuracy of a diagnostic service can be provided deletion, are reported to mimic Albright hereditary Osteodystrophy through External Quality Assessment (EQA), including the new Eu- (AHO) . Recent array CGH studies by Lukusa et al (2004) correlated ropean EQA scheme, CEQA (Cytogenetic European Quality Assess- 2q37 .3 deletion with autism . Molecular cytogenetic studies using FISH ment) and the National EQA schemes . CEQA has been piloted for the and array CGH should to be considered for patients presenting with last two years supported by the Eurogentest Network of Excellence . hypotonia, feeding difficulties and failure to thrive. Literature review The majority of laboratories participating in these EQA schemes dem- and geneotype-phenotype correlation involving 2q37 microdeletion will onstrated satisfactory EQA performance . However, some laboratories be discussed . did not detect the chromosome abnormality and in rare cases even invented a chromosome abnormality . P02.131 An important aspect of cytogenetic analysis is to ascertain the break- the facial dysmorphy in the newly recognised microdeletion points involved in a structural rearrangement . However, marked dif- 2p15-p16.1 refined to a 570 kb region in 2p15 ferences in breakpoints were allocated by participating laboratories E. Chabchoub1, J. R. Vermeesch1, T. de Ravel1, P. de Cock2, J. P. Fryns1; for the same chromosome abnormality . Information on chromosome 1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Bel- breakpoints may be used to initiate additional genetic tests, to ascer- gium, 2Department of Neuropaediatrics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, tain whether a child will be affected with a specific syndrome, to iden- Leuven, Belgium. tify a critical region or for gene mapping . This imprecision may have The implementation of new technologies such as array-based compar- consequences for the validity of any subsequent investigations . The ative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) in the genetic diagnosis screening EQA process has also identified significant variation in the extent of of patients with mental retardation and multiple congenital anomalies interpretation given. Some of the common problems identified through (MR/MCA) enabled the detection of novel subtle chromosomal imbal- EQA submissions will be presented . ances, as well as the refinement of already known chromosomal imbal- ances and, in some cases, the identification of the respective genes. P02.129 Recently a novel 6 .2 Mb microdeletion involving 2p15-p16 .1 was re- mosaic partial trisomy of chromosome 8 in a dysmorphic ported in two patients with autistic disorder (AD) and MR/MCA with newborn child with multiple anomalies recognisable dysmorphic features . T. Zoerjanova1, K. Kuuse2, T. Ilus2, R. Zordania1; While screening for genomic copy number variations with a 1 Mb reso- 1Tallinn` Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Department of Genetics, Tartu lution bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) aCGH in patients referred University Clinics, United Laboratories, Tartu, Estonia. for the aetiological diagnosis of MR/MCA, a de novo 2p microdeletion We present a case of a dysmorphic newborn girl having congenital was detected and refined by fluorescence in-situ hybridisation (FISH) anomalies - polycystic kidneys and agenesis of corpus callosum . to a 570 kb region in 2p15 in a 16 year-old boy presenting with mild Anamnestically: the patient was born 4G/3P praematurely at 33 . ges- mental retardation and multiple congenital anomalies with facial dys- tation week . Pregnancy duration and results of antenatal investiga- morphism, ecomorphic habitus, kyphoscoliosis and congenital heart tions were abnormal - polyhydramnion and dysplastic kidneys were defect. In a first step, Marfan and Williams-Beuren syndromes were diagnosed by ultrasound at 32 gestational week and bone dysplasia excluded by, respectively, FBN1 gene mutation screening and ELN was suspected . Birth anthropometry of the patient (2092g/47 cm; OFC gene locus specific FISH probe. 32 cm) was according to gestational age, due to respiratory failure she We compare our findings with those already reported and we discuss needed artificial ventilation. The patient died at the age of one month. the phenotype-genotype correlations . Phenotype of the patient was dysmorphic:low forehead, enophtalm, This report supports the evidence of a newly recognised microdele- bulbous nose, deformed earlobes, bilateral contractures in III fingers tion syndrome involving 2p15-16 .1 . We show that this smallest 570 kb and congenital anomalies of brain and kidneys deletion of 2p15 is most likely responsible for the characteristic facial were diagnosed . dysmorphism in this syndrome . Cytogenetical investigations: Rapid chromosomal analysis from pe- ripheral blood showed mosaic result: 46,XX/47,XX,+mar . Additional P02.132 cytogenetical analysis by G-banding and FISH method (Chr .8 Whole A case of interstitial (4)(31.23q34.2)de novo deletion, detected Chromosome Painting Probe, Cytocell) revealed the marker chromo- by GtG, FisH and m-cGH analyses in a boy referred by a some to be a derivative chromosome 8: programme of 22q deletion searching 47,XX,+der(8)(pter→q21).ish der(8)(pter→q21)(wcp8+)[14]/46,XX[6]. S. Zajączek1, M. Constantinou2, E. Grygieńczo - Raźniewska3, E. Studniak3, E. The karyotypes of parents were normal . Kamińska4, E. Gawrych5, B. Kałużewski2; In conclusion we identified a mosaic partial trisomy of chromosome 8 1Cytogenetics Unit, Szczecin, Poland, 2Dept. of Medical Genetcs, Medical Uni- in a dysmorphic newborn . Discussion of possible etiology and clinical versity, Lodz, Poland, 3Cytogenetics Unit, Dept of Genetics and Pathology, Po- effect of this cytogenetical result will be presented . meranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 4Dept of Paediatrics, Children Hemathology and Oncology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, P02.130 5Dept of Child Surgery, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. De novo cytptic deletion of 2q37 in a child with hypotonia and Terminal deletions of 4q are rarely described (less than 100 cases) and congenital heart defect frequently misdiagnosed at first as “22q deletion suspicion”. We pres- S. K. Murthy, S. Naveed, E. E. M. Al-Rowaished, S. Mani, S. M. Padariyakam, ent a 9 year old boy with global retardation, epilepsy, bilateral lips and P. S. Jacob, M. T. A. Ali; cleft palate, unusual facial appearance, ASD II and some other anoma- Molecular Cytogenetic Unit, Genetics Center, DOHMS, P.O.Box 9115, Dubai, lies . He was recruited to diagnosis by the 22q deletion searching pro- United Arab Emirates. gramme, but karyotype analyses (lymphocytes, GTG 450 -800 bb ., Unbalanced cryptic chromosomal rearrangement involving the telo- RBG, FISH) did not show any anomaly of 22nd chromosome, but sur- meric region is one of the major causes of complex genetic diseases prisingly revealed deletion, described at first as 46,XY,del(4)(q34qter). resulting in mild to severe clinical conditions .We present here genetic Karyotypes of both parents were normal . More precise m-CGH analy- studies on a one month old female child with hypotonia, poor feed- ses (2,44 OLIGO m-CGH Agilent) showed interstitial 25,6 Mbp dele- ing and congenital heart defect who was referred for chromosomal tion, mapped between loci 178055037 and 152423109 (39 Mbp higher studies . Cytogenetic and FISH studies showed a de novo and unbal- to telomere) . Final karyotype description was then corrected as fol- anced cryptic chromosomal rearrangement resulting from a transloca- lows: 46,XY,del(4)(q31 .23q34 .2) . Possible correlations between ge-Cytogenetics 0 netic map of deleted region and clinical features are now discussed . P02.135 In all cases of del(22)(q11), suspected with negative results of typical Identification of a 2.7 Mb deletion of 3q25.1-3q25.2 in a patient cytogenetic analyses, possibility of subtle aberrations of 4q terminal with complex rearrangements of chromosome 3 by oligo-array region must be carefully considered . cGH E. Seo, J. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Park; P02.133 University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Re- interstitial deletion of the long arm of the chromosome 10: about public of Korea. a tunisian case with del(10)(q23q25) Interstitial deletion of chromosome 3q23 is known in blepharophimo- l. ben jemaa, l. kraoua, r. meddeb, m. chaabouni, f. maazoul, r. mrad, h. cha- sis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) . Recently, a 1 .9 Mb abouni; deletion of 3q24 haboring ZIC1 and ZIC4 has been identified in Dan- service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, tunis, Tunisia. dy-Walker malformation . We present a Korean boy with mild dysmor- We describe a Tunisian patient, a one month-old boy wich is the sec- phism and congenital heart disease such as pulmonary atresia, VSD ond child of healthy unrelated parents . During pregnancy there was and major aortopulmonary collateral artery (MAPCA) at birth . He had a intra-uterine delay of growth . apparently balanced translocation, 46,XY,der(3)inv(3)(p25q25)t(3;8)(q The infant was premature and was born at 35 weeks of pregnancy . 29;q24 .1),der(8)t(3;8) de novo, with complex rearrangements of chro- Birth weight was 1850 g, length was 49 cm, and head circumference mosome 3 . A high density array CGH with 244k oligonucleotide probes was 33 cm . detected a 2 .7 Mb deletion at 3q25 .1-3q25 .2 . Further investigation by There was a facial dysmorphism consisting of down slanting palpebral FISH analysis with BAC clones confirmed the heterozygous deletion fissures, prominent forehead, broad nasal bridge, anteverted nares, at the same region . The genes COMMD2, RNF13, PFN2, SERP1, thin lips, high palate, low-set ears, long philtrum and retrognathia . He EIF2A, SELT, SIAH2, CLRN1, and several open reading frames are in- had short neck, clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, a unique left kidney, cluded in the deletion interval . Among them, some genes may be good shawl scrotum and club foot varus . candidates for the congenital heart disease or other phenotypes . The cytogenetic analysis revealed deletion of the long arm of chro- mosome 10: 46,XY,del(10)(q23q25) in all mitosis . His parents showed P02.136 normal karyotypes . A patient with a 6p interstitial deletion and a complex Interstitial deletions of 10q are rare, this report describes a boy with a translocation involving chromosomes 2, 6, and 14 de novo interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 10 . Typi- D. Misceo1,2, K. Bjørgo1, E. Ormerod1, Ø. Ringen3, C. van der Hagen1, M. Roc- cal presentation includes craniofacial dysmorphisms, postnatal growth chi2, E. Frengen1; retardation, digital anomalies, developmental delay, congenital heart 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital and Faculty of defects and urogenital anomalies. The clinical findings are mainly Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Genetics and Mi- the same as those reported in patients with interstitial deletion of this crobiology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 3Eye Department, Ullevål University region especially facial dysmorphism, our patient has no congenital Hospital, Oslo, Norway. heart defect, why he has unique left kidney and most of the patients We describe a 5 years old patient with global developmental delay . described have a deletion more distal than our deletion . He lags about one year behind his peers . The language development The breakpoint will be confirmed by FISH analysis and well permit to is most delayed, especially the pronunciation . As a baby he was quiet compare exactly the phenotype in this case with those described in and slept excessively . The patient has hypermetropia of 2 .5 diopters litterature were there is only few cases of this deletion . bilaterally and minor exophoria . Eye examination revealed a chorioreti- nal coloboma inferonasally in the left eye . He shows dysmorphic fea- P02.134 tures: hypertelorism, deep set eyes, prominent filtrum, slightly promi- Deletion (1)(p32.2-p32.3) detected by Array-cGH in a Patient with nent forehead, low set and backward rotated ears . Developmental Delay/Mental Retardation, Dysmorphic Features A combined approach of G banding, aCGH and FISH revealed com- and Low cholesterol: A New microdeletion syndrome? plex chromosome rearrangements, involving chromosomes 2, 6 and F. Quintero-Rivera1, T. P. Leren2, J. Llerena3,4, N. Rao1, M. Mulatinho3,1; 14 . These rearrangements are de novo, since both parents have a 1David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Department of Pathology and normal karyotype . He also has two healthy sibs . Laboratory Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Medical Genetics Labo- Beside the reciprocal translocation between chromosome 2q and 6p, ratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medi- we also detected an insertion of a large segment from chromosome 14 cal Center, Oslo, Norway, 3Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, UFRJ, Rio into chromosome 6p, and an extensively reshuffled 6p: chromosome de Janeiro, Brazil, 4Instituto Fernandes Figueira, IFF/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, der(6)(p) also carries a 4 Mb interstitial deletion and a small paracen- Brazil. tric inversion . We report a 25-year-old male with developmental delay/mental retar- Because of the high number of chromosome breakpoints in this patient dation, low levels of total and LDL cholesterol and dysmorphism, which we cannot connect the involvement of each breakpoint to the clinical includes macrocephaly, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, phenotype. However, the most significant aberration is the 6p inter- low set ears, bilateral cataracts, cleft palate, bilateral cleft lip and wide stitial deletion . Interstitial deletions of 6p are rare events that to our spaced nipples . While his karyotype and subtelomeric FISH studies knowledge previously have been reported in a total of eight patients . were normal, a 5 .4 Mb interstitial deletion at 1p32 [del(1)(p32 .2-p32 .3)] We compare the clinical traits of our patient to the few cases of 6p was identified by array-CGH. This region encompasses a cluster of interstitial deletions previously described and we discuss the potential genes involved in fatty acid oxidation and cholesterol metabolism . One role of TFAF2A and FOXC1 in relation to the choroidal coloboma . of these genes is PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9), which is a key regulator of the number of cell-surface LDL receptors . P02.137 Another gene deleted is , DAB1 (Disabled 1 homolog of Drosophila), Dicentric inv Dup of the Whole 4p Without Deletion. Description which is involved in brain development. Based on the findings in our of the First case patient and in the two previously reported individuals with del(1)(p32 .2- L. Rodríguez1, M. Martínez-Fernández1,2, M. Aceña1, S. López Mendoza3, p32 .3), they may have a new microdeletion syndrome that previously L. Martín Fumero3, M. Rodríguez de Alba4,5, M. Fernández4,5, M. Martínez- has been difficult to detect by G-banding because it is located in a G- Frías1,4,6; negative band, but it can easily be identified by array-CGH 1Est. Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congénitas del Centro de Inves- tigación sobre Anomalías, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII,, Madrid,, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria,, Santa Cruz de Tener- ife. Islas Canarias., Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de En- fermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII,, Madrid, Spain, 5Servicio de Genética. Fundación Jiménez Díaz., Madrid., Spain, 6Departamento de Farmacología,Cytogenetics  Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense., Madrid, Spain. P02.139 Terminal inversion duplications (inv dup) are relatively uncommon . The Unusual clinical manifestations Associated with Down most frequent and well characterized inv dup, involved the 8p, where a syndrome maternal heterozygous inversion between the two OR gene-clusters, H. Mutlu, M. Ture, S. Sarısoy, S. Sarısoy, K. Baysal, F. Ekici, B. Ozyilmaz, C. are causally related to the inv dup, and has always associated a termi- Celenk, G. Ogur; nal deletion and an intact segment 8p . Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey. Here we describe a female patient with a dicentric inversion duplica- Down syndrome(DS) is by far the most common and best known chro- tion 4p without any apparent euchromatin deletion . mosomal disorder .The cause is full trisomy 21 in the majority patients The patient was a female newborn, first daughter of a young, healthy (94%) . Mosaicism (2 .4%) and translocations (3 .3%) account for the and non-consanguineous couple . Pregnancy was uneventful, until the rest . Most unbalanced translocations are de novo (75%), and the rest 37th gestational week when a maternal hypertension was diagnosed . result from familial translocation . Here we report 3 cases of Down Syn- The delivery was induced at 38 weeks . At birth she showed micro- drome presented with unusual clinical findings. cephaly, a right cephalohematoma, craniofacial anomalies and skel- CASE 1: 3-month-old infant with DS was cytogenetically diagnosed as etal anomalies of hands and feet . translocation type “der(13;21)” resulting from a Robertsonian translo- High resolution G-band karyotype from peripheral blood lymphocytes, cation of the mother. Radiological evaluation confirmed an asymptom- revealed a “de novo” 4p+ chromosome . FISH analyses with 4p probes, atic Morgagni Hernia . showed that the extra material on 4p was a dicentric inverted duplica- CASE 2: 18-month-old DS patient presented with cleft lip-palate . tion (cen-p16 .3::p16 .3-qter) . Karyotype revealed regular Trisomy 21 . We postulate that a chromatic breakage could have happened at the CASE 3: Cytogenetical analysis of a 2-month-old infant presenting DS very terminal end of the chromosome 4, losing the common telomeric showed 47,XY,+21 karyotype . Physical examination revealed a female region (-TTAAGGG-) but saving the subtelomeric specific region. This external genitalia and inguinaly located bilateral gonads . Ultrasound was followed by U-type reunion producing a dicentric chromosome, confirmed absence of uterus. which after a break at a centromeric region, gave rise to the abnormal Association of DS with cleft lip/palate, Morgagni hernia and androgen dic inv dup 4p chromosome . The abnormal 4p was afterwards stabi- insensitivity is been rarely discussed . To our knowledge 32 cases have lized by the addition of a new -TTAAGGG- repeat sequence mediated been reported so far; and for androgen insensitivity assocition only 3 by the telomerase, but surprisingly this sequence was internal to the cases have been reffered . As up to date no androgen receptor gene centromere sequence . mutation has been identified in similar cases, it is yet not clear whether Acknowledgements: This work was supported by a Grant PI020028 this association is directly correlated . Cleft lip-palate is as well rarely (FIS) . CIBERER, ISCIII . Spain . reported in DS . Coincidental occurence could thus be discussed . P02.138 P02.140 DNA methylation patterns of extra chromosomes in chorionic cytogenetic and parental age study of 545 cases of Down villi cells of missed abortions syndrome in iran.A forty years study O. A. Efimova1, M. A. Andrushuk1, A. A. Pendina2, O. G. Chiryaeva2, L. I. Petro- M. Shariaty1, I. Nabipour2, F. Farzanfar3, S. Beigi2, M. Shariaty1, Z. M. Honar- va2, N. A. Sadik2, V. S. Dudkina2, T. V. Kuznetsova2, V. S. Baranov2; mand1, E. Daei1; 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s 1Medical Genetics Center, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Persian Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Gulf Health Institute, Bushehr, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Distribution of 5-methylcytosine (5-MeC) in human chromosomes re- Department,Cancer Res.Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. veals specific MeC-banding pattern. It remains unknown whether meth- Objective: To determine the karyotypic and maternal age profile of ylation pattern of extra chromosomes is the same as in normal euploid Down syndrome in Iran this study started in 1965 and ended in 2004 . cells or it bears changes of functional significance. We compared DNA Methods: 931 clinically diagnosed Down patients referred to the first methylation patterns of extra chromosomes in cytotrophoblastic cells of author were studied . Peripheral bloods were cultured using Leukocyte missed abortuses with abnormal and euploid karyotypes . Methylation culture method of Moorhead (1) or micro culture technique of Shariaty( patterns of extra chromosomes in trisomies 9,7,13,16,17(one chorion 2) .Giemsa stained mitoses were analysed .Since 1975 G-banded mito- sample for each case), in triploidy(three samples) and tetraploidy(one ses at the 300-450 band resolution were karyotyped sample) as well as structurally rearranged chromosomes were stud- Results: Karyotypes consistent with Down syndrome were observed ied on direct metaphase preparations from cytotrophoblast of human in 545 patients out of 763 case .305 patients were male( 56 per cent missed abortuses at 5-8 weeks of gestation . ) and 240 cases were female(44 per cent ) .66 per cent were born in Indirect immunofluorescence with monoclonal antibodies Tehran while the rest were born across the country .Frequency of free (Eurogentec,Belgium) was applied to detect chromosome regions, en- trisomy 21,translocation 21 and mosaics were 89 .5,5 .3 and 5 .2 per riched in 5-MeC . No difference of 5-MeC signal distribution along chro- cent respectively .the mean age of parents was 34 .67 (SD 9 .14) years mosomes and its intensity between normal and aneuploid/polyploid for Fathers and 28 .49 (SD 7 .71 ) for Mothers . 52 per cent of our cases cells was detected . In either case, 5-MeC-rich sites corresponded to were the result of first or second pregnancies..Only 11.3 per cent had T-,R-bands, short arms of acrocentrics and heterochromatin of chro- consanguineous parents . mosomes 1,9,16 . Methylation intensity in homologues differed only in Conclusion: Our study of 545 cytogenetically proven Down syndrome 9q12 and 16q11 (heterochromatin) in triads and tetrads . patients show a rather different picture regarding age of parents and DNA methylation pattern in structurally rearranged chromosome 7 parity in mothers as compared to the western reports .In our study the (47,XX,i(7)(q10),+i(7)(p10)) was studied . The pattern 5-MeC signal mean maternal age is 28 .4 with peak at 22 while in western countries distribution in both der(7) was band-specific and did not differ from that it is 34.Also 52 per cent of our cases are the results of first or second of the structurally normal one, as well as from homologues in normal pregnancies while 48 per cent are the results of 3rd to 18th pregnan- karyotype . cies Thus, methylation pattern in extra copies of normal and rearranged chromosomes is identical to that in normal karyotypes . Different meth- P02.141 ylation of 9q12 and 16q11 in homologues is more probably due to spe- Pure 20q11.2 duplication: a specific behavioural phenotype? cial role of heterochromatin in cytotrophoblast cells rather than change J. Puechberty1, G. Lefort1, A. Schneider1, A. Chaze1, A. Weise2, T. Liehr2, H. of methylation in aberrant karyotypes . Starke2, F. Pellestor1, P. Sarda1; Supported by CRDF&RFBR . 1Service de Génétique, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 2Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. Pure 20q11 .2 duplication has only been reported once to the best of our knowledge . We report a second case of pure 20q11 .2 duplication in a 9 year-old-girl presenting mainly peculiar behaviour, a few dys- morphic features and no malformations . The proposita was born to non-consanguineous parents with uneventful histories . She was eutro-Cytogenetics  phic at delivery . Minor neonatal problems included polycythaemia and P02.144 neonatal jaundice. During the first months the baby was hypotonic. A syndrome of ectodermal dysplasia and mR due Physiotherapy achieved walking at 16 months . Course was marked by to del(2)(q31.2q33.2): further clinical and cGH-array delayed speech with phonatory difficulties. Academic delay was due characterization mainly to hyperactivity and impaired concentration . At 9 years intel- A. Verloes1, M. Port-Lis2, S. Drunat3, A. Tabet3, B. Benzacken3, L. Rifai4, A. ligence was borderline (IQ:74) . Dysmorphic traits included small dys- Aboura3; plastic ears and a large mouth . There was strikingly happy and jovial 1Robert debré, Paris, France, 2Genetic Unit, University Hospital, Pointe-à-Pitre, behaviour . Karyotype analysis of RHG and GTG-banded blood meta- Guadeloupe, 3Robert debré, Bd Sérurrier, France, 4National Institute of Health, phases showed 46 chromosomes, with an abnormally elongated long Rabat, Morocco. arm of one chromosome 20 . Initial FISH studies (wcp 20, subtelomeric We report a patient with a 23 Mb deletion at 2q23, presenting with 20p and 20q probes and CEP 20 probe) suggested interstitial chromo- severe growth and mental delay, and partial ectodermal dysplasia some 20 duplication . Thorough FISH characterization of the anomaly (hair and teeth involvement) . This recurrent deletion appears to show concluded to partial trisomy 20q11 .2 resulting from an inverted dupli- a consistent phenotype, previously reported in 4 cases . Further pa- cated chromosome 20 . A similar but apparently slightly larger duplica- tients will be necessary to determine which gene in the interval explain tion was reported by Wanderley et al . in 2005 in a 16-month-old boy skin and developmental anomalies . Comparing clinical features from with slightly dysmorphic features and the same happy disposition . This our patient and others who show an overlapping deletion, a common behavioural characteristic could be related to 20q11 .2 duplication . “del 2q32 phenotype” emerge: microcephaly, long face, high forehead, abnormal teeth, low-set ears, midface hypoplasia, high palate, micro- P02.142 gnathia, transparent and thin skin, sparse hair, high frequency of ingui- De novo duplication of 7(q21.2----q32) in a patient: cytogenetic nal hernia, severe development impairment, and behavioral problems. diagnosis and clinical finding Anomalies of hands and feet are also common: this might be caused F. Nasiri1, F. Mahjoubi2; by the deletion of the HOXD cluster which is involved in distal limb 1Blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic morphogenesis . Cleft palate is due to the deletion of the SATB2 gene Republic of Iran, 2Blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, most likely by haploinsufficiency. Both ZNF533 and MYO1B genes are Iran & National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, located in the deleted region . They are involved in neuronal function . Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. These genes may be good candidates for the neurological pheno- Trisomy/duplication of 7q is associated with a characteristic syndrome type which is however not present to date in our patient . Is there a and has been described in published cases . The main clinical features new locus for ectodermal dysplasia on chromosome 2q31q33? This are: frontal bossing , retrognathia, small jaw, low-set ears, dysplastic hypothesis is supported by the observations of Stenvik et al . (1972) ears, deep-set eyes, prominent eyes , strabismus, downcurved up- who described patients with congenitally missing teeth and sparse per lip, small mouth, short hands , stiffness fingers, joint laxity, joint hair and taurodontia. Nails and ability to perspire were not specifically stiffness, scoliosis, reduced muscle tone, hydrocephalus, growth re- mentioned . Levin (1985) saw brother and sister with hypodontia and tardation, strabismus, coloboma of iris, drooping upper eyelid, widely sparse, slow-growing hair . The sister had taurodontia of deciduous and spaced eyes, long eyelashes, short space between eyelids (1-8) . permanent teeth In addition, fingernails and toenails were slow-grow- Here we describe clinical and cytogenetic findings on a 1 year old male ing, thin, and spoon-shaped . No abnormalities in perspiration were child whom referred to our clinic due to developmental delay and hy- noted . (taurodontia, absent teeth, and sparse hair . MIM 272980) potonia . To our best knowledge this report is the first case of a de novo case P02.145 with pure partial duplication of 7 (q21 .2----q32) . A 6qter deletion results in a phenotype of mental retardation and classical cutaneo-articular Elhers-Danlos syndrome P02.143 A. Mosca1, P. Callier1, A. Masurel-Paulet2, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, N. Marle1, M. Rare unbalanced aberration of chromosome 18 in patient with Nouchy3, D. Dipanda4, F. Mugneret1, L. Faivre2; severe dysmorphic features and poor prognosis 1Laboratoire de cytogénétique, CHU le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Service de A. Matulevičienė1,2, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, N. Krasovskaja1, E. Preikšaitienė2, V. Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire Pasteur Kučinskas1,2; Cerba, Val-d’Oise, France, 4Service de Rééducation et de Réadaptation, CHU 1Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, le Bocage, Dijon, France. Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics Faculty of Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS), belonging to a heterogeneous group Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. of inheritable connective tissue disorders, are attributed to mutations The unbalanced aberration of chromosome 18 is very rare chromosomal within a subunit of the Vth chain of the collagen gene . Here, we report rearrangements . We present a patient with rare unbalanced aberration on a 6-year-old patient with history of congenital hip dislocation, major of chromosome 18. He was a first child of the first pregnancy from non- joint hypermobility, fragile and hyperextensible skin, persistent atro- consanguineous parents . His mother was consulted during pregnancy phic scars, and asthenia . Her father and one of her sisters had mild at the Center for Medical Genetics . Risk of congenital malformations joint laxity . She was referred to the genetics department for investiga- for foetus was calculated due to maternal age, gestation and obstetric tions of speech delay, mild mental and growth retardation and minor history . The risk of trisomy 21 was 1:1099 according to the mother’s dysmorphic features . A standard karyotype revealed a 6qter deletion . age . Ultrasound scan was performed at 16th week of gestation . Neither Cytogenetic studies of the parents were normal in favour of a de novo foetal structural malformations nor minor defects or markers of chromo- deletion. A CGH-array (Integragen) is in progress to better character- somal diseases were detected . Triple test was performed at 16th week ize the breakpoints of this deletion . Cerebral magnetic resonance im- of gestation . Biochemical risk of trisomy 21 was 1:55, for Trisomy 18 aging, cardiac and abdominal ultrasounds were normal . It is interesting - 1:1708, for neural tube defects - 1:356 . According to biochemical test to note that two patients with EDS type VII and EDS type II respectively results of trisomy 21 invasive procedure was performed for aneuploidy have been reported with a 6q deletion . None of the genes of this sub- testing by QF-PCR . Test results were negative . At birth the weight was telomeric 6qter region seems to be a strong candidate gene by its 2470g and dysmorphic features were characterized - microcephaly, function for EDS . The review of other cases with chromosome 6q dele- low hairline, hypertelorism, prominent nasal bridge, long philtrum, short tions including the q26-q27 bands did not show any other cases with neck, overlapping position of the fingers, micropenis and corpus callo- EDS phenotype but revealed patients with congenital hip dysplasia . sum agenesis. Expressed respiratory insufficiency was also observed. The death at sixth months was final outcome of this patient. Chromo- P02.146 somal analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed 46,XY,der(18) Encountered chromosomal abnormalities in children with t(4;18)(p14;q12 .2) karyotype . Cytogenetic analysis was performed from epilepst GTG banded metaphases . The resolution level was 400-500 bands . Cy- E. R. Raouf, N. A. Mohamed; togenetic investigation of the parents showed a chromosome aberration National Research Center, Cairo - Giza, Egypt. in mother: she presented a t(4;18) (p14;q12.2). These results identified Objective: Increased evidences of chromosomal aberrations in associ- the exact nature of the unbalanced aberration of our patient . ation with epilepsy suggest a genetic predisposition to the disease . WeCytogenetics  aimed at identifying the frequency of chromosomal aberrations among from abnormal chromosomes followed with DOP-PCR and labeling of children with epilepsy . Methods: Twenty Egyptian children with epi- PCR products in additional cycles of PCR . In patients FISH of these lepsy were recruited for this study . Full history, clinical & neurological microdissected DNA probes painted abnormal chromosome 15(p11 .2- examination together with some investigations (EEG, MRI & CAT) was qter) and 8(q22 .1-qter) . In healthy donors they painted 15(p11 .2- qter) done . Chromosomal analysis using GTG banding and high resolution and 8(q22 .1-qter) . Technique of M-bands with DNA probes derived techniques were evaluated, FISH technique was done to one case from two different mar(15) revealed no additional reorganization in only . Results: Chromosomal aberrations were observed in 3/20 (15%) pericentromeric region of abnormal chromosomes . Obtained data al- of which one case had mosaic interstitial deletion 15(q11q13), the sec- lowed us to described abnormal karyotypes as 46, XX, der(15)t(8;15)( ond case had mosaic inversion 22(q11q13), While the third case had a q22 .1;p11 .2) .The normal karyotypes of both parents led us to hypothe- ring of chromosome 18 . Conclusions : The possibility of chromosomal sis that this der(15) is probably a result of parental gonadal mosaicism . abnormality in cases of epilepsy without apparent etiology and / or as- Different biological father cannot be excluded sociated congenital malformation or witout frank dysmorphic features should be seriously acknowledged . Genetic evaluation including high P02.149 resolution chromosomal study, FISH technique and molecular study MCA/MR Syndrome with (4; 10) (q25; q26) Translocation should be used for proper management and counseling . A. A. Dardir, H. A. Hussein, N. A. Meguid; National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. P02.147 We describe a 52 days boy with low birth weight, sparse scalp hair, induced chromosomal breakage rate in children referred for absent eye brows and eye lashes and bilateral corneal opacities, um- aplastic anemia bilical hernia and anal stenosis . Limb anomalies in the form of bilateral N. Selenti, A. Kolialexi, E. Kouvidi, H. Fryssira, S. Kitsiou, V. Touliatou, E. syndactyly between first, second and third fingers, bilateral lower limb Kanavakis, A. Mavrou; preaxial polysyndactyly and bilateral soft tissue syndactyly between Medical Genetics Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. second and third toes are described . The karyotype of the infant re- Background: Fanconi Anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal instability syn- vealed a unique de novo translocation involving chromosomes 4 and drome characterized by bone marrow failure, developmental anoma- 10, which was confirmed by Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) lies, acute nonlympocytic leukaemia and cellular hypersensitivity to technique, resulting in t(4;10)(q25;q26) . No other patients, to our knowl- cross linking agents such as diepoxybutane (DEB) and mitomycin C edge, with an identical phenotype and chromosomal finding have been (MMC) . However, a number of patients display only minor phenotypic reported . Our report suggests that regions 4q25 and 10q26 may be variations or lack congenital anomalies . involved in the development of the limb anomalies, eye anomalies and Material & Methods: Chromosomal breakage analysis using MMC and other characteristic clinical findings presented in our patient. DEB was performed to differentiate FA from aplastic anemia in 166 children aged from 2 months to 14 years with myelodysplasia with or P02.150 without congenital malformations . Matched for age and sex donors Detecting of gonadal mosaicism for trisomy of chromosomes were used as controls . Peripheral blood samples were analysed with without severe imprinting effects conventional cytogenetic techniques . For clastogen-induced chromo- M. Tahmasebi-Hesari, N. V. Kovaleva; some damage both MMC and DEB were added . A minimum of 150 St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, St. Petersburg, Rus- metaphases per case were analyzed . FA positive was concidered the sian Federation. case in which the percentage of breaks was 7-10 times higher as com- Gonadal mosaicism (GM) may account for both recurrent cases of pared to controls . chromosomal anomalies and appreciable proportion of “sporadic” cas- Results: Incuced breaks were detected in 8/166 patients tested with es . However even in the case of a recurrent anomaly, it is not always both clustogens . Six were diagnosed as FA while the remaining two, easy to discover a suspected GM in the absence of the abnormal line despite the high percentage of clastogenic damage, were character- in a somatic tissue of a carrier . To optimize the testing procedure, we ised as Silver Russell syndrome and Blackfan Diamond anemia re- have conceived the following algorithm . (i) Study on parental origin spectively . 3/6 FA patients presented with congenital anomalies and of the extra chromosome in the trisomic offspring . (ii) Finding appar- 3 only with aplastic anemia . 2/6 FA patients were dizygote twins . No ent non-disjunction (NDJ) is followed by testing the grandparents on relationship was found between the clinical severity of the disease, the parent-of-origin’s side . Presence of two homologs from the same age of onset, and the anemic status . grandparent in the parent-of-origin (uniparental disomy, UPD) and in Conclusions:The present study illustrates that clustogens induced the trisomic proband, would indicate GM in the parent-of-origin . (iii) stress tests provide the means of differentiation between FA and Finding a “new” extra chromosome in the proband is followed by test- «aplastic anemia» and allow for accurate and timely diagnosis to im- ing the grandparents on both sides . Presence of a grandparental ho- plement appropriate therapy . molog not seen in both parents in the proband, would uncover a carrier of GM . Presence of crossovers (“new” allele) may add to uncovering P02.148 both GM and its carrier . Finding UPD or a “new” chromosome/allele in molecular cytogenetic characterization of the same translocation a healthy offspring may also help to reveal the presence of GM in a in two siblings parent . (iv) Parents-of-origin with undetectable GM should receive a T. V. Zolotukhina1, N. V. Shilova1, N. B. Rubtsov2, T. Karamysheva1, Z. G. rigorous multi-tissue cytogenetic investigation for the presence of ab- Markova1, V. A. Galkina1, T. G. Tsvetkova1; normal line . We believe that expenses of labour- and time-consuming 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, testing of families for suspected GM can be rewarded by the opportu- 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. nity of choosing a desirable reproduction strategy . Results of a pilot We are reporting the clinical, molecular cytogenetic studies of two fe- study of 30 families with trisomy 21 offspring will be presented . male siblings of 14 and 6 years, who was refferred for karyotyping because of multiple congenital anomalies and mental retardation . The P02.151 karyotypes of parents were normal . Phenotypes of proband were similar Karyotyping of early passaged human mesenchymal stem cells and included: spine deformaty, mild microcephaly, large nose with high J. Shalygina1, A. Pendina2, O. Efimova1, T. Kuznetsova2, P. Kruglyakov3, E. nasal bridge, micrognatia and crowded teeth . Conventional cytoge- Shvedova3, D. Polyntsev3, V. Baranov2; netic analysis of both siblings using GTG-banding revealed 46, XX,der 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2D.O. (15) karyotype . FISH analysis with mFISH probe kit (MetaSystems), Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian wcp15, wcp 8, telomere specific for chromosome 8 DNA-probes (Ab- Federation, 3Transtechnologies Ltd., Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. bott) was performed to identify derivate chromosome . mFISH showed Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) have a great potential for the origin of the material from the chromosomes 8 and 15 . FISH with a wide range of therapeutic purposes . Their medical application nec- wcp15, wcp 8 confirmed this date and 8q telomere was seen on the essarily requires preliminary passaging . The question of unfavorable derivate chromosome . Thus the derivate chromosome was composed effects of passaging of hMSC on their genome (chromosome) stability from the part of long arm of chromosome 8 and whole chromosome remains controversial . 15 . For detailed karyotype description DNA probes were generated We have studied genome stability of hMSC, obtained from 6 healthyCytogenetics  (according to questionnaire) volunteer donors by bone marrow aspira- At 2 years old the young girl has a normal phenotype with no dysmor- tion . To test genome stability, we performed karyotyping by QFH-band- phic features and no psychomotor retardation . ing technique with AcD-counterstaining . Conclusion: we report on a young child with a large mosaic inv dup(15) First, we made a comparative analysis of hMSC karyotype with that of whose paternal origin was rarely reported and supposed to be the ex- relevant dcPHA-stimulated lymphocytes, cultured under standard con- planation for the good psychomotor development of this child . ditions . Lymphocytes demonstrated normal male or female karyotypes in either donor . Comparative analysis of metaphase chromosomes P02.154 showed perfect karyotype concordance in both hMSC and lympho- the recurrence of pericentric inversions of chromosome 12 in cytes . the tunisian population Second, we analyzed hMSC karyotype at early passages - from 4 to R. Louati1, F. Kallebi1, R. Frikha1, M. Meddeb2, T. Rebai1, N. B. Abdelmoula1; 7 . Metaphase chromosomes were obtained by colchicines treatment 5 1Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of Genetics, Tunis, Tunisia. hours before fixation; 8-15 metaphases were selected for karyotyping We report a recurrent pericentric inversion of chromosome 12 in five in each case . No differences in hMSC karyotype among cells of the Tunisian families . It was ascertained through cytogenetic analysis of 3 same culture as well as among cells from cultures after different pas- men investigated before ICSI treatment for idiopathic infertility and two sages could be detected . No aneuploid or polyploid cells as well as no sisters explored because of IVF attempts failure and recurrent early cells with structural chromosome rearrangements were registered . pregnancy losses. The fifth family was ascertained through a prenatal Thus, no adverse effect of cell passaging on chromosome number or diagnosis because of a familial history of a chromosome 12 inversion their morphology could be detected, advocating for genome stability of in an infertile female member . In these families, there was no familial hMSC at early passages . occurrence of patients with mental retardation or multiple congenital Supported by RFBR . anomaly syndromes, suggesting that unbalanced recombinations seem to be lethal . The same inv(12) was reported by other Tunisian P02.152 cytogenetic laboratories, in association with infertility or recurrent abor- Familial chromosome 9 balanced intrachromosomal insertion tions . leading to offspring with A 9Q34 These pericentric chromosome12 inversions have two different break- F. Girard1, N. Carelle-Calmels1, C. Joumard1, A. Bazin2, P. Kleinfinger2, H. points: inv(12)(p11q12) shown in three families originated from Sfax Freysz3, E. Flori1; town and inv(12)(p12q11) revealed in two families originated from sub- 1Hopital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire Pasteur-Cerba, urbs of Sfax town . Cergy-Pontoise, France, 3Centre Hospitalier de Sélestat, Sélestat, France. This inversion may have an independent occurrence from different Shifts or intrachromosomal insertions represent very rare complex ancestors or has been transmitted from a common founder . Further three-break rearrangements. They are classified in peri- or paracentric more, observation of 2 different breakpoints can be explained by ge- insertions depending on their occurrence within one or two arms . They nomic structure of chromosome 12 which contains numerous duplicat- can be direct or inverted depending on the orientation of the inserted ed and repetitive sequence elements that could mediate the formation segment with regard to the centromere . The normal carriers have a of this recurrent inversion . We propose that pericentric inversion of high reproductive risk . chromosome 12 is a recurrent observation in Tunisian population and We report on a family with a chromosome 9q paracentric insertion dis- need characterization of breakpoints at the molecular level, to ascer- covered through a newborn male referred for cytogenetic analysis be- tain whether the formation of the inversion is mediated by repetitive cause of the association of facial dysmorphism, radio-ulnar synostosis, sequence elements and haplotype analysis, to determine the propor- undescended testes and hydronephrosis . A recombinant chromosome tion of inv(12)s that arose independently and the proportion that share 9 was found . Parental karyotypes showed a paternal intrachromosom- an ancestral founder . al insertion of a part of 9q34 band . By using molecular cytogenetic techniques (CGH-array and FISH), we characterized the break points P02.155 of the insertion . After chromosomal study of the family, four other car- Unexpected prenatal detection of recombinant chromosomes riers of the insertion were found . A prenatal diagnosis could be pro- derived from pericentric inversions: report of two cases posed to a pregnant woman whose husband was a normal carrier and C. Morales1, A. Soler1,2, J. Bruguera3, I. Mademont4, E. Margarit1,2, A. Sán- a 56 year old woman with an unexplained abnormal phenotype was chez1,2; identified as a carrier of the recombinant chromosome 9.We discuss 1Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, the mechanism which have led to this duplication . 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. P02.153 Pericentric inversions, excluding variant forms, are rare chromosomal Paternal origin of a large inv dup(15) supernumerary marker: no abnormalities and have an estimated frequency ranging from 0 .12% abnormal phenotype at 2 years old to 0 .7% . During meiosis, recombination could lead to the formation a. guichet1, p. boisseau2, o. ingster1, s. beziau2, d. bonneau1; of unbalanced recombinant (rec) chromosomes . Two alternative recs 1service de genetique, angers, France, 2service de genetique, nantes, France. are possible: duplication of q-arm and deletion of p-arm or duplica- Inv dup(15) can be classified into 2 major groups according to size, de- tion of p-arm and deletion of q-arm . The probability of recombination termined by presence or absence of Prader -Willi/Angelman syndrome increases with the size of the inverted segment . However, the viability critical region (PWACR) . Small inv dup (15), not containing PWACR of the recombinants depends on the length of the non-inverted seg- seems to have no phenotypic effect where as large ones, containing 2 ments . We report two prenatal diagnoses of fetuses with recombinant or more extra copies of the 15q11q13 region, are associated with ab- chromosomes resulting from parental inversions recently detected in normal phenotype . In those cases, inv dup(15) are maternal in origin . our laboratory . Case 1: CVS was performed on a 30-year-old preg- We report on a prenatal observation with a mosaic marker confirmed nant due to edema, increased nuchal translucency and suspicious of after birth . The proband is the second child of a young, healthy and cardiopathy . The karyotype showed a derivative chromosome 14 with unrelated parents . Prenatal diagnosis performed due to increased fetal partial deletion of q-arm . Subtelomeric MLPA showed 14qter deletion . nuchal translucency at 22 weeks of gestation indicated cytogenetic Cytogenetic analysis of the mother showed that she was carrier of an mosaicism for a supernumerary marker . The low level of mosaicism inv(14)(p11 .1q24) . The pregnancy was terminated and the pathological did not permit to identify it: 47,XX,+mar[3]/46,XX[52] .Normal karyo- examination confirmed tetralogy of Fallot. The karyotype of the fetus types were found in both parents . was described as 46,XY,rec(14)dup(14p)inv(14)(p11 .1q24)mat . Case After birth, the karyotype was analysed on different tissues and all con- 2: CVS was performed on a 32-year-old pregnant due to increased firmed mosaicism for the marker: 45% for blood sample and 25%for nuchal translucency and positive screening for Edwards’s syndrome fibroblasts. FISH studies with commercial probes and BACs probes (1/10) . Cytogenetic analysis showed extra material on chromosome from 15q11q13 region allowed us to characterize the marker as an inv 4p . Subtelomeric MLPA showed 4pter deletion and 4qter duplication . dup (15)(q11q12) including the Prader-willi/angelman critical region . After karyotyping the parents, the father proved to be carrier of an Moreover, molecular studies for parental origin demonstrated a pater- inv(4)(p15 .3-p16q33), so the karyotype of the fetus was described as nally derived inv dup (15) . 46,XX,rec(4)dup(4q)inv(4)(p15 .3-p16q33)pat . First trimester cytoge-Cytogenetics  netic study allows the correct diagnosis of such cases and provides an P02.158 early genetic counselling in patients with high recurrence risk . Jumping translocation in a phenotypically normal male - a study of mosaicism in spermatozoa, lymphocytes and fibroblasts P02.156 E. Iwarsson, S. Sahlén, A. Nordgren; inversions detected in a study of 79920 prenatal and postnatal Dept of Molecular Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden. karyotypes Jumping translocation refers to a rare type of mosaicism, in which C. Hernando, R. Pujol, L. Cusidó, D. Carbonell, M. Rigola, R. Fernández, S. the same chromosome segment is translocated to different chromo- Escorihuela, N. Pujol, J. Barderi, C. Muñoz, L. Maynes, C. Preciado, J. Martos, some sites in different cell lines . We report a case of mosaicism for two S. Leal, O. Casablancas, E. Rodríguez, B. García, M. Cuartero, M. Pleguezu- cell lines, each cell line containing a different de novo Robertsonian elos, J. Hernández, P. Grao; translocation with the common breakpoint in the centromeric region on CERBA Internacional, Sabadell, Spain. chromosome 13, in a phenotypically normal male . The karotype was Inversions are intrachromosomal rearrangements apparently bal- defined as: 45,XY,der(13;13)(q10;q10)/45,XY,der(13;15)(q10;q10)de anced, generally without consequences for the carrier; however, an novo. The relative occurrence of the two clones in lymphocytes, fi- abnormal phenotype may be expressed if a breakpoint disrupts a criti- broblasts and spermatozoa was determined using karyotype analysis cal gene . The observed phenotype depends on the length of the in- and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). Karyotype analysis of verted segment, number of chiasmas produced and the genes of the lymphocytes revealed 57 % der(13;13) cells and 43 % der(13;15) cells involved region . and for skin fibroblasts the figures were almost identical (56 % and The incidence of pericentric and paracentric inversions in general pop- 44 % respectively) . FISH analysis showed 55 % balanced nuclei for ulation ranges from 0,12 to 0,7/1000 and 0,1 to 0,5/1000 in newborns unselected spermatozoa and after swim-up selection the number of respectively . The frequency in the general population is estimated at balanced spermatozoa decreased to 41 % . In addition, 16 % of the un- 1-2% . It is 13 times higher among infertile men than in general popula- selected spermatozoa and 27 % of the spermatozoa after swim-up se- tion . Indeed, these chromosomal abnormalities can perturb spermato- lection carried an additional chromosome 13, indicating a high risk for genesis and lead to the production of unbalanced gametes . trisomy 13 offspring (Table 1) . To the best of our knowledge this is the Out of 79920 cases that came in for genetic counseling during the first study on meiotic chromosome segregation in spermatozoa from last 6 years, we have detected 146 chromosome inversions, exclud- a jumping translocation carrier as well as a Robertsonian der(13;13) ing polymorphic inversions of chromosome 9 . Among these cases, 63 carrier. The reproductive significance of the abnormality and its impli- have been prenatally detected and 83 postnatally, 108 are pericentric cations will be discussed . inversions and 33 cases are inherited . table 1 Results from FISH-analysis of one thousand spermatozoa We have identified inversions for chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Chromosome 13/15 13/15* 13/15* 13/1513/1513/1513/1513/15 10, 11, 12, 14, 18, 20, X and Y . No of signals from chromo- 1/1 0/1 2/1 1/0 1/2 2/2 2/0 3/1 some 13/15 Abnormal phenotype has been observed in 5 postnatal cases (3,4%) . Before swim- 54,80 26,10 15,70 1,80 0,80 0,20 0,30 0,30 In 8 cases, the reason for referral was infertility or miscarriages, none- % of sper- up selection theless ascertainment was primarily incidental . matozoa After swim-up 40,60 30,50 26,60 1,50 - - 0,30 0,50 selection In conclusion, our study has revealed an incidence of inversions in Segregation mode Alternate Adjacent 3:0† Other†† agreement with what it was expected . According to the literature, we *These columns also contain segregation products of the homologous Robertsonian have found that the presence of an inversion is rarely linked with an translocation der(13;13), which are not true adjacent segregation. †Using this two- abnormal phenotype or abnormal progeny, nevertheless caution is colour FISH approach, it is not possible to differentiate between diploid spermatozoa recommended when counseling . and 3:0 segregation as both show two hybridisation signals for the probes used. †Nu- clei with an unexpected combination of signals according to the possible segregation P02.157 modes are classified as other. De novo isodicentric X chromosome: report of two new cases M. Pilechian Langeroudi, C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, F. Farzanfar; P02.159 Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, Low level mosaicism homologous Robertsonian translocation School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic (21;21) in a mother of boy with unbalanced der(21;21) Republic of Iran. S. Teofilova1,2, M. Bulatović1,2, O. Miljanović1,2; Isodicentric X chromosomes with an Xq deletion are uncommon . Phe- 1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology-Clinical Center of Montenegro, notypes are variable and correlate with the existence of mosaic or non- Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Institute for Children s Disease- Clinical Center of mosaic isodicentric X chromosomes and also depend on the amount Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro. of deleted genetic material in the patients . Parents of fetuses and children with unbalanced homologous acrocen- We report two new cases which were referred to our Department due tric rearrangements are rarely found to be carriers or mosaic for the to primary amenorrhea . First case was 20-year-old, 158 cm height, same rearrangements . Carriers of homologous acrocentric rearrange- 54 kg weight and with intermediate IQ . She presented with the typi- ments (Robertsonian translocation) phenotypically normal they are at cal features of Turner syndrome: broad and shield-shaped thorax, very high risk of having multiple spontaneous abortions and chromo- small breasts, wide-spaced nipples, cubitus valgus, short and thick- somally abnormal offspring . Very frequently fetuses with homologous ened neck, low hairline, scant axillary and pubic hair, infantile external Robertsonian translocation arise postzygotic and are of maternal and genitalia . Sonography report showed lack of ovaries and hypoplasia of parental origine . uterus . Her thyroid hormones were normal but her FSH and LH were We report about a fenotypycal healthy woman with low level mosaicism high . Karyotyping was performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes us- for Robertsonian translocation (21;21). She delivered her first child in ing different banding techniques according to standard methods . Her 21 year and he had Down′s syndrome. Chromosomal preparations karyotype was: 46, X, idic (X)(q24) . Chromosome studies of her par- were made and banded using standard tehniques . The karyotype of ents and her three sibs revealed normal . the boy was 46,XY,t(21;21),+21 . After genetic counseling were made Second case was 18-year-old, 155 cm height, 62 kg weight and sub- analysis parents. Father had normal karyotype 46,XY. Mother′s chro- normal intelligence . Her clinical features were: shield-like chest, no mosomes analysis showed very low lavel mosaicism, karyotype 46,XX breast development, widely spaced nipples, pigmented nevi, normal [95]/45,XX,t(21;21) [5],wich was detected becouse analysis made in a neck, absence of axillary hair, limited pubic hair, infantile external geni- large number of cells . talia . Her sonography revealed horseshoe kidney, hypoplastic uterus After prenatal chromosomal diagnostic this woman delivered two and absence of gonads . She had elevated FSH and LH . Her karyotype healthy boys . Fourth pregnancy was aborted becouse prenatal cytoge- was: 45, X [80%] / 46, X, idic (X)(q22) [20%] . Cytogenetic investiga- netic analysis fetus showed unbalanced Robertsonian translocation . tions of her parents and her four sibs revealed normal . Identification of mosaicism allowes for accurate genetic counseling and disussion of reproductive options .Cytogenetics  P02.160 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- characterization of nine small supernumerary marker ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology chromosomes detected in 7,000 fetal karyotypes and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Zahedan University of N. Ploumis1, E. Manolakos2, M. B. Petersen1, H. Kontos1, P. Malligiannis3, A. Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Shahroud Behzisty Or- Bolli4, T. Liehr5, R. Neroutsou2; ganization, Shahroud, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Mashhad Genetics Counselling 1Genomedica, Athens, Greece, 2Bioiatriki S.A., Athens, Greece, 3Embryo Re- Center, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. search Center, Athens, Greece, 4Research Center for Prenatal Diagnosis, Lar- Mental Retardation (MR) has heterogeneous etiology mostly with ge- issa, Greece, 5Institute Of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. netic causes . Chromosomal aberrations are one of the most common Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMCs) are structurally causes of MR and are responsible for 4-28% of all the mental retarda- abnormal chromosomes that cannot be characterized unambiguously tion . In order to identify genes involved in mental retardation, 301 Ira- by conventional cytogenetic banding techniques . Until recently, the nian families with consanguineous marriage and positive family history great variety of marker chromosomes and difficulties with their iden- for MR have been investigated in Genetics Research Center in col- tification presented a problem for the cytogenetic interpretation of the laboration with Max Planck Institute in Berlin . In these families at least karyotype . The risk for an abnormal phenotype is about 7% when de two sibs were affected. As a first step, both chromosome investigation novo sSMCs derived from chromosomes 13, 14, 21, and 22 are ascer- and fragile-X screening were carried out to exclude any abnormality . tained prenatally . Molecular investigations were done on all the normal karyotype and In a Greek survey of 7,000 amniotic fluid samples, nine fetuses with fragile X negative patients . Standard Cytogenetics techniques using marker chromosomes were detected in our laboratory . Using com- high resolution and GTG banding were carried out on all the patients . bined approaches of conventional cytogenetics including special stain- The overall chromosome abnormality rate was 3% (8 patients) . The ing techniques and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we suc- abnormalities included der(18)t(4;18)(q31 .1;q23)mat, der(22)t(21;22 cessfully characterized all of them, which assisted subsequent genetic )(q11;q13), 46,XY karyotype with female phenotype, and premature counseling and decision making . Eight of the SMCs were proven to chromosome condensation in three different MR patients with mi- be of autosomal origin . Of the autosomal SMCs, two originated from crocephaly .However, our abnormality rate is lower than the reported chromosome 15, one from chromosome 9, one from chromosome cases . This is due to biased referral reasons, as all our cases are due 18, one from chromosome 20, and three from chromosome 22 . One to consanguineous marriage and therefore suggestive of autosomal marker chromosome was of sex chromosome origin . Euchromatin ma- recessive inheritance . terial was detected in 7 cases . Five of seven de novo marker chromo- somes were associated with abnormal findings and were terminated. P02.163 Our study demonstrates that molecular cytogenetic characterization Premature chromosome condensation, microcephaly and mental of marker chromosomes detected at prenatal diagnosis, is of crucial Retardation: A report of three large consanguineous iranian significance to risk evaluation and decision making of the couple. families S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, F. Behjati1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Garshasbi2, M. Mo- P02.161 tazacker2, S. Esmaeili Nieh2, S. Abedini1, M. Mohseni1, H. Darvish1, G. Bahrami A complex chromosome 7q rearrangement identified in a patient Monajemi1, R. Vazifehmand1, F. Rakhshani3, A. Zadeh-Vakili3, J. Oveisi3, A. with mental retardation, anxiety disorder and autistic features Naghavi3, G. Mollashahi Sanatgar3, H. Ropers2, H. Najmabadi1; J. G. Dauwerse, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, K. B. M. Hansson, D. J. M. Peters, M. 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation H. Breuning, Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee; Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, We present a 15 year old girl, the second child of healthy parents . Islamic Republic of Iran. The girl is mentally retarded, suffers from a severe anxiety disorder We report three out of a total of 50 Iranian consanguineous families and has autistic features . Her mean IQ was 48 . She has a coordina- affected with microcephaly, growth retardation, and mental retardation . tion disorder and hypotonia. She has small palpebral fissures, simply These three families were unrelated and from northern and southern formed low set ears, abnormal palmar creases, scoliosis, long halluxes parts of Iran . Six members of one family and two of the other two were and her thumbs are proximally implanted . Length and skull circumfer- affected. Parents in all families were first cousins. Chromosome anal- ence were -1 and -2,5 SD respectively . G-banding indicated a de novo ysis using GTG banding technique on the probands showed a high paracentric inversion 46,XX,inv(7)(q31 .3q34) . SNP-array analysis, frequency of prophase-like cells (80%) compared to normal controls however, revealed a ~10Mb, 7q21 .11-7q21 .3 deletion in the paternal (13%) . The morphology of chromosomes was very poor and appeared chromosome . Subsequent FISH analysis with ± 90 BAC/PAC clones fragile, twisted, curly and with raised breakage and overall very un- in the 7q21-q35 region confirmed this deletion, but the expected para- usual looking . This phenomenon is due to premature chromosome centric inversion turned out to be an intra-chromosomal insertion of condensation. Molecular investigation in the first family, using array- the fragment 7q31 .31-q35 into band 7q21 .3 . PAC clone RP4-545C24 based homozygosity mapping and array CGH revealed deletion in the spans the breakpoint in band 7q35, positioning the breakpoint between MCPH1 gene, one of four genes that have previously been implicated the genes NOBOX and TPK1. The 7q31 .31 breakpoint disrupts clone in autosomal recessive mental retardation with mirocephaly . In the RP5-1047E14 and the predicted gene NP079189 . other two families, using homozygosity mapping, linkage to MCPH1 Six other patients with a deletion of 7q21 .1-q21 .3 have been reported locus was suggested . MCPH1 gene is the only microcephaly gene as- previously . They share with our patient the following clinical features: sociated with premature chromosome condensation . mental retardation/developmental delay, microcephaly, mild facial dys- The Cytogenetics findings demonstrating premature entry of cells into morphism, hypotonia, ear anomalies and small palpebral fissures. Our mitosis suggested mutation of genes involved in cell cycle regulation, patient did not show any hearing loss, genital anomalies or growth which was then confirmed by molecular investigation. Our findings deficiency, found in all of the previously reported patients. However emphasize the importance of chromosome studies on patients with none of the previous cases were reported to have anxiety disorder mental retardation and microcephaly . Findings of chromosomes with and/or autistic features . Therefore it is possible that disruption of the premature condensation in such patients implicate mutation in MCPH1 NP079189 gene contributes to the anxiety disorder and the autistic gene, which would therefore warrant further molecular investigations . features in our patient . P02.164 P02.162 Pseudo-Angelman phenotype in two patients with a 2q23.1 cytogenetics Results in 301 consanguineous iranian Patients microdeletion identified by array-CGH with mental Retardation S. Jaillard1,2, C. Dubourg3,2, M. Gérard4, A. Delahaye5, L. Pasquier6,2, C. Du- F. Behjati1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, K. Kahrizi1, R. KarimiNejad2, J. Oveisi3, P. pont4,5, C. Henry1, A. Tabet4, J. Lucas1, A. Aboura4, V. David3,2, B. Benzacken4,5, Jamali4, F. Mojahedi5, I. Bagherizadeh1, J. Ansari1, M. Fallah1, F. Mojtahedi1, S. S. Odent6,2, E. Pipiras5; Abedini1, R. Vazifehmand1, G. Bahrami Monajemi1, H. Darvish1, F. Rakhshani3, 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Rennes, France, 2UMR 6061, IFR 140 GFAS, A. Zadeh-Vakili3, A. Naghavi3, G. Mollashahi Sanatgar3, H. Najmabadi1; Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire,Cytogenetics  Rennes, France, 4Département de Génétique, INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert deletion on 17p13 .3 . Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Département d’Histologie Embryologie Cytogé- Methods: It was realized a double culture of lymphocytes with conven- nétique, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, AP-HP, UFR-USMBH, Paris XIII, Paris, tional banding GTG high resolution, followed by a FISH with the probe France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, Rennes, France. LSI 1 (maps to the 17p13 .3 region on chromosome 17 containing the Background: Genome-wide screening of patients with mental retarda- gene localization of the MDS) . tion using Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) has Results: The fetu´s karyotype is: Male: 46, XY, del (17) (p13 .3) . After identified several novel imbalances. With this genotype-first approach, hybridization with the probe, the SpectrumOrange LSI 1 signal was the 2q22 .3q23 .3 deletion was recently described as a novel micro- present in only one chromosome 17 and the SprectrumGreen LSI deletion syndrome . We report two unrelated patients with a de novo RARA 17q21 .1 signal (control) was present in both chromosomes 17 . interstitial deletion mapping in this genomic region and presenting Male: 46, XY . ish del (17)(p13 .3 p13 .3)(LIS1-) . similar “pseudo-Angelman” phenotypes, including severe psychomo- The parents´ karyotypes are in progress . tor retardation, speech impairment, epilepsy, microcephaly, ataxia and Conclusions: Our results postulate that approximately 90 percent of behavioural disabilities . the patients with MDS phenotype show deletion of the band 17p13 .3 Methods: The microdeletions were identified by array-CGH using oli- but only in a 50 percent of these cases the deletion is visible by gonucleotide and BAC-arrays, and further confirmed by Fluorescence high resolution cytogenetic techniques. The own specificity of FISH In Situ Hybridization (FISH) and semi-quantitative PCR . achieves cytogenetic diagnosis that rarely it is obtained with banding Results: The boundaries and sizes of the deletions in the two patients techniques, unless prometaphasic chromosomes with high number of were different but an overlapping region of about 250 kb was defined, bands would be used . which mapped to 2q23 .1 and included two genes: MBD5 and EPC2 . The SIP1 gene associated with the Mowat Wilson syndrome was not P02.167 included in the deleted genomic region . the results of missed abortus testing from istanbul memorial Discussion: Haploinsufficiency of one of the deleted genes (MBD5 or Hospital EPC2) could be responsible for the common clinical features observed O. Oner, G. Ozgon, C. Aslan, B. Onal, F. Fiorentino; in the 2q23 .1 microdeletion syndrome and this hypothesis needs fur- Genoma Turkey, istanbul, Turkey. ther investigation . INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study is the retrospective data col- lection for patients underwent IVF treatment and spontaneous preg- P02.165 nancy lost between 2000-2007 for missed abortus with indications Etiological investigation of the midline Facial Defects with such as; advanced maternal age (ama), recurrent implantation failure Hipertelorism by molecular and cytogenetic techniques (rif), recurrent pregnancy lost (rpl) and male factor . E. L. Freitas1, S. M. Gribble2, M. Simioni1, E. Prigmore2, N. P. Carter2, V. L. MAT- METHOD: Tissue cultures were performed for missed abortus Gil-da-Silva-Lopes1; materials . Culture developments were observed and underwent har- 1Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 2The Wellcome Trust vesting steps in the optimum timing . Slides were stained with giemsa Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. staining techniques (GTG) and 30 cells were counted . The Midline Facial Defects with Hipertelorism (MFDH) are a heteroge- Between years 2000-2007, tissue cultures were performed to 308 neous and rare group of craniofacial disorders mainly characterized patients in our center . 149 of them were IVF patients, and 159 were by ocular hypertelorism and bifid nose. The pathogenesis of these spontaneous missed abort . conditions is still unknown . All 14 individuals in this study were previ- 38/149 IVF and 48/159 spontaneous missed abort cases had abnor- ously investigated by clinical, dysmorphologic and neurological evalu- mal karyotypes . We also analiysed Trisomy 9, Trisomy 8, Trisomy 4 ation, skull and facial X-rays, computerized tomography and MRI of and Mosaic X in 4 PGD cases .The indications and chromosome analy- the brain, and ophthalmologic and otorhynolaringologic evaluation and sis results of 38/149 IVF cases are represented in the table .1 below . GTG banding . The evaluations demonstrate facial alterations, structur- Table 1 al and functional anomalies of the central nervous system, indicating, Indications Results mainly, cortical migrations errors, perfusion variances and cerebella Trisomy 8 (n=1) RPL involvement . Based upon these observations, we determined an initial Triploidy (n=1) (n=3) molecular investigation strategy . The phenotypes and a review of the Trisomy X/ Trisomy 20 (n=1) literature suggested genes related to face and CNS development such Trisomy 13 (n=1) as SHH, PAX3 and FGF8 may be involved in these disorders . These AMA Trisomy 16 (n=1) genes have been reported to participate in embryological development (n=4) Trisomy 18 (n=1) Trisomy 13/16 (n=1) and are associated with some syndromes with craniofacial anomalies . Trisomy 3 (n=1) Trisomy 13/16 (n=1) The SHH, PAX3 and FGF8 genes were screened by direct sequencing Trisomy 12 (n=2) Trisomy 16/20 (n=1) and however mutations were found . To complement these studies, the Trisomy 13 (n=1) 45,X (n=1) whole genome tiling path array-CGH technique was performed and Trisomy 15 (n=1) 47,XXY (n=1) one deletion was found that affected PAX3 in a familial case .Other RIF Trisomy 16 (n=4) Tetraploidy (n=3) copy number changes were detected and these findings are currently (n=22) Trisomy 18 (n=1) del(1)(q32 .1q42 .1) (n=1) being confirmed by FISH and PCR . These preliminary results suggest Trisomy 19 (n=1) der(14;14),+14 (n=1) our initial hypothesis that developmental genes, such as PAX3, play a Trisomy 20 (n=1) role in the MFDH etiology . Trisomy 22 (n=1) 45,X (n=4) Trisomy 16 (n=1) P02.166 Male Trisomy 4 (n=1) inv(10q) (n=1) Diagnosis of Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) by fluorescence in Factor(n=9) Trisomy 7 (n=1) situ hybridization (FisH) Trisomy 9 (n=1) M. Bassecourt, M. Alcaine, S. Izquierdo, E. Garcia, M. Calvo; Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain. Spontaneous missed abortus results (n=48) Introduction: Mieller Dieker Syndrome (MDS) involves a deletion of the Trisomy 3 (n=1) Trisomy 21 (n=3) chromosomic band 17p13 .3 which contains the gene called LIS 1 (lis- Trisomy 6 (n=2) Trisomy 22 (n=6) sencephaly-1) . It is a syndrome with a very low frecuency, estimated Trisomy 7 (n=1) Triploidy (n=5) in 11,7 cases for each million of births, although the incidence and the Trisomy 8 (n=3) Tetraploidy (n=1) prevalence are probably higher . Trisomy 16 (n=5) 45,X (n=11) Objective: The aim of this study is to report a case from “breast-fed Trisomy 15 (n=5) Mosaic X (n=1) baby” with a extensive record: premature baby, dismorfic phenotype, Trisomy 17 (n=1) lissencephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum and septum pellu- Trisomy 18 (n=1) cidum. Molecular techniques are used to confirm the submicroscopic Trisomy 20 (n=2)Cytogenetics  DISCUSSION: In this study, we present that performing tissue cultures and karyotype growth factor receptor (NGFR) . In our study, chromosomal analysis analysis approve that PGD is a reliable option for the patients with several indications was carried out in the bone marrow sample of 4 years old boy following to have a non-affected offspring. unstimulated cell culture technique . Conventional G-banding analysis of 40 cells revealed multiple complex chromosomal rearrangements, P02.168 48,XY,t(1;15)(p22;q24),add(6q25),add(7q32)x2,t(11p;?),t(11q23),add chromosomal Abnormalities in a Referred Population for (12q24),t(19q13;?),del(20q13),+mar in 98% cells . In addition one te- Karyotype, Role of FISH to Refine the Diagnosis traploid cell was observed . In this case 1(p22) was not deleted but A. K. Kamel, A. M. Mohamed, N. A. Helmy, H. A. Hussein, S. A. Hammad, H. F. translocated to chromosome 15(q24) . Presence of t(11q23) suggests Kayed, M. I. Shehab, A. Gerzawy, M. Eid, H. Afify; the loss of critical heterozygous region . The above abnormality sug- National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. gests advanced stage of the disease and will experience poor progno- The aim of this study was to evaluate the cytogenetic findings in Egyp- sis . However, most of the participating chromosomes and their break tian cases referred for suspected chromosomal anomalies and to clarify points could not be identified due to limited resolution of the technique. the role of FISH to refine the clinical diagnosis. Cytogenetic study was Hence, it has been understood that cytogenetic study could form the performed on 4890 cases referred to Human Cytogenetic Department, primary step for understanding the disease and could further guide National Research Centre . Referrals were grouped into 20 different for employment of molecular techniques for analysis of amplification categories of which genetic counseling represented the highest group and/or deletion of other genes . 19,2% followed by short stature 12 .4%, repeated abortions10 .2%, MCA/MR 10% Down syndrome 9 .2% . Chromosomal aberrations were P02.171 identified in 17.8% of cases, sex chromosome abnormalities repre- Cytogenetic findings in one case of Nijmegen Syndrome sented 22% of the abnormal chromosomes . The most common au- developing Burkitt lymphoma tosomal abnormality was Down Syndrome 52% .In structural chromo- V. Belengeanu1, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1, A. Belengeanu1, M. Banateanu2, some aberrations of autosome, deletion was the most common 6,8% , E. Ormerod3; inversion 6% and translocation 5 .2% .Different FISh probes were used 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timişoara, Romania, 2II Pediatric Clinic, when indicated, It was applied in 10% of referred cases as in cases of Emergency Clinical Hospital, Timişoara, Romania, 3Department of Medical microdeletion syndromes, marker chromosomes, cryptic translocation, Genetics, Ulleval University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. sex chromosomes identification and subtelomeric deletion. Accurate Here we report an 8 years old girl who had post natal growth deficiency, and refine cytogenetics and molecular cytogenetics diagnosis in our microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, partial syndactyly of the second and cases was the corner stone in proper genetic counseling . third toes, susceptibility to infections, leucocitosis, immunodeficiency, adenophathy, but no sign of telangiectasia, ataxia and in evolution de- P02.169 veloped malignancy (Burkitt lymfoma). The first lymphocytes culture characterization of rare karyotype anomaly 45,XX,- from this patient was unsuccessful, which is concordant with other re- 21/46,XX,r(21)by comprehensive FISH: mosaic status and ports from literature. It is known that is difficult to perform cytogenetic constitution of ring chromosome 21 analysis due to the poor proliferation capacity of lymphocytes . From A. D. Polityko1, I. Naumchik1, N. Rumyantseva1, O. Khurs1, E. Jaroshevich1, K. the first culture, 9 mitosis could be analysed, 6 metaphases had a nor- Mrasek2, T. Liehr2; mal karyotype while 3 were incomplete . The second culture revealed 1Republican Medical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute of 16 mitoses, including four incomplete metaphases . Cells rearrange- Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. ments of chromosomes were found in 4 metaphases . Chromosomes Mosaic combination of monosomy 21 and partial monosomy due to anomalies that we found are: isochromosome 11q, int del(7)(q21), ring chromosome 21 is a very rare finding in human karyotype. Here acentric chromosomes and marker chromosome . The images of the we describe a 2,5 years old female who has been referred to genetic metaphases were sent for reevaluation at Ulleval University Hospital department because of multiple congenital malformations (microph- Oslo, Department of Medical Genetics . By combining clinical manifes- talmia, cataract, corneal opacity, cerebellum abnormality, heart defect tations and laboratory findings including cytogenetic findings and tak- (ASD), craniofacial dysmorphias) and mental/growth retardation . Par- ing in account the evolution of the patient we sustain the diagnosis of ents were young healthy non-consanguineous couple . Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome . At the moment of reporting this case, Conventional cytogenetic study of affected child revealed diagnosis the diagnosis of Nijmegen breakage syndrome was confirmed by mo- 45,XX,-21[160]/46,XX,r(21)(p11q22)[160] de novo (parental karyo- lecular analyses . Our patient had developed malignancy in a relative types were normal) . Somatic aberrations of ring chromosome in clone short period of time after she was first investigated and the prognosis with r(21) were not found . is estimated to be poor. This is the first case of Nijmegen Breakage Molecular cytogenetic analysis was performed to characterize the con- Syndrome reported in Romania . stitution of r(21) . Following probe sets were used for that: subtel 21q (Abbott/Vysis), BAC 105E1 (21q21 .1), BAC 143N1 (21q21 .3) . Subtelo- P02.172 meric segment has been deleted by ring chromosome formation, and A child with proportional pre- and postnatal growth retardation, finally r(21) was described as ish r(21)(p12q22)(BAC 105E1+, BAC oculocutaneous albinism and normal intelligence with a 143N1+, subtel 21q-) . 15(q26.2-qter) deletion Possible mechanisms of the mosaic karyotype abnormalities forma- M. Poot1, M. J. Eleveld1, R. van ‘t Slot1, A. A. Verrijn Stuart2, M. M. van Gen- tion, clinical and cytogenetic aspects of examination of the patient, and deren3, R. Hochstenbach1, F. A. Beemer1; data of the literature are discussed . 1Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Department of [Supported in parts by DAAD 325/2007, DFG WER 17/01/06] . Pediatric Endocrinology, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Institute for visually handi- capped children Bartimeus, Zeist, The Netherlands. P02.170 We report on an 8 ½ years old girl with severe pre- and postnatal multiple chromosome abnormalities in a case of neuroblastoma growth retardation, congenital heart malformation, facial asymmetry, R. Sonar, B. B. Ganguly; oculocutaneous albinism, and subluxation of the radial heads . Post- MGM Center for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, New Bombay, India. natal growth was severely retarded and proportionate (height -4 .5 SD, Chromosomal abnormalities play pivotal role in the process of malig- OFC -3SD at 8 years of age) . Her intelligence was in the low normal nant transformation of neural cells which is named as neuroblastoma . range . Extensive endocrinological studies showed a normal growth This malignancy has been studied extensively by various techniques hormone response to glucagon, without high growth hormone levels like cytogenetics, flowcytometry, molecular methods, histopatholgy possibly indicating growth hormone resistance . At 7 years of age ocu- etc. to identify the genetic markers for their classfication and gather locutaneous albinism was diagnosed . The albinotic phenotype was un- information on significant prognostication for selection of appropriate usual because, despite clear ocular and systemic features of albinism, choice of treatment . The most common genetic events associated with the girl did not have foveal hypoplasia, misrouting, or nystagmus . By neuroblastoma are loss of heterozygosity (LOH) for the short arm of GTG-banding a deletion of band 15q26 was found . Array-CGH, using the chromosome 1 (1p), over expression of N-myc proto-oncogene, a 3783 BAC array, revealed a segmental monosomy of the 15(q26 .2- triploidy or tetraploidy, and defects in expression or function of nerve >qter) region, which was narrowed down to a 6 .87 Mb deletion by us-Cytogenetics  ing the Illumina Infinium 317 K SNP array system, and subsequently CONCLUSION: In the present study we analysed a patient with a confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis. The terminal deletion of 21q22 . The clinical manifestations of our patient deletion appeared to have arisen de novo . The IGF1R (insulin-like are mostly consistent with previously reported cases . However, since growth factor 1 receptor) and the NR2F2 genes were situated within, the extent of the majority of these deletions has not been determined, but the OCA2 (oculocutaneous albinism II) gene (formerly called the P though phenotype-genotype correlation is difficult. We therefore rec- gene) was located outside the deleted region. Clinical findings in our ommend that patients with chromosomal abnormalities diagnosed by patient were compared with previously reported cases carrying termi- conventional karyotyping should be reinvestigated by array CGH . nal deletions of 15q26 .2 . This allowed us to expand the clinical pheno- type of terminal 15q26 .2 deletions and to indicate candidate genes for P02.175 several phenotypic features . Partial trisomy of chromosome 10q due to the paternal balanced t(10;22)(q24;p11) P02.173 T. Cora1, H. Acar1, M. Acar1, B. Alımcı1, R. Örs2; Array cGH with genomic DNA extracted from peripheral 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Selcuk Univ, KONYA, Turkey, blood detects overrepresentation of 12p material in a boy with 2Dept. of Pediatri, Medical Faculty, Selcuk Univ, KONYA, Turkey. Pallister-Killian syndrome features The distal part of the long arm of chromosome 10 trisomy is a well S. Uhrig1, A. Obenauf1, U. Gruber-Sedlmayr2, S. Langer3, M. R. Speicher1; defined, but rare syndrome. This chromosomal abnormality is almost 1Institut für Humangenetik, Graz, Austria, 2Abteilung für Allgemeine Pädiatrie, the result of an balanced translocation from the parents . In the present Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Graz, Austria, 3Institut für report, we present a family having a girl with balanced translocation, Humangenetik, Technische Universität München, München, Germany. a healthy girl and a malformed female infant with the pure partial tri- Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is a rare disorder characterized by somy of the long arm of chromosome 10q (q24 leads to qter), resulting multiple congenital anomalies . The cytogenetic hallmark change in from an unbalanced segregation of a paternal balanced translocation PKS is the presence of a supernumerary isochromosome 12p (i(12p)), t(10;22)(q24;p11) . In this patient, physical examination showed to have which is usually limited to skin fibroblasts. Here we report on a 11-year- abnormal phenoty such as microcephaly, small nose, depressed nasal old boy with clinical features suggestive for PKS . Amniocentesis per- bridge, blepharophimosis, micrognathia, hypotonicity and growth re- formed elsewhere did not show any abnormality . At the age of 9 years tardation. These clinical findins are compared with the other previously he developed seizures requiring anticonvulsant treatment . When we described cases with the trisomy 10q in the literature . saw the boy at age 11, he had a coarse face with hypertelorism, a broad nasal bridge, a highly arched palate, long philtrum and promi- P02.176 nent lower lip . On the right forehead and chest were streaks of hypo- Report of a dysmorphic case from IRAN with a new finding, and and hyperpigmentation . G-banding analysis of peripheral lymphocytes structural abnormality in the long arm of chromosome 1. revealed a mosaic karyotype with a small metacentric supernumerary F. Hadipour1, Z. Hadipour2, F. Behjati3,4, Y. Shafeghati3,1; marker chromosome (SMC) in about 30% of metaphases . Array CGH 1Sarem Women’s Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem Women’s using genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood identified overrep- hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Research Center, Tehran, resentation of 12p, however, several 12p-clones showed a balanced Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Sarem Women’s Hospital,, Tehran, Islamic Republic ratio profile, which was not compatible with an isochromosome 12p. of Iran. Therefore, we further characterized the marker by forward painting with Background: Partial trisomy of 1q42 is one of the structural Chromo- subtelomeric BAC-clones for 12p (GS-496A11) and 12q (12q-21K18) . some abnormalities with a distinctive phenotype . While both clones showed regular signals on both chromosomes 12, Material and Method: Here in we report a 1-year-old Iranian girl re- the marker had a signal on only on one end . Hybridising the centro- ferred to our genetics center because of neuro-developmental delay mere specific probe for chromosome 12 both normal chromosomes and dysmorphic findings. 12 and the marker showed unique hybridization signals . At present, Cardinal features were: trigonocephaly, microcephaly, spastisity, sunk- we are using additional clones to characterize this der(12) further . Our en eyes, prominent forehead, low set and malformed ears (with poste- results suggest that array CGH is suitable for the detection of low level rior rotation and abnormal helix), micrognathia, long philtrum, carplike mosaics and may thus complement conventional banding analyses . mouth, frontal bossing, high palate, high nasal bridge, high arched eye- brows, short neck, strabismus, and asymmetric face and locked jaw, P02.174 abnormal and small hands and feet, brachydactily of fingers and toes, molecular cytogenetic study of the partial monosomy 21q flat feet, congenital hearth disease, dysplastic nails, simian crease in L. Nazaryan1, S. Midyan1, R. S. Møller2,3, R. Ullmann4, N. Tommerup2; right hand and abnormal sole in the left hand . 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Wil- Chromosme study: according to the MR, and MCA we carried out chro- helm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Cellular mosome analysis by high resolution GTG banding technique . The re- and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, sult was a structural abnormality, a duplication in1q42 region . Parents 3Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 4Max Planck Institute for Mo- were investigated and they were normal . lecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Conclusion: our study showed that this chromosome Abnormality was INTRODUCTION: Partial monosomy 21 is rare and only a few cases de novo in this case . So, we should consider structural and numerical have been reported so far . Furthermore, the extent of the deletions has chromosome abnormalities in the patients, with MCA+MR . Microceph- not been determined in the majority of these cases, which makes phe- aly is a new finding for this locus, and was not reported before. notype-genotype correlation difficult. In this study we present a 1 year Keywords: Partial trisomy of 1q42, trigonocephaly, microcephaly, old girl with severe neonatal hypotrophy, microcephaly, mental retar- dation, large low-set and deformed ears, wide forehead, strabismus, P02.177 massive nose, long philtrum, wide mouth with thin lips, micrognatia, X chromosome centromere instability: an epiphenomenon of pectus excavatum, spinal curvature and clubfoot . ageing or of Alzheimer disease? METHODS: The patient was analysed using conventional cytogenet- L. Zivkovic1, B. Spremo-Potparevic1, Z. Milicevic2, N. Djelic3, V. Bajic4; ics, array CGH and FISH . Array CGH was carried out using a sub- 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Institute of Physiology, Department of Biology and megabase whole genome tiling path BAC array and the results were Human genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2“VINCA” Institute of Nuclear Sciences, verified by FISH analysis. Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Faculty RESULTS: Cytogenetic analysis of the patient and her parents re- of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Biology, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of vealed a de novo deletion of chromosome 21q22 .11-qter . The deletion Biomedical Research Galenika, Belgrade, Serbia. was further characterized by array-CGH which justified the borders Premature centromere division (PCD) as a cause of improper chromo- of the deletion to 21q22 .12-qter (chr21:35,860,000-46,940,000, hg17) . some separation is found in ageing cells, Alzheimer disease patients, In addition we detected a 0,9 Mb duplication on chromosome 17q12 . various chromosome instability syndroms and cancers . Gender plays Array CGH was also performed on the cytogenetically normal parents an important role in the pathogenesis of AD and can influence the risk and the results showed that the duplication was inherited from the phe- of developing AD . Is PCD a citogenetic marker of this disease, or only notypically normal father . epifenomen of ageing? PCD phenomenon of metaphase chromosomeCytogenetics 0 from peripheral blood lymphocytes were evaluated in 25 sporadic AD segregation (chromosome balanced) was found in 31% blastomeres . subjects (14 females and 11 males) and 25 healthy elderly subjects In unbalanced blastomeres, 39 .4% resulted from adjacent segrega- (14 females and 11 males) . Multifactorial analyses of variance was tion, 15 .5% from segregation 3:1 and 14 .1% of blastomeres were used to assess the freqency of PCD in our samples in correlation to haploid, polyploid or chaotic . No statistical difference between male age ( up to 65, including 65 years vs . over 65 years) and illness (AD and female rates of chromosome abnormalities in both Robertsonian patients vs . olderly controls) . and reciprocal translocation carriers was observed . Comparison of the A statisticaly significant difference was faund in the number of meta- length of translocated chromosome segment and the type of segrega- phase with PCD, X chromosome comparing AD female and female tion revealed a trend for higher proportion of normal blastomeres when controls (P = 0 .02) and in the number of total PCD, X chromosome shorter chromosome segments were involved . in female sample (P = 0 .04) . Our results showed no positive correla- taion with age conserning the X chromosome . These results point to a P02.180 fact that the X chromosome is prepferentially affected in AD cases of Array cGH analysis (two novel deletions) in pigment dispersion women and that the amplification of instability of the X chromosome in syndrome women are not precisely conected to age . R. Mikelsaar1, H. Molder2, O. Bartsch3, M. Punab4; 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Joint-Stock Com- P02.178 pany of Ophthalmic Surgery, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Institute for Human Genetics, congenital Lower Lid Entropion with pericentric inversion 9(p13- Mainz University School of Medicine, Mainz, Germany, 4Andrology Unit, Tartu q12) and deletion in chromosome 10(q23-qter) University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. M. Tanwar1, M. Kumar1, P. Gupta2, N. Pushkar2, R. Kumar1, R. Dada1; Pigment dispersion syndrome (PDS) is an ocular disorder in which 1Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Deptt. of Anatomy, AI- melanin granules from the iris pigment epithelium are distributed IMS, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, throughout the anterior segment on various ocular structures . The AIIMS, New Delhi, India. prevalence of PDS is 2 .5% in whites, and 1 .6% in black population . Entropion is an inversion of the eyelid toward the globe . The lower In half of cases, PDS progresses to pigmentary glaucoma . The etiol- eyelid is more frequently affected and depending on the underlying ogy of PDS is not known. Only one locus for PDS has been identified disorder . Entropion may be either unilateral or bilateral . Congenital at 7q35-q36. We report the first, a 34-year old, male with PDS and a entropion is an extremely rare disorder, usually involves the lower balanced 10;15 translocation, revealed using GTG banding . Molecular eyelids . It is often familial and seen more frequently in Asians . The cytogenetic breakpoints were located using fluorescence in situ hybri- possible causes for this condition include structural tarsal plate de- disation (FISH) analysis at chromosome 10cen and on 15q between fects (horizontal tarsal kink syndrome) and shortened posterior lamella D15Z alphoid DNA (CP5033) and SNRPN (DNA probes from Abbott- (tarsus, conjunctiva, eyelid retractors) . It has been reported that con- Vysis and Oncor) . The proband’s karyotype was interpreted as 46,XY genital entropion is a part of a syndrome involving multiple systemic ,t(10;15)(p11 .1;q11 .1) . Array CGH analysis using the DNA sample of anomalies . A case of primary congenital upper eyelid entropion with the patient was genotyped in duplicate with the HumanHap300-Duo cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and central nervous system abnor- Beadchip (Illumina) . Array CGH analysis did not show altered DNA malities and another with congenital heart defect has been reported . sequences in the breakpoints of the translocation, but revealed two But, to the best of our knowledge there is no report describing the novel deletions in 2q22 .1 and 18q22 .1 . These two CNV regions are genetic background of the disease . We report a patient of congenital not previously described in the Database of Genomic Variants . We lower lid entropion and corneal opacity who was referred to us for cy- suppose that the coexistence of t(10;15) and PDS in our patient is a togegetic analysis . GTG-banding of 50 well spreaded metaphases re- coincidence . However, the deletion in 2q22 .1, where the gene LRP1B vealed an interstitial deletion in chromosome 10 and pericentric inver- has been located, may play a major role in the dysembryogenesis of sion of chromosome 9 . Chromosomal analysis showed 46, XX (57%)/ the eye and cause the disorder . As array CGH showes a number of the 46,XX,del(10q23-qter)(10%)/46,XX,inv(9p13-q12)(33%) karyotype . chromosomal alterations, it is important to use this molecular karyotyp- Most publications suggest that pericentric inversion of chromosome ing in diagnostic laboratories . 9 is a polymorphic variation and its clinical significance is uncertain. Thus our finding raises the possibility that the congenital lower lid en- P02.181 tropion locus may be located on chromosome 10 . This represents a Polymorphic variants and phenotype correlation. Findings in a severe manifestation of the disease. Finally, a workup of this finding is Brazilian reference center suggested and more cases of congenital lower lid entropion needs to C. L. Campanhol1, R. Paleari1, A. Bedone2, K. C. Andrade3, R. Barini4, J. K. R. be screened using cytogenetics Heinrich1; 1Laboratorios Clinicos Especializados CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, P02.179 2Tocogynecology Department/ Faculdade de Ciências Medicas / UNICAMP, chromosome segregation in blastomeres from translocation Campinas, Brazil, 3Ultrasound Unit CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 4Fetal carriers. Medicine Unit and Tocogynecology Department/ Faculdade de Ciências Medi- M. Trková, N. Jenčíková, H. Peková, V. Nedomová, J. Horáček, D. Stejskal; cas / UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, Campinas, Brazil. The Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproduction Medicine GENNET Ltd., Objective: To describe the frequency of polymorphic variants such as Prague, Czech Republic. inv(9), 9qh+, 16qh+ and sattelite increase and associated phenotype Balanced carriers of reciprocal and Robertsonian translocations suffer in a clinical cytogenetics core in a Women´s University Hospital . from reduced fertility and are at increased risk of recurrent spontane- Methods: A retrospective review of the laboratory databases identi- ous abortions or chromosomally unbalanced offspring . During meiosis fied all cases of polymorphic variants from January 2003 to December I, segregation of the translocated chromosomes and their normal ho- 2007 . Clinical records were also evaluated . mologues produces a variety of unbalanced gametes . Preimplantation Results:The total number of cases analyzed in 5 years was 797 . Cy- genetic diagnosis (PGD) offers to the translocation carriers an alterna- togenetic evaluation of prenatal diagnosis cases with abnormal ultra- tive to prenatal diagnosis and a possible pregnancy termination . PGD sound findings were the most frequent (n=602[75,5%]) and showed allows not only selection of normal embryos but also provides unique rates of 73,5% (n=443) of normal karyotypes, 21,8% (n=131) of ab- information about the chromosome segregation . normal karyotypes and 4,7% (n=28) of polymorphic variants . Out of Interphase FISH combining subtelomeric and centromeric probes was 162 karyotypes in women who were evaluated for sex-related disor- used to examine the blastomeres of 126 embryos from 6 Robertsonian ders, 67,3% (n=109) presented a normal karyotype, 23,5% (n=38) (2 female/4 male carriers) and 12 reciprocal translocation carriers (6 presented an abnormal karyotype and 9,2% (n=15) presented poly- female/6 male carriers) . In Robertsonian translocation carriers, 39 .3% morphic variants . Individuals who were investigated for recurrent abor- normal and 53 .6% aneuploid (25% trisomic and 28 .6% monosomic) tions showed a 9,1% rate (n=3) of polymorphic variants among 72,7% embryos were found . Each reciprocal translocation had a different (n=24) of patients with normal karyotype and 18,2% (n=6) with ab- segregation mode, but at least one balanced blastomere was found in normal karyotypes . Abnormal karyotypes included both structural/nu- each translocation . The lengths of translocated segments varied from merical and autosomic/sexual abnormalities . Phenotypes associated 7 .8Mb to 140 .4Mb (4% to 73% of the chromosome involved) . Alternate with polymorphic variants at prenatal diagnosis were cardiac and facialCytogenetics  abnormalities followed by abdominal wall defects, central nervous sys- P02.184 tem and diaphragmatic hernia. Abnormal amniotic fluid volume was Prenatal diagnosis by QF-PcR: a case with partial trisomy of present in 6 cases . chromosome 13 Conclusion: Although polymorphic variants are considered to be silent C. Curcio1, C. Lodrini1, A. Biasi1, C. Melles1, L. Spaccini2, D. A. Coviello1; abnormalities within karyotype analysis, our study showed elevated 1Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Ele- rates of those variants in our reference center if compared to the gen- na, Milan, Italy, 2Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Ospedale Buzzi, Milan, Italy. eral population which might indicate a strong correlation between the QF-PCR is a well established method for the rapid prenatal diagnosis onset of an abnormal phenotype and karyotype polymorphic variants . of the most common chromosomal aneuploidies (chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and sexual) . P02.182 This technique provides fast results and it is coupled with the con- Chromosome bands specially affected in fishermen who ventional cytogenetic analysis on samples of women with ultrasound participated in the clean-up of the Prestige oil spill abnormalities at different gestational weeks, failure of long term culture G. Monyarch Gros1, G. Rodriguez Trigo2, J. P. Zock2, F. Gómez2, H. Verea2, J. and in order to differentiate twins . A. Barberà2, M. D. Coll1, F. Pozo-Rodríguez2, C. Fuster1; Here we report a case of pregnancy with ultrasound findings of multiple 1Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 2Grupo SEPAR-Pres- fetal malformations: QF-PCR performed on amniotic fluid didn’t show tige, Barcelona, Spain. numerical anomalies for chromosomes 18 and 21; it also identified the Context The oil tanker Prestige wrecked and produced contamination presence of two X chromosomes, associated to female sex . of the coast of Galicia (Spain), in 2002 . A great number of people par- About chromosome 13, the three specific chromosome polymorphic ticipated in the cleaning-up tasks . STR markers gave different results: D13S631 and D13S258 located in Objectives To evaluate potential genotoxic effects in lymphocytes of 13q31-32 and 13q21 respectively, suggested a possible trisomy, while the fishermen exposed, we analyzed the presence of chromosome the STR D13S742, located in 13q11-13q12 .1, showed a normal chro- alterations . mosomal pattern . Methodology We analyzed 50 clean-up work and 46 non-exposed fish- The cytogenetic analysis confirmed the presence of an additional ermen from 800 fishermen that were previously interviewed about the marker belonging to chromosome 13 .Although we agree that QF-PCR details of their cleaning-up tasks. The fishermen who were non-smok- cannot substitute the traditional cytogenetic analysis, this case brings ers and in good health were included in exposed (E) group (>15 days out its ability to provide reliable and rapid results even in case of partial of cleaning-up tasks at least four hours per day) and non-exposed chromosomal aneuploidies of the examined chromosomes . (NE) group . The collection of the samples was performed between July 2004 and February 2005 . Peripheral lymphocytes were cultured . P02.185 Breakpoints implicated in chromosomal abnormalities were identified Genomic instability in blood and fibroblasts submitted to by G-banding . controlled cell phone radiation levels. Results Comparison of cytogenetic data between the E and NE groups J. K. R. Heinrich1, A. M. Almeida2; showed significant differences for: (i) the proportion of total chromosome 1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Foundation CPqD, Campinas, Brazil. lesions (E:67 lesions /4,521 metaphases; NE:35/4,859; P= 0.0079), OBJECTIVE To evaluate genomic instability characterized by multiple and (ii) the proportion of structural chromosome alterations (E:92 targets of investigation both in conventional and molecular cytogenet- structural alterations/1,368 metaphases karyotyped; NE:32/1,285; P< ics and apoptosis . The results comprise a 4-year joint project between 0.0001) . Statistical analysis of the 112 breakpoints implicated in these a University and a Research Foundation . chromosomal abnormalities showed that seven bands were specially METHODS: We have investigated the effects of AMPS, CDMA and affected in the E group: 7p15, 7q33, 9q34, 13q32, 16p13 .3, 18q23 and GSM cell phone radiation in cultured blood samples and skin fibro- Xq21 . In addition, in the NE group the bands most affected by the 60 blasts cell lines after radiation exposure in a specially designed ex- breakpoints found were: 1q21, 11q23 and 14q23 . position set up (TEM CELL) at SAR levels from 0,8 to 10W/kg . After Conclusion Participation in clean-up tasks of oil spills may result in the exposition, the cells were applied into different assays such as prolonged genotoxic effects lasting two years after exposure . conventional cytogenetic analysis for structural and numerical abnor- Financial support: FIS (PI070086), SEPAR, Red Respira (ISCIII malities, micronuclei frequency, HER-2, C-MYC and TP53 gene status C03/11; C03/09). through FISH, CGH profile and apoptosis-related proteins. RESULTS: Genomic changes such as chromosomal breaks, trans- P02.183 locations, marker chromosomes and aneuploidy, when compared to Primary ovarian failure associated with pericentric inversion of the controls, were detected in SAR levels above 5W/kg as well as chromosome 3 the increase of micronuclei frequency above 10W/kg. CGH profiles V. B. Chernykh, V. A. Galkina, O. V. Barkova, T. V. Zolotukhina; and FISH analysis did not show a significant difference between the Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, controls and the exposed samples . It was observed a trend for the Moscow, Russian Federation. detection of different genomic instability processes above SAR limits We report on a patient with primary ovarian failure and pericentric of 5 and 10W/kg . inversion of chromosome 3 . Female was referred for genetic exami- CONCLUSION: As genomic instability and chromosome damage are nation because of secondary amenorrhea . Menarche occurred at the frequently related to tumorigenesis, our findings support the hypoth- age of 14 years; menses were irregular and stopped three years later . esis of a dose-dependent positive effect of RF radiation on the genome Patient had no additional clinical signs . At the age of 19 years she’s of cells and also give further evidence to suggest continuous cytoge- height was 167 cm, weight 54 kg . Hormone tests revealed a high level netic investigation of occupationally exposed individuals to SAR levels of LH and FSH, with low level of estradiole (hypergonadotropic hypo- above the accepted international limits . Financial support: FUNTTEL/ gonadism) . Pelvic ultrasonography displayed the hypoplasia of uterus Brazil and ovaries; fallopian tubes were normal . Histopatholgy of gonads re- vealed dysgenetic ovarian tissue with single follicles . Her lymphocyte P02.186 karyotype was 46,XX,inv(3)(p24 .2;q21) . Radioinduced bystander effect revealed in vitro and in vivo in The patient’s mother with similar inversion had irregular menstrual cy- mixed human lymphocytes culture cle . She was reported to have seven pregnancies, two of which have O. V. Shemetun, O. A. Talan, M. A. Pilinskaya; ended with births, and five pregnancies - medical abortions. The oldest Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. sister of the patient was healthy and had regular menses . The karyo- The new methodic approach to investigation of radioinduced bystander types of she’s eldest sister and father was normal . effect in somatic human cells with help of G-banding cytogenetics had A number of genes involved in female germ cells differentiation and been elaborated . The frequency of chromosome aberrations in pro- ovarian cancer have been mapped in both short and long arms of the posed by us model system - “mixed human peripheral blood lympho- human chromosome 3 . Probably, ovarian failure was resulted from this cytes culture” consisted of cells differed on cytogenetic sex markers pericentric inversion . (XX, XY) and some morphological chromosome peculiarities had been studied . It had been shown that joint cultivation of intact lymphocytesCytogenetics  did not influence upon their background frequency of chromosome ents revealed a normal chromosomal constitution, suggesting a de aberrations . Under joint incubation of X-irradiated in vitro (in doses novo rearrangement in the child’s mother . 250 and 1000 mGy) and intact lymphocytes the dose-dependent in- As there is obviously no genetic disease known in the child’s mother, teraction between targeted and untargeted cells had been discovered the translocation is apparently balanced and is high probabilty for the - cytogenetic effect in bystander cells (4 .31 and 6 .13 of aberrations child not to suffer from a genetic disease caused by the translocation per 100 metaphases, accordingly) cultivated with irradiated ones (6 .99 inherited from his mother . After genetic counseling the parents decided and 21 .19 of aberrations per 100 metaphases, accordingly) elevated to continue pregnancy . their background level (2 .27 aberrations per 100 metaphases) . In It is known that for the above translocation the total risk for an abnor- mixed cultures established from unexposed donors and Chernobyl mal pregnancy is about 39% (33,33% abortion; 4,17% stillbirth or early liquidators (with radiation doses in range 1010-2370 mGy) the mean- death; 1,40% unnbalanced offspring at birth) and the chance for an group frequencies of aberrations in irradiated cells were 5 .21±0 .89 per uneventful pregnancy and birth of a chromosomally normal or chro- 100 metaphases, in bystander cells - 4 .05±0 .64 per 100 metaphases . mosomally balanced child about 61% . Due to the existing risk for birth The difference between spectrum of aberrations in exposed and intact of an unbalanced offspring we recommend an early chorionic villus cells had been revealed both in vitro and in vivo - in targeted cells sampling to perform chromosome analysis as soon as possible in a specific cytogenetic markers of irradiation dominated (unstable and next pregnancy . stable chromosome exchanges), as well as in “bystander” cells simple aberrations (chromatid breaks and terminal deletions that can be con- P02.189 sider as the markers of chromosome instability) mainly induced . All case Report: Family reciprocal translocation (8;16) cytogenetic effects had been characterized by essential interindividual M. Burek, L. Letica, I. Tonkovic Durisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, R. Lasan, D. fluctuations. Muzinic, D. Begovic; Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University P02.187 Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. can segregation analysis in spermatozoa of male carriers of a Amniotic fluid sample from 32 year old pregnant woman was taken reciprocal translocation help in genetic counselling? and send in our laboratory to perform prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis E. Van Assche1, W. Vegetti2, M. Bonduelle3, G. Verheyen4, A. Van Steirteg- by standard techniques with GTG staining . Result was karyotype with hem4, I. Liebaers3; reciprocal balanced translocation 46,XY,t(8;16)(p21 .3;q22) . 1Center for Medical Genetics- UZA, Antwerp, Belgium, 2First Department of Parents were referred to our outpatient clinic for genetic counselling . Obstetrics and Gyneacology, Milan, Italy, 3Center for Medical Genetics UZ- They presented the following family history: two female children 8,5 Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 4Center for Reproductive Medicine UZ-Brussel, and 6 years old with mental retardation, husband’s brother and aunt Brussels, Belgium. are also mentaly retarded . Blood samples were taken from both par- Balanced reciprocal translocations (Rcp), the most frequent chromo- ents and chromosome analysis had been carried out on peripheral somal rearrangements in humans are mainly transmitted by one of the lymphocytes by standard techniques with GTG staining . Mother had parents . We used the FISH technique to analyse the chromosomal normal female karyotype . Father had karyotype with the same bal- content of spermatozoa from 20 Rcp carriers . A total of 15375 sperm anced translocation as fetus . It was recomended to reffer their two nuclei were analysed . The mean frequency of normal/balanced and daughters and husband’s brother for cytogenetic study . unbalanced gametes in the carriers was 47 .4% (range 20 .4-89 .6%) Clinical findings of girls were: mental retardation and facial dysmor- and 52 .6% respectively . In 11/20 carriers the frequency of normal/bal- phism . Blood samples were taken from both girls for chromosome anced and unbalanced sperm differed statistically (p<0 .05) . In one car- analysis by standard techniques with GTG staining and Fluorescence rier the frequency of balanced/normal sperm exceeded 75% . In litera- in situ hybridization . Karyotypes of both girls were pathologic with de- ture, reviewed by Benet et al . (2005), 2/84 carriers showed also such rivative chromosome 8, resulting from translocation (8;16) in father: a high %. In our series we observed 3/20 carriers who produced ≥ 70 46,XX,der(8)t(8;16)(p21 .3;q22)pat . It means that girls have partial tri- % of unbalanced sperm . On the other hand, in literature only one such somy of chromosome 16 and partial monosomy of chromosome 8, carrier was found . Based on this information we can tell couples, with which is the reason for their mental retardation . a male Rcp carrier and with normal fertility, that they have a chance of 50% at each conception of giving birth to a child with a balanced/ P02.190 normal chromosome complement . If however recurrent miscarriages translocation (8;12)(p21;p11.2) found at Prenatal Diagnosis keep occurring, sperm analysis may be offered in order to see if they R. Pinto Leite1, M. Souto1, P. Botelho1, A. Nogueira2, M. Martins1, E. Ribeiro1; belong to the carriers who produce ≥ 70 % of unbalanced sperm. In this 1Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2UTAD, case PGD may improve their conception and delivery rate . In couples Vila Real, Portugal. where the translocation carrier has fertility problems (e .g . OAT) PGD The translocations are considered the most frequent chromosomal will probably increase their chance to become pregnant of a child with changes in the human species . Simple reciprocal translocations arises a normal/balanced karyotype . After repeated failures, however, sperm when a two-way exchange of material takes place between two non- analysis may help these couples to decide to use rather donor sperm . homologous chromosomes . They can be “de novo” or familial, with a prevalence of 1:50000 and 1:500 births, respectively . The great major- P02.188 ity of familial translocations between autosomes have no phenotypi- A balanced reciprocal translocation t(3;16)(q21;p13.3) cally effects . transmitted from mother to her offspring We report a case of a 37-year-old pregnant woman with a normal A. R. Stana1, F. M. Nedelea1, G. Peltecu1, M. Bari1, V. Stoian2, B. Guenther3, H. obstetric history . Amniocentesis for cytogenetic evaluation was per- C. Duba3; formed at 16 weeks of gestation . 1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Bucharest, Chromosome analysis of cultured amniocytes with GTL banding Bucharest, Romania, 3General Women and Children Hospital, Linz, Austria. showed a apparently balance reciprocal translocation 46,XY,t(8;12)(p We report a case with a maternal balanced translocation 21;p11 .2)mat - karyotype of parents were referred and demonstrated t(3;16)(q21;p13 .3) detected by prenatal diagnosis at a male fetus . that the mother was carrier of the same translocation . FISH with paint- Prenatal karyotype from cultured amniocytes was performed due to ing probes confirmed the translocation. increased risk for Down syndrome at serological test, without ultraso- Few chromosomal translocations that involve chromosome 8 and 12 nographic anomalies . were reported, but to our knowledge, all are related with other break- For checking if the translocation in the child is de novo or inherited points . A bibliographic review is presented . we performed chromosome analysis in the parents . Those are young and healthy, at the first pregnancy, achieved after a period of aparent sterility . . We have performed karyotypes of the parents and we found the same translocation in the mother . The breakpoints were established using GTG and QFQ staining methods . The karyotypes of the maternal par-Cytogenetics  P02.191 36cm . The girls presented hypertelorism, hypotonia, epicanthal folds, Reciprocal translocations 10;18 in a patient with miscarriages, abnormal fingers, low set ears, and abnormally growth teeth. Echo- menstrual and speech problems cardiography indicated dilation of the aorta . A. Faraj Pour, C. Azimi; Karyotyping after lymphocyte culture at the age of 14 months revealed Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, 46,XX,r(18)(q21 .2qter) . The parent had normal karyotype . School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic The clinical feature of our case is mostly compatible with the other re- Republic of Iran. ported cases of r(18) except the presence of abnormal teeth and heart Reciprocal translocations are usually an exchange of material between problem . This report further contribute to the clinical of the r(18) . nonhomologous chromosomes . They are found in about 1 in 600 hu- man newborns . Such translocations are usually harmless and may be P02.194 found through prenatal diagnosis . However, carriers of balanced re- A girl with ring chromosome 5 ciprocal translocations have increased risks of creating gametes with E. Dagytė1,2, L. Cimbalistienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; unbalanced chromosome translocations leading to miscarriages or 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius children with abnormalities . Translocation between chromosomes 10 University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University and 18 is very rare . A few reports have been published up to now in- Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. cluding one in a patient with two miscarriages and another in a patient We report a girl presenting ring chromosome 5 . The girl was born of with juvenile neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis (Batten disease) . Our case the second pregnancy of healthy, 25 year old mother and 28 year was a 24 year-old woman who was referred to our Department due to old father . The pedigree is otherwise unremarkable with respect to two miscarriages . She had also speech problems including stuttering stillbirths, malformations and mental handicap. The first pregnancy and irregular menstrual periods . She has no problems in lips, teeth, resulted in spontaneous abortion . jaw, nose, palate and hearing . Sonograghy of her uterus and ovaries The girl was born at 37 weeks of gestation . Birth weight was 1895 was normal, and also her hormones were within normal range . g, length was 43 cm, head circumference was 29 cm and chest cir- Family information revealed only stuttering in her uncle . Chromosomal cumference was 26 cm . Dysmorphic features included microcephaly, analysis was made on her lymphocytes, using the standard banding upslanting palpebral fissures, hypotelorism, microstomia, high palate, techniques . Her karyotype was: 46, XX, t (10:18)(p11:p11) . micrognathia, short neck, hirsutism . Abdominal ultrasonography re- vealed no abnormalities . P02.192 Clinical examination at 5 years of age showed weight 11,6 kg (<3 ‰), structural chromosome rearrangements in couples with length 90 cm (<3 ‰), head circumference 43 cm (<3 ‰) . Dysmorphic recurrent spontaneous abortions features included microcephaly, upslanting palpebral fissures, micro- F. Farzanfar1, S. Morovvati2; stomia, mild micrognathia, long smooth philtrum, narrow vermilion, 1Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center neck webbing, low posterior hairline, short toes, broad thumb, mild of Molecular Biology, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic hirsutism . Mental development was normal .Cytogenetic analysis of Republic of Iran. peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed 46,XX,r(5)(pterq35) karyo- Introduction: Several studies have been done to determine the contri- type . Both parents had a normal karyotype . Cytogenetic analysis was bution of chromosome abnormalities in patient with recurrent sponta- performed from GTG banded metaphases . neous abortions . In this study we present a retrospective study of the cytogenetic data in 310 couples with recurrent spontaneous abortions P02.195 registered in Imam Khomeini hospital in Tehran . Observation of satellite association in couples with history of Materials and Methods: Giemsa-banding and Reverse-banding tech- habitual abortion niques according to standard procedures were routinely applied on F. Manoochehry1, F. Mahjoubi12, S. Abdollahy1; peripheral lymphocytes in all patients . 1Iran blood Transfusion Organization Research Centre (IBTO), Tehran, Iran, Results: In our 310 couples with recurrent spontaneous abortions, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran blood Transfusion Organization Re- the incidence of chromosomal rearrangements was 19 (6 .1%) . Of all search Centre (IBTO), Tehran, Iran & Clinical Genetic Dept. National Institute chromosomal abnormalities detected, 42% (8/19) were balanced re- for Genetic Engineering and Biotecnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- ciprocal translocations, 21% (4/19) were Robertsonian translocations, public of Iran. 16% (3/19) were para- or pericentric inversions, 10 .5% (2/19) were X Chromosomal aberrations account for approximately 50% of fetal chromosome aneuploidies, and 10 .5% (2/19) were marker chromo- losses prior to 15 weeks . Human acrocentric chromosomes are fre- somes . Pericentric inv(9)(p11;q13) were excluded because they were quently found in association . This satellite association has been re- considered as a normal population variant . ported to be random by some researchers . However, there are some Conclusion: In this study we found chromosomal rearrangements new reports of possible association between this phenomenon and in 6 .1% of our patients with recurrent spontaneous abortions which idiopathic recurrent abortions . In our institute in order to identify the is much higher than the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in role of chromosomal rearrangements in aetiology of habitual abor- general population . Also in current study the prevalence of autosomal tions, we analyzed chromosomes of some couples with the history rearrangements in females was slightly more than males . of miscarriages . Chromosomal karyotyping analysis was performed on cultures of peripheral blood lymphocytes by using the GTG-band- P02.193 ing method . Sixteen metaphase cells were analyzed for their chromo- clinical features of a case with ring chromosome 18 some constitution in each sample . We found that in 4 patients with M. Zamanian1, F. Mahjoubi2; idiopathic recurrent abortion the incidence of satellite association is 1The Blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, quite high in each cells and in overall . Thus the observation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The Blood Transfusion Organization Research Cen- present study shows that there might be possible association between ter, Tehran, Iran. & National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnol- satellite associations and recurrent miscarriages at least in subpopu- ogy, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. lations of the patients . Chromosome 18 Ring is a rare disorder in which there is loss (dele- tion) of genetic material from one or both ends of the 18th chromo- P02.196 some and joining of the chromosomal ends to form a ring . Associated molecular cytogenetic characterization and Genetic counseling symptoms and findings may vary greatly in range and severity from in some Rare cases of sex chromosomes Abnormalities case to case, depending upon the amount and location of lost genetic A. M. Mohamed1, A. K. Kamel1, I. Mazen1, N. Dessouki2, H. A. Hussein1, M. O. material and other factors . A ring may also be formed without the loss El -Rouby1; of any genetic material . 1National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt. Here we report an additional case of a 14 months girl with r (18) . The We reported on six cases with rare sex chromosomal abnormalities . girl was born at term after an uncomplicated pregnanacy and delivery . Our aim was to use molecular cytogenetics to correlate karyotype Birth weight was about 1 .5 kg, length 48cm, and head circumference findings to phenotype for proper genetic counseling. Two cases pre-Cytogenetics  sented with ambiguous genitalia . The 1st case was reared as male and de novo deletions, one transposition and one pericentric inversion of a had right palpable gonad, uterus and left streak gonad . Its karyotype chromosome 6 in a patient whose karyotype was previously described was 45,X/45,der(X)/46,X,der(X) .ish der(X)t(X;Y)(p22 .3;p11 .3)(DXZ1 by banding analysis as 46,XX,del(6)(q13q15),inv(6)(p11 .2q15) . In ad- +,DYZ3+,SRY+,KAL+,telXp-/Yp-) . The second case reared as a fe- dition to the deletion of band 6q14 detected previously by classic cy- male and had right testis, a uterus and left ovary with some follicles . togenetics, we found two additional microdeletions . The most distal The karyotype was 45,X/46,X,+mar.ish idic(Y)(qter→p11.3::p11.3→ one is a 360 kb deletion in band 6p12 .3, containing the genes RHAG, qter)(wcpY+,DYZ3++,SRY+,telYp-) .The 1st case diagnosed as mixed CRISP1, 2, and 3, and PGK2 . The second deletion in 6p12 .2-p12 .1, gonadal dysgenesis and the second as true hermaphroditism .To our containing the genes PKHD1, IL17, MCM3, EFHC1, and TRAM2 knowledge this is the 1st case of true hermaphroditism with this dis- genes is 1 .15 Mb in size . The deletion in region 6q14 .3-q16 .1, report- tal break points . The other 4 cases presented with primary amenor- ed previously, was mapped more precisely and determined to be 11 .9 rhea and short stature . Karyotype of 3rd case was 45,X/46,X,+mar . Mb in size . It contains 27 genes, some of which are involved in pain ish idic(Y)(pter→q11::q11→pter)(DYZ3++,SRY++).The 4th case had sensation, growth regulation, and tissue modeling during develop- 46,X,der(X) ish. Der(X)(pter→q21::p22.1→pter)(DXZ1+,XIST+,telXp+ ment. The refined karyotype is 46,XX,der(6)(pter◊p12.3::p12.1◊p12.1:: +,STS++), the 5th case had severe short stature and her karyotype was q14.3◊p12.1::p12.3◊p12.2::q16.1◊qter) or (pter◊p12.3::p12.1◊p12.1:: 46,X,der(X). ish der(X)(qter→p11.2::p11.2→qter)(wcp X+, DXZ1++). q14.3◊p12.1::p12.2◊p12.3::q16.1◊qter).The main clinical features of The 6th case had 46,X,der(X).ish idic(X)(pter→q25::q25→pter)(wcpX this 31-year-old women are dysmorphic facial features consisting of +DXZ1++,XIST++,telXp++) . a broad face, prominent glabella, broad nose, and hypertelorism, non- A team of specialists collaborated together to give the proper genetic progressive deficit of motor control, in particular a broad-based slow- counseling and follow-up specially for cases with Y chromosome who motion-like gait, absence of speech development, inability to acquire had the risk of gonadoblastoma .We recommend further investigations and to comprehend theoretical knowledge, and reduced sensitivity to using Array CGH for identification of duplication / deletion in different pain . The rearrangement of chromosome 6 presumably originated in regions of sex chromosomes . a paternal meiosis . By combining the SNP array and FISH data we were able to completely map and to reconstruct this highly complex P02.197 rearrangement in a single chromosome . molecular cytogenetic characterization of a small supernumerary marker chromosome derived from chromosome 11 in a mother P02.199 and a child with distinct phenotypes characterization of a small supernumerary marker J. B. Melo1, E. Matoso1, M. R. Lima2, L. Backx3, J. R. Vermeesch3, N. Kosya- chromosomes using cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic kova4, T. Liehr4, I. M. Carreira1; methods (two case reports) 1Laboratório de Citogenética and Centro de Neurociências e Biologia Celular, M. Miskovic1, T. Liehr2, M. Guc-Scekic1,3, A. Weise2, K. Mrasek2, T. Lalic1, N. Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Instituto Lakic1; Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, 3Center for Human Ge- 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, netics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Institut für Humangenetik Serbia, 2Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, 3Fac- und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany. ulty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are defined as Small supernumerary marker chromosomes(sSMC),defined as ad- structurally abnormal chromosomes that cannot be identified or char- ditional abnormal chromosomes, too small for characterization by acterized unambiguously by conventional banding cytogenetics alone, conventional banding cytogenetics alone,are present in 0 .043% of and are generally equal in size or smaller than a chromosome 20 of newborns and 0 .077% of prenatal cases .About 1/3 of the sSMC are the same metaphase spread . sSMC derived from chromosome 11 are correlated with a specific clinical picture,while most of the remaining rare and, so far, it is not yet clear which regions of chromosome 11 are sSMC have not yet been associated with clinical syndromes . critical and have clinical consequences . We present two cases with sSMC in karyotype which were initially We report a mother and a child with a karyotype 47,XX,+mar[21]/ studied by GTG banding technique.To define origin of sSMC,additional 46,XX[9] and 47,XY,+mar[25]/46,XY[5], respectively . After centromeric molecular cytogenetic methods (FISH) were performed using probe FISH the origin of the sSMC was ascertained as derived from chromo- sets:cenM-FISH and subcenM-FISH Mix for the corresponding chro- some 11 . Subcentromeric FISH revealed the presence of two differ- mosomes . ent shapes of the sSMC in the mother, with apparently the following Patient 1 had a diagnosis of total anomalous pulmonary venous return breakpoints - ish r(11)(::p11 .12~11 .2->q12::)[2]/min(11)(p:11 .12~11 .2- and facial dysmorphism .Here a mosaic karyotype 47,XX,+mar[22]/ >q12:)[7]; and three different shapes of the sSMC in the child 46,XX[11] was detected .The sSMC was characterized as an - ish r(11)(::p11 .12~11 .2->q12::)[6]/r(11;11)(::p11 .12~11 .2->q12:: invdup(22)(q11 .21) .Similar cases were previously reported and the p11 .12~11 .2->q12::)[3]/min(11)(p:11 .12~11 .2->q12:)[4] . The sSMC patient could now clinically be diagnosed as having a Cat-Eye syn- was microdissected and amplified by DOP-PCR. The amplified DNA drome . was analysed by array painting, using fulltilling array specific for chro- Patient 2 was a prenatal diagnosis of 42-years old woman with fetal mosome 11 (with 100-150 kB resolution) . An unexpected result re- karyotype 47,XY,+mar(de novo) .In this case sSMC was characterized vealed an unusual sSMC . A maternal uniparental dissomy of chromo- as an invdup(15)(q11 .1) .According to the literature similar cases didn’t some 11 was excluded . The child presents a more severe phenotype, show any clinical abnormalities .This type of sSMC is the most com- with facial dysmorphisms, strabism, ptosis, mental retardation and mon (appears with 30% frequency) . developmental delay . The mother has a congenital cardiopathy and no It is difficult to predict precisely the phenotypic risk that could be as- apparent mental retardation . sociated with the presence of sSMC .The origin of sSMC is important Molecular cytogenetics techniques are a valuable tool for the accurate factor in determining its possible phenotypic effect .Conventional cy- identification of the genetic origin and content of sSMC, contributing to togenetic techniques are limited .Molecular cytogenetic methods are a better genotyphe/phenotype correlation . necessary in terms of providing the information about marker origin Supported in parts by the Erwin-Riesch Stiftung. and structure .It’s only way to establish phenotype-karyotype correla- tion and discuss the results in genetic counseling . P02.198 Acknowledgments:Supported in parts by the DFG (436RUS17/135/ three de novo deletions, one transposition, and one inversion of 03;436RUS17/109/04,436RUS17/22/06),Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds chromosome 6 in a patient with complete absence of expressive and the Evangelische Studienwerk e .V .Villigst . speech and reduced pain perception M. Poot1, R. van ‘t Slot1, R. Leupert2, V. Beyer2, E. Passarge3, T. Haaf2; P02.200 1Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Institut für the Effect of chromosomal Rearrangements on Gene Humangenetik, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Insti- Expression tut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. A. Reymond1, F. Schütz1, J. Chrast1, M. Delorenzi1, W. A. Bickmore2, L. A. J. Using the Infinium HumanHap300 Genotyping BeadChip SNP array Harewood1; and BAC-based FISH we found three adjacent, but non-contiguous 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzer-Cytogenetics  land, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. is responsible for the elongation of the telomeres, and exists only in The t(11;22)(q23;q11) is the only recurrent non-Robertsonian trans- cancer, stem and progenitor cells . A reduction in telomerase levels was location in humans . Carriers are phenotypically normal, but at risk of observed in HCV patients lymphocytes compared to healthy individu- having progeny with Emanuel syndrome . It is conceivable that this als . large chromatin rearrangement influences the transcription levels of The aim of this study was: 1) Evaluating random aneuploidy rate in lym- genes mapping both near, and distant, to chromosome breakpoints . To phocytes of chronically infected HCV patients compared to individuals test this, we compared gene expression profiles of lymphoblastoid cell who eradicated the virus (remission group) and to healthy controls . 2) lines from 13 cytogenetically normal individuals, to those of 9 balanced Developing new method for measuring relative telomere length . translocation carriers and 4 unbalanced Emanuel syndrome patients . For random aneuploidy, we applied the FISH technique with probes Comparison of unbalanced individuals with controls revealed twice as from chromosome 9 and 18 . For the telomere detection we used the many gene expression changes than the balanced/control compari- PNA telomere kit . son . This was anticipated as individuals are partially aneuploid for both A significantly higher random aneuploidy rate was found in the HCV HSA11 and 22 and are phenotypically affected . Consistently, a statisti- group as compared to the control group, while the remission group had cally significant fraction of the differentially expressed genes mapped intermediate rates between the other tow groups . to these two chromosomes . We observed significantly shorter telomere length in HCV patients Permutation tests showed that, despite being lower, the number of compared to the controls and to the group in remission . We found a differentially expressed genes between the two groups with complete reverse correlation between shorter telomeres and the rate of aneu- genome complements is significantly higher than that observed when ploidy . one compares control samples alone . This suggests that balanced re- Random aneuploidy and short telomeres are two co-existing biological arrangements have a greater effect on gene expression than normal phenomena found in HCV patients; it may represent pre malignant variation even though individuals are phenotypically normal . changes which could play a role in the cascade leading to neoplasia . Interestingly, in balanced individuals, expression of HSA11 genes is affected to a much higher degree than those on HSA22 . We hypoth- P02.203 esize that the position of the derivative chromosomes is altered within A new candidate gene for mental retardation and severe central the nucleus, with derivatives chromosomes being moved to a position hypotonia comparable to the normal HSA22 . This would result in HSA11 genes A. Moncla1,2, C. Missirian1,2, P. Cacciagli1, B. Chabrol1, L. Villard2; being placed into an altered chromatin environment, thus altering their 1La Timone Children’s Hospital, Marseille, France, 2Inserm U910, Marseille, expression . We are currently investigating this possibility . France. We report a female patient affected by mental retardation and severe P02.201 central hypotonia. At birth, the patient had normal parameters. The first New report of an unbalanced Xp/Yq translocation detected in a clinical signs were noticed during the first months of life when she was mentally retarded patient with short stature and icthyosis unable to hold her head . J. Oliveira, N. Oliva-Teles, M. Mota Freitas, R. Santos, M. Pinto, A. Fortuna; At first examination, CT scan, muscle enzymes, metabolic parameters Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães - INSA, Porto, Portugal. (including amino acids and organic acids chromatography), mucco- Deletion of Xp22 .3 causes different X-linked disorders in males; in fe- polysaccharides and thyroid were normal . At one year of age, she males, depending on the X-inactivation patterns or gene disruptions, showed major axial and peripheral hypotonia and she was not able to the phenotype may be variable (Schinzel, 2001) . Patients with dele- hold her head. She was not able to sit and has no tendon reflexes. She tions in this region have been previously reported in a restrict number displayed abnormal and permanent choreic movements . She does not of cases, and presented with distinct combinations of usually non- suffer from epilepsy . Nerve conduction velocity and electromyogram related clinical manifestations such as short stature, mental retarda- are normal . She is not deaf and her EEG and MRI are normal . At age tion, ichthyosis, chondrodysplasia punctata, attention deficit hyper- 3, her OFC is normal, she shows major hypotonia and she is still un- activity disorder, ocular albinism and epilepsy (Lonardo et al ., 2007) . able to hold her head or to roll-over and suffers from oculomotor dys- The phenotype is correlated with the deletion breakpoints on the X praxia . She has no motor autonomy . She can speak 3-4 words and has chromosome and the respectively affected genes . As a result of gene a very good eye contact . sequence similarities between Xp22 and Yq11, homologous recombi- Routine cytogenetic analysis revealed an apparently balanced de nation between these two regions has been suggested as the cause novo t(10;13)(p14;q13) translocation . The molecular characterization of X/Y translocations . of the chromosomal rearrangement shows that a gene is interrupted The authors report on a male patient aged 17 presenting with mild on chromosome 13 . This gene encodes a protein of unknown func- mental retardation, short stature, X-linked ichthyosis and with steroid tion . Preliminary analysis reveals that it is only expressed in brain and sulphatase deficiency. High resolution GTG, QFQ and CBG banding testis, making it a good candidate for the neurological phenotype of revealed the following karyotype: 46,Y,der(X)t(X;Y)(p22 .3;q11 .2)mat . our patient. However, more patients need to be screened to confirm its The study of the parents proved that the translocation was of maternal implication in this new phenotype . origin . PCR-based techniques positioned the centromeric breakpoint between genes VCX2 (Xp22 .31) and AMELX (Xp22 .2) . The analysis P02.204 of the DYS385 marker, located in Yq11 .21, suggested that this region De novo t(1;2)(q25;q21) case with various dysmorphic features is duplicated in the patient . and mental retardation A review of cases described in the literature with similar cytogenetic H. Akin1, O. Kirbiyik1, A. Alpman1, E. Karaca2, O. Cogulu2, F. Ozkinay2; findings will be equally addressed and compared with the present 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, case . The authors highlight the importance of careful evaluation of Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Xp22 .3 deletions in terms of clinical prognosis, follow-up and genetic Turkey. counselling . Translocation is the most clinically significant abnormality of all the structural chromosome rearrangements . Balanced de novo chromo- P02.202 some rearrangements may be found in patients with mental retarda- telomere length and Random Aneuploidy in Hepatitis c patients tion; however their role in the developmental phenotype of the patient A. Amiel1, L. Goldberg-Bittman1, M. D. Fejgin1, R. Hadari2, Y. Kitay-Cohen2; is usually unclear . Loss of genetic material within the breakpoint re- 1Genetic Institute, Meir Hospital, Kfar Saba, Israel, 2Liver Unit, Meir Hospital, gions may be responsible for the phenotype . Kfar Saba, Israel. We describe a 9-year-old boy with various facial dysmorphic features Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is one of the major causes of hepatocellu- such as telecanthus, epicanthic folds, upslanting palpebral fissures, lar carcinoma and has recently been recognized to play a role in the long eyelashes, hypoplastic alae nasi, thin upper lip and high palate . pathogenesis of B-cell lymphoma . Random aneuploidy is one of the In addition, mild mental retardation, developmental delay, bilateral fifth genetic instability parameters observed in cancer . Telomeres are the finger clinodactyly, valgus deformity in the second toe, skin syndactyly end structures of each chromosome . These structures protect from between the second and third toes and pes planus were also present . shortening at each replication cycle . Telomerase is the enzyme which Because of the diagnosis of mental retardation and the physical ab-Cytogenetics  normalities, cytogenetic study was performed . Balanced translocation Republic of Iran. t(1;2)(q25;q21) was detected . His parent’s karyotypes were found to We report a 8-year-old boy with clinical features of Down syndrome: be normal . In the literature no similar breakpoint region has been re- small stature, brachycephaly, flat occiput, small nose, low nasal bridge, ported .Here we point out the importance of this rare translocation that upslanting palpebral fissures, inner epicanthal folds, Brushfield’s spots, may provide a valuable clue to the phenotypic findings and identifica- anomalous auricles, dental hypoplasia, short broad hands, Simian tion of target loci . crease, hypoplasia of midphalanx and clinodactyly of fifth fingers, wide gap between first and second toes, and mental deficiency. Karyotyping P02.205 of this patient showed: t (18;21)(q23;q11 .2) . Cytogenetic studies on his Possible post-meiotic origin of the constitutional t(11;22) parents and his only sister revealed normal karyotypes . A few reports T. Kato1, H. Inagaki1, H. Kogo1, T. Ohye1, M. Tong1, M. Tsutsumi1, B. S. Eman- have been published concerning familial subtelomeric translocation of uel2, H. Kurahashi1; chromosomes 18 and 21, but we could not find any de novo transloca- 1Division of Molecular Genetics, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan, 2Divi- tion of 18/21 similar to our case in the literature . sion Human Genetics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. P02.208 The constitutional t(11;22) is the only known recurrent non-Robert- A comparison of maternal age among fetuses with trisomy 13 sonian translocation in humans . The translocation breakpoints oc- and trisomy 18 cur within palindromic AT-rich repeats on chromosomes 11q23 and I. N. Machado1, J. K. R. Heinrich1, R. G. Paleari2, C. d. Campanhol3, K. C. An- 22q11. In our previous studies, we established translocation-specific drade4, R. Barini4; PCR by using the sequence of the translocation junction fragments 1Cell Culture and Cytogenetic Laboratory, Fetal Medicine Unit, CAISM, Uni- from both derivative translocation chromosomes . Using this method, camp, Campinas, Brazil, 2Cell Culture and Cytogenetic Laboratory, CAISM, we successfully detected de novo t(11;22)s in sperm samples from Unicamp, Campinas, Brazil, 3Cell Culture and Cytogenetic Laboratory, CAISM, normal healthy males, but not in lymphoblasts or fibroblasts. To un- Unicamp, Campinas, Brazil, 4Fetal Medicine Unit, CAISM, Unicamp, Campinas, derstand how this translocation occurs during spermatogenesis, we Brazil. divided sperm samples into small aliquots prior to DNA extraction and Objective: To evaluate the difference of maternal age among fetuses directly performed translocation-specific PCR. Multiplex PCR allowed with trisomy 13 and trisomy 18 . us to detect der(11) and der(22)-specific PCR products of de novo Methods: A retrospective review of the cytogenetic laboratory databas- origin, which were amplified concomitantly from the same aliquots. es identified all cases of prenatally diagnosed trisomy 13 and trisomy This result suggests that the de novo t(11;22) occurs as a reciprocal 18 from January 1997 to December 2007, and maternal age was re- translocation . Further, we changed the combinations of primer pairs, corded . Ages were compared by unpaired t test, with a power of 44 .6% which allowed us to identify dicentric and acentric translocation deriva- because the two groups had no normal distribution . A “p” value < 0 .05 tive chromosomes . Interestingly, these two unusual derivative chromo- was considered statistically significant. somes also appear concomitantly in the same aliquots . Based on the Results: 61 affected fetuses were included: 38 cases of trisomy 18 and fact that almost no unbalanced translocation products were identified, 23 cases of trisomy 13 . The mean maternal age in cases of trisomy 13 we speculate that de novo t(11;22) translocations are likely to arise at was 30 .3 years (16-44 years, sd = 7 .8 years), and in cases of trisomy post-meiotic stages of spermatogenesis . 18 was 29 .9 years (16-46 years, sd = 9 years) . The difference in mean maternal age between these two groups shown a “p” value = 0 .82 . The P02.206 frequency of patients younger than 35 years of age for trisomy 18 was A rare translocation (15;16)(p10;p10) in a normal man 65 .7% (n=25) and for trisomy 13 was 65 .2% (n=15) . H. Reshadi, C. Azimi, Z. Beheshti, Z. Saltanatpouri; Conclusion: Our study showed that the difference in mean maternal Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, age among fetuses affected by trisomy 13 and trisomy 18 was not School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic significant. It was shown a trend of more cases diagnosed in patients Republic of Iran. younger than 35 years old . However, more data are needed to es- Whole-arm translocations result from centric fusion of two chromo- tablish whether this is a true phenomenon or a bias of the population somes (usually nonhomologous), followed by a reciprocal exchange studied . with fusion of entire arms in two derivatives, each with a hybrid cen- tromere . Nevertheless, there are at least two alternatives: that both P02.209 points of interchange will be juxtacentromeric and then each deriva- A case of de novo trisomy 12p tive will conserve its own whole centromere, or that one point will be T. G. Tsvetkova, N. V. Shilova, V. A. Galkina, N. V. Kosjakova, I. A. Mandron, centromeric and the other juxtacentromeric, so that one derivative will T. V. Zolotukhina; have a hybrid centromere and the other will conserve its original but Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. reduced centromere . Although the underlying mechanisms are still We are reporting the clinical and cytogenetic studies on a 6 months-old unknown, detailed molecular analyses have provided evidence that boy who was referred for karyotyping because of distinct craniofacial centromere duplication may predispose to constitutional centric fusion dysmorphic features. Phenotype of proband included: acrocephaly, flat and consequently favour the occurrence of whole-arm translocations . occiput, mid-face hypoplasia, upslanting palpebral fissures,hypoplastic Constitutional whole-arm translocations are rather rare and can be supra-orbital ridges and high narrow palate,dysplastic ears, brachy- identified in either a balanced or unbalanced state. Most individuals dactyly, broad thorax and pectus excavatum . Psychomotor and mental with balanced forms have a normal phenotype, but may be subfertile . retardation was marked . Conventional cytogenetic analysis of patient In contrast, patients with unbalanced whole-arm translocations have using GTG- banding revealed 47,XY,+mar karyotype . Supernumerary abnormal phenotypes . Here, we describe a 34-year-old healthy mar- marker chromosome ( SMC ) resembled 21q or 12p and had AgNOR ried man who was referred because of consanguinity . His wife and on short arm . The karyotypes of parents were normal . FISH analysis first child were healthy and they wished to have a second child. Chro- with LSI 21(21q22 .13-q22 .2) and WCP 12 DNA -probes (Vysis,Abbott) mosomal studies were carried on lymphocyte cultures using G-band- and DAPI contrstaining was performed . SMC was LSI 21-, WCP12+ . ing . All mitoses showed a reciprocal whole-arm translocation (15;16) . FISH analysis showed that SMC was composed of chromosome 12p The karyotypes of his wife and his child were normal . Other family and short arm of one of acrocentric chromosomes . Inverted DAPI- members were not available for study. Literature review confirmed that staining revealed that short arm of the SMC contained only hetero- t(15;16) is very rare . chromatic DNA and NOR of acrocentric chromosome . Therefore we proposed that this part of SMC has not a pathological phenotype ef- P02.207 fect . An adverse effect on the phenotype is caused of a de novo tri- A rare de novo translocation (18;21)(q23;q11.2) in a patient with somy 12p . Probably this chromosome is a result of parental meiotic Down syndrome mutation. Use of FISH with high-specific DNA-probes increases the F. Farzanfar, C. Azimi; quality of cytogenetic diagnosis and allowes one to base further rec- Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, ommendation for genetic counseling School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, IslamicCytogenetics  P02.210 tion . NT thickness was 2,92 mm (1,95 MoM), PAPP-A was 0,31 MoM clinical features of a case with trisomy 10q and monosomy 3p and β-hCG was 0,6 MoM. The combined risk for trisomy 21 was >1:50 resulting from a maternal balance translocation: A case report and for trisomy 18-1:61 . The ultrasound scan at 16 weeks showed and review of clinical features asymmetrical fetal growth restriction and congenital heart disease - F. Mahjoubi1, M. Akbary2, S. Kareeme3, G. Babanohammadi3; tricuspid valve atresia, pulmonary atresia, hypoplastic right ventricle . 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetic Dept., Tarbiat The parents opted for termination of pregnancy at 20 weeks of gesta- Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran tion . Medical Genetic Laboratory, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Re- The amniocentesis was performed for quantitative fluorescent poly- public of Iran. merase chain reaction and karyotype analysis . QF-PCR tests results Here we describe clinical and cytogenteic data on 2 year female child were negative for chromosomes 13, 18 and 21 trisomies . Chromo- with partial trisomy for the distal part of the long arm of chromosome some analysis of lymphocytes revealed 47,XY,+22 karyotype . Fluo- 10 (10q22-->qter) and a concomitant monosomy 3(p25-->pter) as a rescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed using microdele- result of a maternal balanced reciprocal translocation . Her karyotype tion probe localized to 22q11.2. FISH analysis confirmed the trisomy was ascertained as 46,XX,der(3)t(3;10)(p25;q22) . The father had nor- of chromosome 22 in the proposita . In view of these results parental mal karyotype . The mother had an apparently balanced translocation chromosome analysis was not requested . involving chromosome 3 and 10 [46,XX,t(3;10)(p25;q22)] . To our best knowledge, this is the second reported case of partial trisomy 10q and P02.213 partial trisomy 3p and first reported case from Iran. Clinical features of complete trisomy 5p due to paternal transmission of this case and a few published cases will be reviewed briefly. chromosome 5 centric fission products G. Kalnberza, I. Teilane, Z. Krumina, A. Dzalbs, R. Lugovska; P02.211 Medical Genetics Clinic, University Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia. Partial duplication of chromosome 16p: narrowing of the critical In humans stable centric fission of chromosomes are rare event, and region responsible for the common phenotype only few families are reported with this chromosomal aberration . To our G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, M. E. Grimaldi1, R. Lecce1, V. Leuzzi2, G. Neri1, M. opinion this is the first report of centric fission of chromosome 5 in sev- Zollino1; eral generations . Complete trisomy 5p also is very rare chromosomal 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, abnormality. Clinical findings of trisomy 5p are macrocephaly, facial dys- Italy, 2Department of Child Neuropsychiatry, Università “La Sapienza”, Roma, morfism, hypotonia, tracheobronchial abnormalities and heart defects. Italy. We describe a newborn boy was born in 40 weeks of gestation from the Clinical descriptions of almost 50 patients with trisomy 16p, encom- third pregnancy as second child in the family. The first child was healthy passing the band 16p13 .3, have been reported to date in literature . girl, and the second pregnancy ended with spontaneous abortion during Phenotypical features commonly associated to this chromosomal al- 10 weeks of gestation . Birth weight was 3700 g, height 54 cm, HC - 40 teration are: severe developmental delay/psychomotor retardation, cm. After delivery hypotonia, some respiratory difficulties, cephalohae- growth retardation, seizures, microcephaly, cleft palate, mild flexion matoma in parietooccipital region were observed . All sutures of head contractures, clubbed feet, genitourinary abnormalities, congenital were widely opened . Phenotypicaly the patient had low situated ears, heart defects, a specific facial appearance and, usually, a poor prog- short palpebral fissures, a single crease. The patient died from respira- nosis . tory infection at 5 month . We report the case of a female patient (aged 16 years) with moderate Routine chromosome analyses (GTG-banding) were performed on to severe mental retardation in which we disclosed, by the means of peripheral blood lymphocytes of proband, his parents and grandpar- array-CGH (BAC-array at a resolution of 1 Mb) a cryptic tandem dupli- ents . The karyotype of proband showed complete telocentric trisomy cation of chromosomal region 16p13 .3, sized about 2 Mb . 5p: 47,XY,+der(5)(pter→p10:). The cytogenetic analyses of father and The main clinical features were: psychomotor retardation, very limited his mother (proband’s grandmother) revealed centric fission of chromo- speech, relative microcephaly, narrow forehead, deep set eyes, nar- some 5, thus the karyotypes was 47,XY,-5,+fis(5)(p10),+fis(5)(q10) and row palpebral fissures, wide nasal bridge, long philtrum, rounded nasal 47,XX,-5,+fis(5)(p10),+fis(5)(q10), respectively. tip, thin upper lip, midfacial hypoplasia, a protruding mandible, dysmor- phic and low-set ears, tapering fingers, clubbed feet. The patient never P02.214 had seizures . Atypical turner syndrome due to structural chromosomal Our patient’s duplication is the smallest one reported to date with clini- rearrangements - clinical and cytogenetic study of 9 patients cal features that resemble very closely the characteristics of larger I. C. Ivanov1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, M. Gramescu2, V. E. Gorduza2, R. 16p trisomy cases . We highlight, however, the relative mildness of our Popescu3, C. Bujoran3, L. Negura1, E. Carasevici1, M. Covic2; patient’s phenotype . 1Immunology and Genetics Laboratory-St Spiridon Hospital, iasi, Romania, We suggest that genes included in this 2 Mb region on 16p13 .3 should 2(2) University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Medical Genetics Department, iasi, be responsible of the main pathological findings of “trisomy 16p syn- Romania, 3(3) Sf Maria Children’s Hospital - Medical Genetics Center, iasi, drome”, such as mental retardation, typical facial appearance, micro- Romania. cephaly, hands and feet abnormalities . Turner’s syndrome is the most common chromosomal abnormality in Remarks about the possible causative role of different gene mapped females, affecting 1:2,500 live female births . It is due to the total or in the region and comparisons with other microduplication phenotypes partial absence of an X chromosome in a female . The most consistent mapped on other regions on chromosome 16p are made . clinical features are short stature and ovarian failure . A variety of chro- mosomal abnormalities are associated with Turner syndrome . P02.212 We present the cases diagnosed in Iasi Medical Genetics Center be- Prenatal findings: a foetus with trisomy of 22 chromosome tween 2000-2008 with atypical Turner syndrome due to structural chro- B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, N. Krasovskaja2, V. Kučinskas1,2; mosomal rearrangements, in order to discuss cytogenetic diversity of 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty of Vilnius Uni- Turner syndrome . Cytogenetic study was performed using peripheral versity, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hos- lymphocytes with G banding . pital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. Between 2000-2008, our Cytogenetics lab has performed 1380 karyo- Trisomy of chromosome 22 is very rare chromosomal pathology, par- types, 27 being recorded with the diagnosis of Turner syndrome . Out of ticularly in the second or third trimester of pregnancy . We present a 33- these, 9(33 .3%) were due to structural chromosomal rearrangements . year old para I, gravida IV woman . She was consulted at 12 weeks of Abnormalities identified were: iXq ( 7cases) and r(X) (2cases). gestation due to aggravated obstetric history . Her previous pregnancy Clinical and cytogenetic data are compared with literature data for was terminated at 19 weeks of gestation due to fetal meningocele . Af- each case . Typical and particular features are discussed . ter three years patient delivered a normal boy . The recurrent risk for In conclusion, we present 9 cases diagnosed with atypical Turner syn- meningocele was about 2% . For other congenital malformations risk drome due to structural X chromosome abnormalities, in order to illus- was the same as population risk . Fetal NT and maternal serum bio- trate some rare variants and to discuss particularities and cytogenetic chemistry (PAPP-A and β-hCG) was assessed at 12 weeks of gesta- diversity of Turner syndrome .Cytogenetics  P02.215 DISCUSSION: This study provides the importance of chromosome analysis for female cytogenetic analysis of turner syndrome patients applied to IVF center who had the infertility indications mentioned above. L. Letica, R. Lasan, I. Tonković Đurišević, K. Crkvenac Gornik, M. Burek, D. According to results, patients who were resulted as translocation carriers were sug- Begović; gested to undergo PGD. Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. P02.217 Turner syndrome is caused by the absence of all or part of the second case report: a balanced translocation between chromosome X sex chromosome . In our study on 100 female patients clinically diag- and 13 nosed with Turner syndrome: L. Minaycheva, N. Sukhanova, L. Nazarenko, S. Vovk, V. Timoshevsky, I. 46 patients were 45,X Lebedev; 10 patients were mos 45,X/46, XX Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. 2 patients were mos 45,X/47, XXX/46,XX We report a 1 year and 9 months patient who was referred to the 8 patients were mos 45,X/47, XXX Tomsk Institute of Medical Genetics with the diagnosis of multiple 31 patients had a structurally abnormal X chromosome (mainly iso- congenital malformations and neuropsychic development delay . She chromosome, deletion p or q arm, ring X chromosome) and 2 patients had microcephaly, deformation and asymmetry of the skull, absence had a structurally changed Y chromosome of the part of the left parietal bone . Flat, wide and protuberant bridge The phenotype is variable and includes short stature and gonadal dys- of nose («the Greek profile»), hypertelorism, epicantus and bilateral genesis . Mental retardation is not a feature of Turner syndrome . cleft palate were observed. Palpebral fissures of the various size were Conventional cytogenetical G-banding method and Fluorescence in located asymmetrically . The philtrum was short and exposed the upper situ hybridization technique were considered in cultured peripheral incisors that were set in a “rabbitlike” forward slant . Deep neurologic blood . and behavioral development delay and epilepsy were noted . Stan- Postnatal recognation of the syndrome requires genetic counselling of dard cytogenetic analysis have revealed a balanced rearrangement: parents and supportive multidisciplinary treatment . 46,X,der(X)(pter→Xcen),t(X;13)(Xqter→Xq12::13cen→13qter), -13. Dual-colour FISH with DXZ1 and D13Z1/D21Z1 probes allowed to re- P02.216 fine localization of centromeres in chromosomes involved. As a result the importance of women karyotyping in assisted reproduction two derivatives were described. The first was presented by der(X) with G. Ozgon1, O. Oner1, C. Aslan1, B. Onal1, F. Fiorentino1, G. Karlikaya2, H. Kara- short arm of X-chromosomes and centromeric heterochromatin . The gozoglu2, S. Kahraman2; second one was a consequence of translocation between long arms 1Genoma Turkey, istanbul, Turkey, 2Memorial hospital, istanbul, Turkey. of chromosomes X and 13. The influence of both derivatives to pheno- INTRODUCTION: Recent researches show that the infertility is related type can be realized through two mechanisms, including manifestation to both male and female genetics . Patients, who applied to our center, of X-linked recessive mutations under releasing of X-inactivation and evaluated according to their indication and karyotypoes . spreading of X-inactivation to autosomal segment with subsequent Karyotpye analysis was applied for the patients with the indication functional monosomy . Our patient has not revealed any symptoms such as; recurrent implantation failure (RIF), recurrent pregnancy lost of X-linked disease but clinical features of partial monosomy 13 . This (RPL), male factor and abnormal fetus history, female factors (primary finding allows to suggest X-inactivation spreading mechanism that is amenore) . under investigation . In this study, we aimed to demonstrate karytopes evaluation of the women who were referred to our cytogenetics laboratory . P02.218 MATERIAL- METHOD: Chromosome preparations were made from A report of a XYY man with mental retardation, prognathism, and 72-h PHA-stimulated cell cultures from peripheral blood . Cell division short stature was synchronized by a pulse of thymidine administered 21 h prior to S. Akbaroghli1, F. Mahjoubi2,3, M. Akbary4; harvesting . The thymidine block was released by washing the cells in 1Dr. Akbaroghli Genetic Counseling Centre, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic fresh culture medium (RPMI 1640),also prewarmed to 37°C, for 3,5 h Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33Tehran Medical prior to harvesting . The culture was harvested using colcemid for 50 Genetic Laboratory, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of min prior to harvesting . At least 20 GTG-banded (Giemsa stain) meta- Iran, 4Medical Genetic Dept., Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, phase cells were analyzed for each patient . Islamic Republic of Iran. RESULTS: Here we report a 24-year-old man referred to our laboratory for evalua- Table 1 tion of possible Fragile X syndrome on the basis of mental retardation . The patient was found to be negative for Fragile X . But he was found to Indications Total Normal be 47 XYY from chromosomal examinations . On clinical examination Mosaic X (n=15) the patient was found to have dysmorphic facial features, prominent inv(9) (n=7) ears, long fingers, short stature, crowded teeth, high arched palate, RIF 360 342 inv(10) (n=1) prognathism, low nasal bridge, large testes, and speech problem . balanced translocation (n=4) We have reported previously another case of XYY male with mild men- Translocation carrier (n=10) tal retardation, prognathism and malformation of nails and hands . The Inversion (n=6) RPL 308 282 common features of this new case with the previous one are mental Mosaic X (n=8) retardation and prognathism . mar (n=1) Male Factor 44 43 Mosaic X (n=1) Abnormal Fetus P02.219 24 23 Balanced translocation (n=1) Story Prevalence of gr/gr deletion among Iranian azoospermic infertile men Female Factor 18 18 S. Rahmani1, H. Fazli2, R. Mirfakhraie1,3, M. Montazeri1, M. Golalipoor4, J. Jafari Aghdam5, S. M. Kalantar2, F. Mirzajani3; Table 2 1Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Is- PGD Candidates’ Normal lamic Republic of Iran, 2Research & Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Total Indications(n=261) Karyotype Republic of Iran, 3National Institute For Genrtic Engineering & Biotechnology, AMA 60 56 Mosaic X (n=4) Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Grgan University of Agricultural Sciences & RPL 24 23 Mosaic X (n=1) Natural Sciences, Gorgan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Islamic Azad University, RIF 82 77 Mosaic X (n=5) Tehran North Unit, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Male Factor 27 27 Number of microdeletion in the AZF locus of Y chromosome which Mosaic X(n=2) itself is divided in to three discrete regions (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc) has Translocation Carrier 43 6 Translocation carriers been demonstrated to play important role in impaired spermatogen- (n=37) esis . The most frequent deletions are known to be occurred in AZFcCytogenetics  region of AZF locus and different prevalence of the partial deletions P02.222 were reported in different populations . An azoospermic man with a rare sex chromosome mosaicism In present study, we have screened 50 nonobstructive azoospermia S. Afshar, C. Azimi, F. Farzanfar; men and 50 fertile men for gr/gr deletion of DAZ gene . Tow AZFc-spe- Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, cific sequence-tagged sites were examined using multiplex PCR meth- School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic od . The prevalence of gr/gr deletions in patients and controls samples Republic of Iran. were 32% (16/50 cases) and 6% (3/50 cases) respectively . The differ- Among numerous etiologic factors, chromosomal aberrations play a ence between two groups was significant (p-value: 0.011) Our results prime role in male infertility accompanied by abnormal semen . The pa- suggest that gr/gr partial deletion is more frequent in infertile men and tients with most severely compromised sperm counts have sex chro- may be correlated to the Iranian male infertility . mosome aberrations including aneuploidy and the presence of marker chromosomes . Some patients have evidence of mosaicism as detect- P02.220 ed in their peripheral blood karyotypes . Here, we report a 28-year-old Y chromosome microdeletion screening in infertile men in patient with a rare sex chromosome mosaicism . His chief complaint serbia was infertility secondary to azoospermia . Chromosome investigations M. L. Ristanovic1, V. Bunjevacki1, I. Novakovic1, A. Nikolic2, C. Tulic3, M. Maj- were performed on cultures of peripheral blood lymphocytes using kic1, A. Mircic4, D. Radojkovic2; GTG-banding and HR-banding techniques . His karyotype showed:47, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical faculty, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, XXY / 47, XYY / 48, XXYY . The origin of the error that leads to this Serbia, 2Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Egineering, Belgrade, mosaicism is likely to be paternal nondisjunction at meiosis I in one Serbia, 3Institute of Urology and Nephrology, Medical faculty,University of Bel- cell lineage, at meiosis II in the second line, and at both meiosis I and grade, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of Histology and embryology, Medical faculty, meiosis II in the third cell lineage . This was the only case with this kind University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. of mosaicism observed during the last 20-years of work in our Depart- The purpose of this study was to evaluate frequency Y chromosome ment, and no similar cases were found in the literature . microdeletions in Serbian men with azoospermia and severe oligo- zoospermia . Initially, 206 infertile patients were included in the study P02.223 and spermogram has been performed in order to determine the sperm 20-year chromosomal studies among the iranian infertile men density . Patients were excluded if clinical evidence of obstructive azo- C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, F. Farzanfar; ospermia or known cytogenetic defects were present . The screening Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, for Y chromosome microdeletion was performed in 176 selected pa- School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic tients by multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method on DNA Republic of Iran. extracted from peripheral blood . The following STS markers were Chromosomal aberrations have been postulated to be as one of the tested: sY 84, sY 86 (AZFa); sY 127, sY134 (AZFb); sY 254, sY 255 principal genetic factors in male infertility and occur in about 2-3 % (AZFc). Amplification found to be negative were repeated at least two of unselected patients with proven subfertility . This rate is estimated times to confirm the deletion of given marker. The presence of dele- to be 5-7 % in patients with oligozoospermia and increasing to 10-15 tions was correlated with patient’s sperm concentration, and hormonal % in patients with azoospermia . In this 20-year retrospective study parameters .In 6,1 % men with sperm concentration less than 1x 106 we investigated 829 men which were referred to our Department due /ml a Y chromosome microdeletions were detected, comparing to 8,5 to infertility . Karyotyping was performed on peripheral blood lympho- % in azoospermic men . The most frequent deletion was AZFc . Conclu- cytes according to standard methods .Out of 829 patients, 557 patients sion: The clinical correlation of spermatogenic impairment to the differ- (67 .19 %) had a normal karyotype and 272 patients (32 .81 %) showed ent AZF region deletions may provide the useful information for genetic abnormal chromosomes .Klinefelter syndrome, found in 195 patients counseling of infertile couples . (23 .52 %), was the most frequent aberration in our study .The remain- ing 77 cases ( 9 .29 %) showed the following abnormal karyotypes: P02.221 Karyotype Number Genetic studies in 50 patients with Functional Azoospemia 47, XXY 195 C. J. Trujillo1, S. Ashour1,2, S. B. El-Badawi1; 48, XXYY 4 1Erfan & Bagedo, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. mos48, XXYY/47, XXY/47,XYY 1 mos48, XXXY/47, XXY/46, XY 4 The present study investigates the number of molecular and cytoge- mos47, XXY/46, XY 9 netic defects in a population of 50 azoospermic men, (age 33 .36 range mos45, X/46, XY 7 26 to 50) from the Western Region of Saudi Arabia from January 2006 mos47, XXY/ 46, XX/46 .XY 7 to December 2007. Functional azoospermia was defined as total ab- mos46,XX/46 .XY 5 sence of spermatozoa in ejaculate, with normal vas deferens and with- mos45, X/46, X, del(Y)(q10) 2 out obstruction . mos47, XXY/45, X/46 .XY 4 mos46,XY, t(7;13)/46, XY 1 Cytogenetic analysis was performed in peripheral blood culture . GTG- 47, X, i(X)(q10)Y 3 banding of 20 metaphases was done . FISH with X centromeric (CEP 46, X, add(Y)(p11 .3) 7 X), Y centromeric (CEPY), SRY LSI probes was used . In all cases of 46, X, del(Y)(q11) 6 mosaicism 500 cells were scored by FISH . 46, X, r(Y) 2 Y microdeletions were detected by multiplex PCR according to the Eu- 47, X, t(X;Y)(q10 q10) 2 ropean Molecular Genetics Quality Network guidelines for Yq deletion 46, X, t(Y;14) 2 testing, using gene-specific primers that covered all three regions of 46, XY, t(14;22) 1 47, XYY 2 the azoospermic factor (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc) . This included sY84, 46, XX (sex reversal) 5 sY86 for AZFa; sY127, sY134, for AZFb; sY254, sY255 for AZFc . 46, XY, inv(9) 3 Chromosome abnormalities were observed in 16 cases (32%), in- Total 272 cluding 47,XXY karyotype in 11 cases, three mosaic (one 47,XXY/ 46,XY/45, one 47,XXY/46,XY and one 46,XY/45,X) . One patient was P02.224 46,XX male, SRY gene was detected by FISH . One patient had a ter- Analysis of heteroploidy frequency in sperm from man with minal deletion of chromosome 19p13 . Y microdeletions were found in chromosome rearrrengmants three cases (6%): two with AZFc, and one with both AZFc and AZFb . I. Fedorova1,2, E. Shilnikova2, O. Chiryaeva1, L. Petrova1, V. Dudkina1, T. Genetic abnormalities were determined in 38% of azoospermic cases, Smirnova3, M. Bogdanova3; which is higher than the usual reported figures between 15% to 30%. 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa- Genetic testing is indicated to determine etiology of azoospermia and tion, 2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medi- to choose ART strategies and the offering of prenatal diagnosis in the cal centre “InAlMed”, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. indicated cases . Structural chromosome aberrations detected on metaphase plates from peripherial blood limphocytes lead to increased risk of chromo- some abnormal progeny . Analysis of chromosome segregation in sper-Cytogenetics 0 matozoa from carriers of chromosome aberrations allows to under- 47,XXY[82]; stand peculiarities of meiotic divisions and get information about risk of 46,XX[11]/47,XXY[36];46,XY[6]/47,XYY[38];46,XY[10]/46,XX[26]/ conceiving chromosome inbalanced offspring . 47,XXY[61]; FISH with specific DNA probes heteroploidy fraquency was scored in 46,X,del(Y)(q );46,X,inv(Y)(p ;q ) . 11 . 23 11 . 2 11 . 22 decondenced sperm from 3 patients with chromosome aberrations: We have found some patients with complex structural and aneupoloidy 46,XY,t(2;3)(q33;q29) - case 1; 46,XY,inv(4)(p12q21),inv(10)(p11q21) abnormalities: - case 2 and 45,XY,der(13;14)(q10;q10) - case 3 . × 46,XX,inv(9)(p q )/47,XXY,inv(9)(p q )[4] 11; 13 11; 13 In case 1 disomy frequency of chromosome involved in this rearrange- × 47,XXY[93]/48,XXY+mar[4]/48,XXXY[2] ment increased (up to 3,01%) . In case 2 disomy frequency of inverted × 47,XXY,inv(9)(p q ) 11; 13 chromosome (0,9%) was compared to this one the of other autosomes × 47,XXY,t(1;17)(p q ) 36 .1; 21 (1,06% for chromosome 7; 0,9% for chromosome 9) . Frequency of × 46,X,del(Y)(q )[98]/45,X[6] 11 . 2 diploidy was higher in patients with robertsonian (case 3) and recopro- × 47,XXY,inv(9)(p q )/t(10;22)(q q ) 11; 13 26 .3; 13 .1 cal translocations (case1) (1,48% and 2,05%, respectively) compared × 46,X,idic(Y)(p q )[27]/45,X[36]/46,XY[2] 11 .32 ; 11 .32 to patient with invertions (0,54%) . Frequency of heteroploidy are in We believe that many infertilities especially severe oligospermic and agreement with spermiological analysis (WHO standard): patients azoospermic cases raise the need for a cytogenetic analysis besides 46,XY,t(2;3)(q33;q29) and 45,XY,der(13;14)(q10;q10) feature oligoast- molecular techniques to reveal the existence of any genetic abnorma- enozoospermia, in contrast to patient 46,XY,inv(4)(p12q21),inv(10)(p1 lities. 1q21) having astenospermia . Our data suggest that spermiological analysis can be linked to the P02.227 karyotype abberations and carriers of chromosome aberrations with meiotic studies in spermatocytes from fertile males decrease of sperm concentration have poor fertility prognosis . L. Uroz1, O. Rajmil2, C. Templado1; Supported by CRDF and RFBR . 1Unitat de Biologia Cel·lular i Genètica Mèdica, Facultat de Medicina, Universi- tat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 2Servei d’Andrologia, Fundació P02.225 Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. A Y chromosome with three short arms in a male with a BACKGROUND: Meiotic chromosome abnormalities are associated 45,X/46,X,psu dic(Y) karyotype with male infertility . However, little is known about meiotic process in K. Hansson, K. Szuhai, J. Knijnenburg, F. Hes, E. Bakker, J. Smit, W. vd Ende, men of proven fertility . We carried out meiotic studies in spermatocytes M. Hoogenboom, C. Knepflé, K. Madan; to establish the base line level of meiotic abnormalities in fertile males . Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Testicular biopsies were obtained from We report a case with an unusual pseudo-dicentric Y chromosome with 11 fertile males aged 30-47 . Meiotic spreads were prepared by the air- three short arm segments. When the male patient was first referred for drying technique and cells were stained with DAPI . RESULTS: Meiotic karyotyping because of hypogonadism and mental retardation more progression was analysed at pachytene, metaphase I and metaphase than 30 years ago, he was found to have a mosaic karyotype with two II stages, counting 1,000 pachytene spermatocytes per individual . All cell lines, one 45,X and the other with an abnormal non-fluorescent Y males showed a normal meiotic progression, with a proportion of meta- chromosome . The father had a normal Y chromosome . At the age of phase II to metaphase I higher than 0 .5 . A total of 848 spermatocytes 47, the patient was referred again for cytogenetic analysis because at metaphase I was studied . The overall percentage of dissociated sex of his mental retardation . Mutation analysis in connection with thyroid chromosomes was 21 .7% . Autosomal synaptic abnormalities were dysfunction revealed a thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRb) germline found in 0 .9% of spermatocytes I (medium-sized bivalents with one mutation . FISH studies revealed a complex rearrangement with an chiasmata or small bivalents as two separated univalents) . Only 0 .2% alternating pattern of Y short and long arm material: short-long-short- of the spermatocytes I analysed were hyperploid . Hypoploidy was not long-short . Using probes for the subtelomeric regions two signals with evaluated, since it could be due to technical artefacts . The percentage the Ypter probe was found whereas no signal was observed with the of structural chromosome aberrations per individual ranged from 0% to subtelomeric Yq probe . Two signals were also found using probes for 5 .8% . The total mean chiasma frequency was 51 .0, ranging from 48 .7 the centromeric region and the SHOX gene . In contrast, FISH with to 53 .0 . CONCLUSION: The incidence of meiotic abnormalities (both a probe for the SRY gene revealed three signals on the abnormal Y chromosomal and synaptic abnormalities), as well as spermatocyte chromosome: two on the short arms of the dicentric and an extra sig- distribution and chiasma count in fertile males could be used as refer- nal in the short arm segment situated in the middle of the rearranged ence data in further studies on males with idiopathic infertility . Y chromosome . DNA-studies are in progress to further elucidate the Acknowledgements: This work received financial support from The nature of this complex Y chromosome rearrangement . Generalitat de Catalunya (2005SGR-00495, 2005FI00399) P02.226 P02.228 cytogenetic Analysis of infertile iranian men increased autosomal structural aberrations in human S. Soleimani1, M. Zamaniyan1, M. Montazeri2, F. Nasiri1, F. Mortezapoor1, M. spermatozoa regarding age Rahnama1, F. Mahjoobi1; C. Templado1, A. Donate1, J. Giraldo2, O. Rajmil3, M. Bosch1; 1The Blood Transfusion Organization Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub- 1Unitat de Biologia Cel·lular i Genètica Mèdica, Facultat de Medicina, Uni- lic of Iran, 2NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. versitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 2Unitat de Bioestadistica Male infertility factor accounts for about half the cases of couple in- and Institut de Neurociències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, fertility . Spain, 3Servei d’Andrologia, Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. Some of the chromosomal changes (aberrations) which seem effective Background: Although most of de novo structural aberrations are pa- in men infertility include: ternal in origin, little information is avaible on the relationship between 1 . Balanced chromosomal translocation advanced paternal age and structural chromosome abnormalities in 2 . Chromosome inversion human spermatozoa . Objective: To explore the age effect on the fre- 3 . Marker chromosome quency of structural abnormalities in human spermatozoa . methods: 4 . Sex chromosome abnormality Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with a panel of 62 specific Our investigation provides the circumstantial and direct evidences probes was used in spermatozoa to screen all 22 autosomes for dupli- which confirm the importance of the sex chromosome in reproductive cations and deletions . Sperm samples were collected from 10 healthy disorders . We have analyzed (7years study) 845 blood samples from males: five males aged 24-37 (mean age 27.8 years) and five males infertile men which 617 of them were oligospermic and azoospermic . aged 60-74 (mean age 66 .4 years) . A total of 150,000 sperm nuclei Constitutional chromosome aberrations were diagnosed in 278 of were scored by multicolour FISH, analysing 1,000 spermatozoa per these patients . We have observed 29 .2% chromosomal abnormality in donor and per autosome . Results: The frequency of structural ab- azoospermia men that is compatible with the data from literature . normalities per individual ranged from 4 .2% to 7 .8% . The mean per- The following abnormal chromosome complements were found: centage of autosomal duplications was significantly greater (P < .05) 46,XX;47XXY;47,XYY;48,XXXY;45,X[10]/46,XY[134];46,XY[4]/ in older donors (4 .5%) when compared with that in younger donorsCytogenetics  (3 .3%) . This increased frequency of duplications in older donors could their impact on the semen parameters corroborated with mitochondrial correspond, at least in part, to an excess of acentric fragments in mutations and DNA integrity would help to provide a deep insight into their spermatozoa . Chromosome 12 was the only autosome with an the understanding of the OS induced infertility and thus in better man- increased level (P < .05) of structural aberrations in relation to age . agement of such cases . conclusions: Our results indicate an association between advanced paternal age and increased risk in offspring for de novo autosomal P02.231 unbalanced structural aberrations . cFtR gene mutations and tt-polymorphism in infertile men of This work received financial support from The Generalitat de Cata- Russia lunya (CIRIT, 2005SGR-00495) and The Ministerio de Educación y T. M. Sorokina, L. F. Kurilo, S. A. Kazakova, A. A. Stepanova, V. B. Chernykh; Ciencia (SAF2004-06134), Spain Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Cystic fibrosis conductance transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene P02.229 mutations are common genetic cause of male infertility. Cystic fibrosis, A two chromosome inversions 46,XY,inv(4)(p12q21),inv(10)(p11q congenital bilateral and unilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD 21) associated with spermatogenetic failures and CUAVD syndromes) lead to azoospermia or severe oligozoosper- E. Shilnikova1, I. Fedorova2,1, N. Sadik2; mia . Also CFTR mutations are associated with reduced sperm quality 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s in men who do not present CF phenotype . Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. We investigated a cohort of 568 men from Russian infertile couples . Chromosome aberrations carriers are often affected by reproductive Fourteen common CFTR mutations (del21kb, ΔF508, ΔI507, 1677del- failures, including spontaneous abortion and newborns with chro- TA, 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821delT, L138ins, G542X, mosome abnormalities, due to production of genetically unbalanced W1282X, N1303K, R334W, 3849+10kbC>T) and TT-polymorphism in gametes . But such patients do not exhibit any particular phenotypes . A the intron 8 (IVS8T) have been analyzed . man from infertile couple was studied to determine the karyotype and CFTR mutations were found in 25 out of 568 (4 .4%) patients . Following spermatogenesis failures . mutations have been revealed: ΔF508 (n=9), del21kb (n=5), W1282X Using QFH-banding technique and FISH with DNA probes specific to (n=5), 2143delT (n=2), 2184insA (n=1), G542X (n=1), R334W (n=1), chromosome 4 and 10, we detected karyotype with two pericentric in- 1677delTA (n=1) . The 5T allele frequency was 10 .6% in examined pa- versions: 46,XY,inv(4)(p12q21),inv(10)(p11q21) . There were no chro- tients . This allelic variant has been revealed in the heterozygous (n=52 mosome anomalies in the karyotype of his twin brother (46,XY), their cases), in the homozygous (n=3 cases) and in the compound hetero- parents were not available for genetic analysis . zygote state with common CFTR mutation (n=5 cases) . The combined Semen parameters (concentration, motility and morphology) were frequency of CFTR mutations and 5T allele was 7 .6% in infertile men analyzed according to WHO criteria . Motile spermatozoa amounted to cohort . 25% with other parameters being normal (asthenozoospermia) . Also All patients with CFTR mut/5T and 5T/5T genotypes had a diagnosis of Quantitative Karyological Analysis of Immature Sex Cells (QKAISK) in azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia . Two azoospermic men with ejaculate was performed to determine the stage of spermatogenesis CFTR mutations had extragenital features of cystic fibrosis (chronic block . Partial block of spermatogenesis after MI division and delay of bronchitis or a chronic pancreatitis) . In one severe oligozoospermic karyokinesis was detected . Frequency of diploid and disomic sperma- patient with CFTR mutation the CUAVD syndrome associated with re- tozoa was identified using multicolour FISH with specific DNA probes nal abnormalities has been diagnosed . to chromosomes 9 and 10 . Frequency of aberrant chromosome diso- my did not differ from that of normal one and totaled 0,9% . Frequency P02.232 of diploid spermatozoa was 0,54% . modelling reduced male fertility in mice This study confirms the necessity of complex cytogenetic somatic cells E. Bolcun-Filas, R. Speed, M. Taggart, H. J. Cooke; and gametes analysis for patients with chromosome aberrations to cal- MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. culate the risk of genetically unbalanced offspring more precisely . Human fertility is highly variable and a substantial part of that variation Supported by CRDF and RFBR . is genetic . The phenotype is hard to measure and involves input from two individuals making whole genome association studies difficult if P02.230 not impossible to design robustly . Candidate gene approaches based correlation of Antioxidant Enzyme level with mitochondrial on a knowledge of the underlying processes of gametogenesis have mutations in North indian infertile men had only limited success. This is a reflection both of the large number M. B. Shamsi, S. Venkatesh, R. Kumar, S. Arora, D. Arya, R. Dada; of genes thought to be required, particularly for sperm production, and AIIMS, New Delhi, India. the likelihood that the majority of mutations are recessive requiring Oxidative damage to spermatozoa is a well known potential cause of rare homozygosity for a mutation at any one locus to produce a phe- infertility . The balance between antioxidants and pro-oxidants is es- notype . sential . Optimum levels of free radicals (Reactive Oxygen Species) Recognising this we have asked if compound heterozygosity at genes are important physiological mediators in normal sperm functioning . An- encoding proteins required for meiosis can be a factor . SYCE1 and tioxidants as Glutathione Peroxides, Glutathione Reductase (prostatic SYCE2 are proteins of the meiotic Synaptonemal Complex . We have origin), Superoxide Dismutase (prostatic and epididymal origin) and shown that SYCE2 is essential for male and female fertility in mice Catalase (multiglandular origin) prevent oxidative stress (OS) . Free and here we show that this is also true for SYCE1 . Heterozygous null radicals induce mitochondrial DNA damage especially in genes reg- animals are fertile in the case of both genes . Mice heterozygous for ulating Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and result in impaired both null alleles have a ten fold elevation in XY asynapsis and also an sperm function and spermatogenesis . increase in unpaired autosomes . Lack of pairing is predicted to result In an ongoing study the correlation between the enzymatic antioxi- in cell death and a consequent reduction in sperm count . We observe dants, malonaldehyde (product of lipid peroxidation) in the seminal a reduction in sperm count of up to 40% showing that compound hemi- plasma and in blood serum was done , the results were further cor- zygosity in genes involved in the same pathway can have a significant related with semen parameters and mitochondrial DNA integrity . Re- impact . sults showed significant correlation between SOD in blood serum and sperm concentration (r=0 .699, and p= 0 .008) . Positive correlation was P02.233 observed between the seminal SOD, sperm count and progressive Gene expression profiling of normal and pathological testis by motility . These results are in accordance with several previous stud- microarray analysis ies . No correlations could be established between the seminal MDA, V. Gatta1, F. Raicu1, A. Scioletti1, A. Ferlin2, G. Palka1, C. Foresta2, L. Stuppia1; blood serum MDA and semen parameters. In these cases a significant 1G. D’Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti, Italy, 2University of Padova, Pa- high number of mitochondrial mutations in the OXPHOS genes were dova, Italy. observed . This may explain for low sperm count and motility defects Microdeletions of the AZFa, AZFb and AZFc loci on Yq are detected in in our patients . about 10% of infertile males . Despite the large amount of data collected The analysis of antioxidant levels in seminal plasma and blood and in the last years, the biological mechanisms leading to the disruptionCytogenetics  of spermatogenesis in Yq deleted patients are still largely unknown . In to have Y chromosome microdeletions . The AZFc region was the most this study we analyzed by microarray technology the testis expression frequently involved region in affected subjects . One of these subjects profiles of patients with idiopathic infertility, patients carries of AZFc showed microdeletion in all 3 regions(AZFa, AZFb, AZFc) and one deletion and controls (patients with obstructive azoospermia), in or- subject had microdeletions in both AZFb and AZFc regions . Other 5 der to obtain useful information about the specific genes involved in subjects had microdeletions in only AZFc region . All subjects having each different pathological condition . Using the hierarchical clustering microdeletion were azoospermic . average method in 27 microarray experiments we identified in AZFc In conclusion, cytogenetic and molecular study should be performed deleted patients two main gene clusters showing different expression to obtain reliable genetic information for the genetic counseling of pri- patterns as compared to normal controls and patients with idiopathic mary infertile man . Y chromosome microdeletion diagnosis is useful infertility . Analysis of these gene clusters using IPA software revealed in decision making for assisted reproductive techniques because the an interesting down-regulated gene network directly related with sper- association between some deletions and residual spermatogenesis matogenesis, with the most significant network centred around YBX2 capacity has been proven . gene (Y box binding protein 2), involved in RNA storage during game- togenesis . This alteration is responsible for the downregulation of the P02.236 protammine1 and 2 genes evidenced in the same nethwork analysis . Oxidative stress and mitochondrial DNA mutations in In the expression profiles comparative analysis between controls and Oligoasthenoteratozoospermic patients AZFc deleted patients we also observed an interesting downregula- S. Venkatesh, R. Kumar, M. B. Shamsi, M. Tanwar, D. Pathak, R. Dada; tion of the CREM pathway, which is a master controller gene for sper- Laboratory for Molecular reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, matogenesis . This suggests that impairment of RNA storage and dys- All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. regulation of the CREM pathway could represent two of the biological Excess production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) establishes oxi- mechanisms underlying spermatogenesis failure in patients with Yq dative stress (OS) in the semen . Mitochondria are suspected to be the microdeletion . source and target of ROS where mutation in mitochondria can impair the formation/function of mature spermatozoa . So the present study P02.234 was aimed to correlate the oxidative stress and mtDNA mutation with Identification candidate genes and proteins involved in male the sperm parameters of infertile patients . Study includes 62 infertile infertility through proteomic analysis of human sperm proteins subjects and 30 fertile controls attending AIIMS, New Delhi, India . R. Oliva1, S. de Mateo1, J. Martínez-Heredia1, T. Botta-Orfila1, S. Blescia1, J. Complete semen analysis was performed according to WHO criteria Oriola1, J. Estanyol2, J. Ballescà3; (1999) . OS was evaluated by malonaldehyde estimation and sperm 1Human Genetics Research Group, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics mitochondrial DNA mutations by standard PCR-DNA sequencing . In- Service, Faculty of Medicine, Univ. Barcelona, and Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, fertile group showed significantly (p< 0.001) higher MDA levels (0.18 ± Spain, 2Proteomics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Univ. Barcelona, Barcelona, 0 .03 nmol / 106 spermatozoa) compared to fertile controls (0 .10 ± 0 .02 Spain, 3Institut Clínic de Ginecologia, Obstetricia i Neonatologia, Hospital nmol/ 106 spermatozoa) . The mean sperm count of infertile group was Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. 12 .78 ± 11 .81 x 106/ml, whereas the fertile group had 55 .73 ± 20 .57 Proteomics offers at present the opportunity to compare the relative x 106/ml . DNA sequencing revealed that 66% (n=41) of the infertile abundance of the different proteins present in patients and controls group harboured one or more mutations (T4672A, C10165T, C10207T, with the potential to identify diagnostic markers and candidate proteins A10470G, T13946A) in the mitochondrial genome where no mutations to be used in genetic association studies . Towards this goal the proteins were detected in the fertile group inspite some common nucleotide present in the sperm cells from sperm samples from infertile patients changes (A750G, A4769G) in both the groups . All the mean sperm and from semen donors were analyzed by 2D gel electrophoresis . In parameters of infertile subjects were negatively correlated with the each of the 2D maps the intensity of 101 spots previously identified malonaldehyde level . Higher MDA levels in the infertile subjects com- by MALDI-TOF analysis was measured . Additionally, the protamine pared to the controls may be correlated with the change in the gene content and DNA integrity were also determined in each independent sequence of sperm mtDNA of infertile subjects . Thus mtDNA mutation sample . Several interesting proteins such as transcription factors, pro- harboured in the infertile groups may be due to oxidative stress . hibitin, heat shock and proteasome proteins have been identified. Of relevance the expression of an important number of proteins (55 dif- P02.237 ferent 2D spots) correlated in independent sperm samples at high sta- Mutations and polymorphisms in the cystic fibrosis gene in men tistical significance. Some of the proteins have been found to correlate with severe oligozoospermia. with DNA integrity and protamine content in infertile patients . Therefore M. Teder-Laving1, M. Punab2, E. Oitmaa3, A. Belousova4, K. Haller5,6, O. Pool- this is proving to be a useful approach leading to the identification of amets2, E. Raukas7, A. Metspalu8, A. Salumets4,9; candidate proteins and therefore candidate genes which may harbour 1Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 2Andrology Unit of Tartu University Hospi- mutations or polymorphisms involved in the pathogenic mechanisms tal, Tartu, Estonia, 3Asper Biotech, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute of Molecular and present in infertile patients . Supported by BMC006-03479 . Cell Biology, Department of Biotechnology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu,, Tartu, Esto- P02.235 nia, 6Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, Department of Immunol- Primary male infertility in Izmir / Turkey: a cytogenetic and ogy, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 7United Laboratories, Tartu University molecular study of 187 infertile turkish patients Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 8Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department H. Akin, H. Onay, E. Turker, F. F. Ozkinay; of Biotechnology, Tartu, Estonia, 9Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Ege University Medical Faculty Medical Genetics Department, İzmir, Turkey. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Infertility is an important health problem affecting 10-15% of couples . Background: Majority of male cystic fibrosis (CF) patients are infer- The contribution of male factors to patients is about 30-50% . The tile because of congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens (CBAVD) . main genetic factors in male infertility are somatic chromosomal ab- In addition, male infertility as a result of isolated CBAVD is also rec- normalities and Y chromosomal microdeletions within Yq11 region . ognized as a primary genital form of CF. Mutations in cystic fibrosis The genes which control spermatogenesis are located in Yq11 region transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene have been found and are known as azoospermia factor genes (AZF) .The AZF region in more than 85% of CBAVD cases . Possible involvements of CFTR has 3 non-overlapping loci-AZFa, AZFb, AZFc which are required for mutations in other forms of male infertility have been suggested but normal spermatogenesis . All these genes are expressed in testicular remain controversial . In sperm, CFTR may be important in transport tissue showing that they play roles in human spermatogenesis . Here, of various anions and sperm capacitation, hence making it possible we aimed to detect somatic cytogenetic abnormalities and AZF micro- that certain CFTR mutations may lead to reduced sperm fertilizing ca- deletions in a sample of 187 Turkish infertile men and to evaluate the pacity and male infertility in other forms of male infertility rather than frequencies and the characteristics of our primary male infertility data CBAVD . in order to perform appropriate genetic counseling . Objective: To compare the frequency of CFTR gene mutations be- Cytogenetic study revealed chromosomal abnormality in 9 subjects tween oligozoospermic and healthy fertile men . (4 .8%) . In remaining 178 subjects, 7 subjects (3 .93%) were detected Materials and Methods: The study populations consisted of 124 oligo-Cytogenetics  and 90 normozoospermic men . We screened simultaneously for 254 In addition the seminoma patients showed twice as many copy number different CFTR mutations and variations using arrayed primer exten- compare to the infertile patients (in average 102 relative copies) . sion (APEX) genotyping microarray (Asper Biotech Ltd) . Conclusion: The main importance of our findings lies in great diag- Results: CFTR mutations and variants were demonstrated in 22 nostic potential in male infertility genetic background testing . Number (17 .7%) of 124 oligozoospermic patients and in 13 (14 .4%) of 90 con- of TSPY copies could be also significant tumor marker in relation to trol men . In addition, the total frequency of mutant/variant alleles in testicular tumorgenesis . infertility group was slightly, but not significantly higher than in con- trols (9 .7 vs 7 .2%) . Similar trend was also observed for IVS8-5T al- P02.240 lele frequencies (3 .6 vs 2 .2%, respectively) . Although we demonstrate AZF microdeletions on the Y chromosome of Iranian infertile comparable CFTR mutation/variation frequencies in both groups, the men with non-obstructive azoospermia causal relationships between specific CFTR mutations and male infer- R. Mirfakhraie1,2, S. M. Kalantar3, M. Montazeri2, N. Salsabili4, G. Modabber2, tility cannot be completely ruled out . S. M. Seyed Hassani3, M. Houshmand2, F. Mirzajani2; 1Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Is- P02.238 lamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnol- simultaneous inactivation of the transcription factors sox9 and ogy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research & Clinical Centre for Infertility, sox8 in murine testis development leads to complete infertility Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Mirza Kouchak Khan Hospital,Tehran University F. J. Barrionuevo1, H. Scherthan2, C. Lécureil3, F. Guillou3, M. Wegner4, G. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Scherer1; The human Y chromosome contains genes that are essential for sper- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2Insti- matogenesis specially those that are located on three major intervals tut für Radiobiologie der Bundeswehr, München, Germany, 3Institut National de defined as AZFa, AZFb and AZFc. la Recherche Agronomique, Université de Tours, Nouzilly, France, 4Institute of Deletions in these genes may result in spermatogenic failure in pa- Biochemistry, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. tients with non-obstructive azoospermia and oligozoospermia . Widely Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations of the HMG-box transcription different frequencies of such deletions (0-55%) have been reported factor SOX9 result in campomelic dysplasia, a human skeletal malfor- from different populations . mation syndrome associated with XY sex reversal . The murine Sox9 The main purpose of this study is to detect the frequency of Y chro- gene is expressed in embryonic and postnatal Sertoli cells of the mouse mosome microdeletions in Iranian patients with non-obstructive azo- testis, and inactivation of Sox9 before the sex determination stage at ospermia and fertile control subjects . Multiplex polymerase chain re- E11 .5 leads to complete XY sex reversal . To see whether Sox9 is re- action (PCR) was applied using several sequence-tagged site (STS) quired for testis development after testis induction, we crossed Sox- primer sets, in order to determine Y chromosome microdeletions in 9flox mice with an AMH(Anti-Müllerian Hormone)-Cre transgenic line . 100 infertile males and 50 fertile controls . Conditional Sox9 null mutants, SOX9-negative at E14 .0, are initially Microdeletions in AZFa, AZFb and AZFc (DAZ gene) regions were only fertile, but become sterile from complete meiotic arrest at around 5 detected in seventeen of the patients (17%) with the frequency of 15%, months . As Sox8, a Sox9 related transcription factor, i) is expressed 49%, and 36% respectively . similar to Sox9 during murine testis development, ii) has been shown Our findings suggest that knowing the prevalence of AZF microdele- in vitro to activate AMH, a Sox9 target during testis development, iii) is tions in Iranian infertile men will be informative before starting assisted expressed normally in AMH-Cre;Sox9flox/flox mutants, and iv) as homo- reproductive treatments . zygous Sox8 null mutants show no obvious early gonadal phenotype, we hypothesized that Sox8 may compensate for the absence of Sox9 . P02.241 We therefore generated a Sox9 conditional knockout on a Sox8 mu- male infertility and biotransformation enzyme gene tant background . In double mutants heterozygous for Sox8, testes de- polymorphisms velop normally up to post-natal day 10 (P10), but subsequently show M. Volk1, A. Kastrin1, H. Jaklič1, B. Zorn2, B. Peterlin1; spermatogenic arrest . Homozygous double mutants show normal tes- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, tis cord formation at E15 .5, but subsequent testis cord development Slovenia, 2Department of Andrology, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Lju- is impaired; at P6, testis cords are completely irregular in shape and bljana, Slovenia. appear fibrotic, resulting in complete infertility. In summary, concerted Environmental xenobiotics such as organophosphate pesticides are function of Sox9 and Sox8 in post E14 .0 Sertoli cells is essential for the known to be involved in male infertility . Interindividual genetic varia- maintencance of testicular function . tions in biotransformation enzyme activities can lead to differences in the susceptibility to male infertility . In this case-control study, PCR P02.239 was used to investigate the association between polymorphisms in Real -time PcR evaluation of tsPY copy number in infertile and the PON and GST genes (PON1-55/192, PON2-311, GSTM1/T1) and seminoma patients. male infertility in 381 Slovenian participants (the study group of 187 R. Vodicka1, K. Krizova1, R. Vrtel1, L. Dusek2, J. Santavy1; infertile male participants: 86 with azoospermia, 101 with oligoasthe- 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- noteratozoospermia; the control group of 194 fertile males) . lic, 2Institute of Biostatistik and Analyses, Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech We found statistical significant difference in the PON1-55 genotype Republic. distribution between the infertile and fertile men (chi-square(2) = 7 .37; Introduction: Multicopy TSPY gene is localized on chromosome Y in p = 0 .02), which after applying Bonferroni correction was no longer MSY region in gene clusters . Total number of the gene copies is es- significant. Likewise, no significant differences in frequencies of geno- timated from 20 to 40. Testis specific expression indicates a role in types of other tested polymorphisms, PON1-192, PON2-311, GSTM1/ meiotic or post meiotic processes during spermatogenesis . T1, respectively, and the occurrence of male infertility were observed The aims of this work are: (Table 1) . 1) Confirmation of our previous findings (Vodicka R, et al., TSPY gene In this case-control study we didn’t confirm the association between copy number as a potential new risk factor for male infertility . Reprod PON1/2 or GSTM1/T1 genetic variations and male infertility in Slove- Biomed Online . 2007 May;14(5):579-87 .) nian participants . However, limitations of the genetic association stud- 2) Analyses and comparison of a new DNA samples from infertile and ies, namely, the relatively small sample size and population specific seminoma patients . genotype effects which make results difficult to reproduce, should be Material and method: There were included 104 infertile and 6 semi- considered when interpreting and generalizing the results . noma patients and 50 healthy controls into study . Table 1 . Genotype frequencies of the PON and GST polymorphisms in Copy number relative quantification was measured using the combina- infertile and control group . tion of two Real -Time PCRs by Y quantifiler kit and by SYBR green kit . Results: Our results confirmed increasing copy number in infertile pa- tients (in average 53 relative TSPY copies) compare to controls (in average 31 relative copies) even after enlarged collection of samples .Prenental diagnostics  Infertile group (N = Control group (N = our study is to evaluate the feasibility of BAC arrays in the analysis of Genotype 189) 194) prenatal samples . PON55 LL 73 97 METHODS: Chorionic villus and amniotic fluid samples are obtained ML 93 87 using standard clinical procedures . DNA is extracted and labelled for MM 21 10 the aCGH analysis . For samples with limited amounts of DNA, we per- chi-square(2) 7 .37 form whole genome amplification (WGA). Two types of arrays are used: p 0 .02 arrays targeted to constitutional syndromes (Constitutional Chip® 3 .0), PON192 QQ 98 91 and 1 Mb resolution-arrays covering whole genome (Spectral ChipTM) . QR 74 90 The arrays are scanned with ScanArray®, and data is analysed with RR 15 13 SpectralWare® . All samples are also analysed by conventional karyo- chi-square(2) 1 .84 typing. Potential aCGH findings are confirmed with FISH using the cor- p 0 .40 responding BAC DNA as probe . PON311 SS 106 92 RESULTS: To reduce the turn-around time, DNA is extracted directly SC 72 85 from the samples. For direct amplification, we have compared three CC 9 17 suppliers for their WGA performance . In addition, some cases have chi-square(2) 4 .40 been tested both with native and amplified DNA to address potential p 0 .11 bias caused by amplification. Results are promising, and a larger set GSTM1 null 97 92 of samples will confirm the best practices. normal 90 102 CONCLUSION: The use of samples without cell culturing combined chi-square(1) 0 .59 with simultaneous detection numerous genomic imbalances can have p 0 .44 great benefit to prenatal diagnosis. The difficulty in discriminating the GSTT1 null 35 46 pathologic and benign copy-number variations and the possibility to normal 152 148 detect potentially unwanted information will undoubtedly be challeng- chi-square(1) 1 .14 ing for the professionals interpreting the data but also for array manu- p 0 .29 factures . P02.242 P03.02 Detection of the most common genetic causes of male infertility sequential and integrated prenatal screening for Down by QF-PcR analysis syndrome D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, T. Plaseski2, P. Noveski1, S. Trivodalieva1, G. D. T. K. Kascheeva, Y. A. Nikolaeva, T. V. Kuznetzova, V. S. Baranov; Efremov1; Ott Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic En- Objective . To compare the integrated test in three variants screening gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace- for prenatal Down syndrome detection: the first trimester combined donia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, screening , sequential screening and integrated screening . Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Methods . Ultrasound scanners Aloka SSD-2000 and Medison SA- The most common genetic causes of spermatogenic failure are sex 8000 Live was applied for 716 singleton pregnancies on 10-13 weeks chromosomal abnormalities (most importantly Klinefelter’s syndrome) of gestation with 265 of them (37%) were after 35 . First trimester bio- and deletions of the azoospermia factor (AZF) regions (AZFa, AZFb, chemical markers were studied on 9 to 13 weeks of gestation with AZFc) of the Y chromosome . Recently, several studies have proposed Life Cycle system for prenatal screening (Wallac/Perkin Elmer Life and that partial AZFc deletions/duplications may represent a risk factor for Analytical Sciences, Finland) . 644 second trimester samples ( 89,9%) spermatogenic impairment . Here we describe a multiplex quantitative were tested by test- systems products of “Alkor-Bio”, Saint-Petersburg fluorescent (QF)-PCR method that allows detection of these common . Detection rates (DR) and false-positive rates (FPR) were estimated . genetic causes and risk factors of male infertility . The 11-plex QF-PCR Results . Integrated screening has the lowest FPR . All 27 cases of included the amplification of amelogenine gene; four polymorphic chromosomal anomalies (including 22 DS cases) were revealed after X-specific short tandem repeats (STR) markers (XHPRT, DXS6803, prenatal diagnostics with FPR value 13 .6% (1st trimester) . FPR in the DXS981 and exon 1 of the AR gene), non-polymorphic Y-specific second trimester screening was 23 .4% . FPR for integrated screening marker (SRY gene), polymorphic Y-specific STR marker (DYS448), in this group was twice lower - 11 .3% . For young pregnant women FPR as well as co-amplification of DAZL/DAZ, MYPT2/MYPT2Y and two was 2 .9% comparing to 5 .8% FPR after combining screening . CDY1/CDY2 fragments that allowed for the determination of the DAZ, Conclusion . Integrated screening was the safest policy in the high risk MYPT2Y and CDY gene copy number . A total of 348 DNA samples pregnancies. Interpreting the second test but ignoring the first-trimes- from infertile/subfertile patients (n=204) and fertile controls (n=144) ter markers measurements leads to false risk estimation . were included in the study . We detected 14 infertile males with sex chromosomal aneuploidies (10 individuals with Klinefelter’s syndrome, P03.03 two XX and two XYY males) . All previously detected AZF deletions; An assessment of the use of interphase FisH in prenatal AZFc (n8), AZFb (n1), AZFb+c (n1), gr/gr (n11), gr/gr with b2/b4 du- diagnosis plication (n3) and b2/b3 (n5) gave a specific pattern with the 11-plex N. V. Shilova, T. V. Zolotukhina; QF-PCR . In addition, 29 DNA samples showed pattern consistent with Research Centre for Medical Genetics of RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. the presence of gr/gr and two with b2/b3 duplication . In conclusion, Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with different DNA- multiplex QF-PCR is a rapid, simple, reliable and inexpensive method probes has been provided more ability to perform chromosomal enu- that can be used as a first-step genetic analysis in infertile/subfertile meration . In our study FISH with AneuVysion kit (Vysis, Abbott) was patients . applied for detecting of more commonly aneuploidies in 67 (8,6%) from 779 cases of prenatal diagnosis after CVS . Interphase FISH analysis P03. Prenatal diagnostics was carried out when absence or small amount of metaphases took place in semi-direct samples to avoid of repeated invasive procedure . P03.01 Different aneuploidies were diagnosed correctly and rapidly by FISH Use of array cGH in prenatal diagnosis in 14 fetuses with phenotypic abnormalities on ultrasound . In other 53 H. Raussi1, P. Miny2, K. Heinimann2, F. Wenzel2, I. Filges2, A. Godenhjelm1, P. cases fetal aneuploidies were not detected by FISH analysis . In 49 of Ollikka1; them fetuses did not have any ultrasound abnormalities and appeared 1PerkinElmer LAS, Wallac, Turku, Finland, 2Division of Medical Genetics, Uni- normal at birth. Normal fetal karyotypes were confirmed by conven- versity Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland. tional cytogenetic analysis on cord blood lymphocytes in 2 cases OBJECTIVE: Microarray based comparative genomic hybridization with abnormal ultrasound screening (intrauterine growth retardation) . (aCGH) is relatively widely used in genetic diagnosis of children, but There was spontaneous termination of pregnancy at 18-19 weeks ges- true potential is still unexplored in prenatal diagnosis . The objective of tation in one case with fetal cystic hygroma . In remainder case withPrenental diagnostics  abnormal nuchal translucency (7mm) cordocentesis was performed ond trimester pregnant women and 104 first trimester pregnant women and 46,XX,r(13)(p11q22) karyotype was detected by conventional cy- , which underwent triple/double test screening for Down syndrome . Es- togenetics . Obtained date suggest that FISH may be a satisfactory timating with Prisca 4 .0 software : ß-HCG , AFP and free-estriol values alternative test in women undergoing prenatal diagnosis because of , obtained by chemiluminescent assay , it was selected a group of 115 advanced maternal age, abnormal maternal serum screening, a pre- second trimester pregnant women with elevated risk for Down syn- vious pregnancy with a trisomy 21 and parental anxiety when high drome . Among these women, 88 chose not to have amniocentesis .We quality ultrasound examination is provided . For the other indications, analysed the outcome of children born by these women and we found especially for fetal abnormalities, detected on ultrasound scan, it is a high rate of “false” positive results - about 20% . Of the 27 women necessary to follow FISH with conventional cytogenetics . with high risk which accepted amniocentesis, 26 cases presented nor- mal fetal karyotypes and one showed a pseudomosaicism . P03.04 In contrast , first trimester screening , which means maternal serum Prenatal DNA Detection of Down syndrome PAPP-A and free-HCG measurements, combined with nuchal trans- K. Thilakavathy, R. Rosli; lucency thickness , showed a much lower ‘false” positive rates , for Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, about 5% . Malaysia. We concluded that first trimester screening is more effective than triple It has been shown that fetal cells and circulating cell-free fetal DNA in- test screening in early detection of Down syndrome creases in the maternal circulation in women carrying Down syndrome fetus . The current technology in non-invasive screening methods of P03.07 fetal aneuploidies is focused on detecting Y-chromosomal sequences implementation of a combined screening of aneuploidies which is not practical to be used for pregnancies involving female fe- E. Martínez, L. Cardo, A. Benavides, I. Hernandez, F. Moreno, B. Prieto, F. tuses . Hence, it is vital to develop an assay that is universal for both Alvarez; male and female fetus pregnancies . We attempted the use of superox- Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. ide dismutase (SOD-1) gene, which is located at the Down Syndrome Multiple strategies of chromosomal anomalies screening have been Critical Region, to overcome this situation for the prenatal detection of developed, aimed to reduce the number of invasive techniques . Down syndrome . The prospective of the gene using real-time quantita- The first trimester combined test has been widely considered as one of tive polymerase chain reaction was explored . Our results show that the most efficient approaches. the level of SOD-1 sequences is significantly elevated in the third tri- Objetive: A retrospective observational study has been carried out in mester normal pregnancies (mean = 11728 copies/µl) when compared order to evaluate the first year of a multicentric screening program in to the second trimester (mean = 5705 .6 copies/µl), p<0 .005 and non- Asturias . pregnant normal women (mean = 3580 .2 copies/µl), p<0 .0001 . Down Material and methods: 3630 pregnant women were screened, from 7 syndrome pregnancies have the greatest elevation compared to all the hospitals of Asturias . Maternal serum free B-hCG and PAPP-A con- three trimesters of normal singleton pregnancies and twin pregnancies, centrations were measured in our reference laboratory (HUCA), in a p<0 .05 . These data indicate that a quantitative analysis using a gene Delfia Xpress analyzer from Perkin Elmer (PE). Nuchal translucency associated with a disorder could be used in screening for the prenatal measurement (NT) was performed at every hospital . diagnosis of fetal aneuploidies regardless of the sex of the fetus . Results from genetic analysis in amniotic fluid as well as the outcome of the delivery were also registered in order to evaluate the efficiency. P03.05 Results: 3630 women during the 9- 13+6 weeks of pregnancy participat- Chromosome 21-specific STR markers can effectively diagnose ed in the screening (mean age 31 .1 years, 23% older than 35 years) . fetal Down syndrome: a comparison to traditional karyotyping There were 9 Down syndrome cases . Combined screening detection D. Chu1, C. Yeh1, J. Liou2, J. Hsu2; rate was 66 .7% (3 .97% false positive); 56 % of the amniocentesis cor- 1Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, 2Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, responded to pregnant women older than 35 years, but only 29 % were Taipei, Taiwan. indicated for a positive screening result . Short tandem repeats (STR) have been proposed to be useful in iden- Conclusions: The screening program allowed us to offer a prenatal tifying chromosome aneuploidies . In this study, it was our goal to test diagnosis to 77% of our pregnant women population, which is under the sensitivity and specificity of the combination of 3 chromosome 21- 35 years old . specific STR loci in rapid determination of the number of fetal chro- The false positive rate decreased from 14 .2% (maternal age) to 4% mosome 21 prenatally. Six hundred and two amniotic fluid samples (combined test) . from increased risk pregnancies (either with abnormal maternal serum Two main points of this program have to be highlighted: the total con- screening results or with advanced maternal age) were analyzed . Spe- trol of the pregnancy and the continuous optimization based on the cific primers with florescent dye labeled on the 5’ ends were applied to multicenter colaboration PCR-amplify these three STR loci following denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in a DNA sequencer . Data revealed that 588 amni- P03.08 otic fluid samples showed two chromosome 21s in the fetal cells. How- Proteomic screening techniques used in maternal plasma reveal ever, two of them with 3 chromosome 21s in the fetal cells . These data potential biomarkers for trisomy 21 pregnancies. were 100% concordant to the fetal karyotyping results from the clinical W. E. Heywood1, T. E. Madgett2, A. Wallington2, J. Hogg3, K. Mills1, N. D. cytogenetic laboratory . In conclusion, this protocol could provide a very Avent2, L. S. Chitty1; rapid yet accurate detection of fetal Down syndrome, comparing to 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2University of the West of traditional chromosome karyotyping . It is especially useful for those England, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3University College Hospital, London, United late second trimester pregnancy women that if amniocentesis is pur- Kingdom. sued and confirmed fetal Down syndrome by karyotyping yet not able Objective: To use proteomic methods to search for biomarkers for tri- to meet the 24 week deadline for therapeutic abortion . This molecular somy 21 (T21) in maternal plasma . approach could be their alternative for karyotyping . Methods: Surface Enhanced Laser Desorption Ionisation Mass Spec- trometry (SELDI) was used to compare gestationally aged matched P03.06 maternal plasma samples from normal and T21 pregnancies to detect A comparison between first and second trimester pregnancy differentially expressed proteins optimally <30kDa . Analysis was per- screening for Down syndrome formed using Q10 cation exchange arrays . Two Dimensional Differ- G. Popescu1, M. Bari1,2, F. Nedelea1, A. Stana1,3; ence Gel Electrophoresis (2D DiGE) which is optimal at screening for 1Filantropia Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2University “Carol Davila”, Bucha- larger molecular weight proteins was performed at three expanded pH rest, Romania, 3University “Titu Maiorescu”, Bucharest, Romania. ranges . We wanted to ascertain which prenatal screening method should be Results: SELDI analysis demonstrated significant differences across used in practice to detects more cases of Down syndrome , with a gestational ages in normal pregnancies, and changes in T21 pregnan- lower false positive rates . cies . First trimester T21 samples showed a small peak at ~100kDa that For this purpose , we made a retrospective study among the 570 sec- was significantly elevated by 1.3 fold (p=0.00026). Second trimesterPrenental diagnostics  T21 samples showed significant changes, with similarities to the protein The obtained results confirm that MAQ is highly sensitive technique profile of normal first trimester pregnancies. Two protein peak masses that requires DNA samples of good purity and minimum concentration . in the ranges 5-10kDa (p=0 .028) and 20-25kDa (p=0 .004) were more MAQ’s experimental setup solely consists of a standard (multiplex) than 2 fold different. The 2D DiGE first trimester study revealed two PCR reaction followed by fluorescent fragment analysis, together re- spots in the 5 .3-6 .5 pH range, increased by 1 .4 fold (p=0 .019) and sulting in a considerable reduction of labor and time . 1 .2 fold (p=0 .017) . Analysis of second trimester samples showed two further significant spots in the 5.3-6.5 pH range and two in the 6-9 pH P03.11 range (p<0 .05) . Reliability of results obtained using subtelomeric mLPA in Conclusions: Proteomic screening methods have revealed a potential prenatal samples. Our experience first trimester marker for T21and have demonstrated changes in the J. Bruguera1, I. Madrigal2, L. Rodriguez-Revenga2, N. Clusellas3, E. Margarit3,4, normal maternal plasma proteome related to gestational age which A. Sánchez3,4, A. Soler3,4; do not occur in T21 pregnancies . These proteins may be useful as 1Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de biomarkers to improve on current screening for T21, reducing the need Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barce- for invasive testing lona, Spain, 3Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular. Hospital Clinic., Bar- celona, Spain, 4IDIBAPS (Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i Sunyer), P03.09 Barcelona, Spain. Fetal sex determination service using real time PcR and MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) is a tech- pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization on free fetal DNA nique which allows to analyze large numbers of samples simultane- S. E. Tobi1, H. B. Schlecht1, J. A. Shorto1, E. M. Boon2, R. Elles1; ously and has proven to be accurate for identifying deletions, duplica- 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, tions, and amplifications in several diseases and for the screening of 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. subtelomeric rearrangements . The aim of our study is the diagnosis Routine genetic prenatal diagnosis is currently based on an invasive and characterization of cryptic subtelomeric chromosomal abnormali- sampling procedure, which carries a significant risk (1-2%) of fetal loss. ties in a series of pregnancies in which ultrasound examination disclos- Therefore, the possibility for non-invasive sampling has been pursued es major fetal malformations, using a specific set of probes for subtelo- for several years particularly following the discovery of free fetal DNA meric chromosomal imbalances, SALSA P036B,D human telomere kit (ffDNA) present in maternal plasma . Two techniques, Real Time PCR, (MRC-Holland) . It was performed on fetal DNA obtained from cultured that can detect very low levels of Y chromosomal sequence, and a new amniocytes . To exclude false positives we use the complementary kit and highly specific PCR technique, pyrophosphorolysis-activated poly- P070 (MRC-Holland). We have collected 173 amniotic fluid samples merisation (PAP), were validated for fetal sex determination using free from pregnancies in which fetuses present different phenotype abnor- fetal DNA (ffDNA) as a substrate (Prenat Diagn . 2007 27: 932-7) . Both malities and show a normal karyotype . Investigation revealed 23 cases Real Time PCR and PAP can be used to detect the very low levels of that presented subtelomeric imbalances . These submicroscopic chro- Y chromosome DNA present in ffDNA during a male gestation and in mosomal anomalies include deletions and/or duplications of several combination offer more reliable early prenatal sexing . Using these two chromosomes. Tests performed with both kits gave 3 confirmed imbal- techniques combined a service for fetal sex determination from mater- ances (3pter deletion, 13qter duplication plus 20pter deletion) and 21 nal blood is now offered in the NW Regional Molecular Genetics Labo- discordant results . These controversial results may be due to different ratory, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester . In the 8 months that the service reasons . Some P036 imbalances have been previously reported as has been running 27 patients have been tested (9 male, 11 female and polymorphisms . Another reason is that P036 and P070 kits contain 7 fail). The predicted sex of the fetus was subsequently confirmed as different probes and some imbalances are located very closer to the correct in 8 of the 27 samples tested, and we are not aware that any telomere region so the P070 kit does not confirm the results and FISH of the remaining 12 results were incorrect . The failure rate is currently is not enough sensible to detect them . These discordant results need 15%, which is partly due to the strict test acceptance criteria we im- more accurate techniques for confirming some subtelomeric imbal- pose on this new service . The test acceptance criteria are that 4/4 PAP ances . replicates and 7/8 Real Time Ct values must be in agreement . Supported by the grant PI05/0096 to A .S . from F .I .S ., Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Spain . P03.10 introduction of mAQ technique for autosomal aneuploidies P03.12 detection multi-colour FisH in 17 minutes: towards 24 chromosome R. Raynova1, L. Heyrman2,3, S. Andonova1,4, D. Goossens2,3, J. Genova4, A. aneuploidy screening in under 24 hours Jordanova1,2, I. Kremensky1,4, J. Del-Favero2,3; D. Ioannou1, M. Vetter1, L. Thomas1, K. Finch2, A. Abogrein1, A. R. Thornhill2, A. 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Applied Molecular Genomics H. Handyside2, D. K. Griffin1; Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 3University 1University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom, 2The London Bridge Fertility, of Antwerp (UA), Antwerp, Belgium, 4Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia Medical Gynaecology and Genetics Centre, London, United Kingdom. University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) for chromosomal aneuploidy Multiplex Amplicon Quantification (MAQ) is a multiplex PCR based has become widespread for women of advanced maternal age in re- method for the detection and analysis of CNVs . The method consists cent years. The ‘gold standard’ technique (multicolour fluorescence in of the simultaneous PCR amplification of several fluorescently labeled situ hybridisation (FISH) to identify up to 12 specific chromosomes af- target and reference sequences . The comparison of normalized inten- ter multiple rounds of hybridization) has received criticism owing to the sities between the test individual and control individuals results in a possibility of false positives and the possible omission of key chromo- dosage quotient indicating the copy number of the target amplicon . somes not included . Any successful PGS test needs o b quick, simple, The Trisomy MAQ for the detection of autosomal aneuploidies con- cheap and accurate . We describe preliminary results using fast FISH tains 42 amplicons divided over 34 test amplicons: 7 on chromosome to simultaneously screen multiple chromosomes in lymphocytes as a 21, 7 on chromosome 18, 8 on chromosome 13, 9 on X and 3 on Y prelude for clinical application . 5 colour FISH was achieved in only 17 chromosomes and 8 control amplicons . The MAQ assay was applied minutes from slide preparation to final post-hybridization wash (includ- on 615 DNA samples derived from amniotic fluid or chorionic villi of ing a 5 minute hybridisation time) . In the initial experiments, probes which 535 samples had normal karyotypes and 80 samples had abnor- for X, Y, 15, 17 and 20 have been successfully applied to control lym- mal karyotypes . All investigated samples were previously diagnosed phocytes . In a second set of experiments, four hitherto poorly studied by STR based QF-PCR and cytogenetic analysis . chromosomes (1, 8, 11 and 17) in human embryos and sperm were Genescan was performed on ABI 3700 DNA sequencer (Applied Bio- analysed . Finally we have applied 4 sequential layers of probes (14 systems) data was analyzed with MAQs software (www .vibgeneticser- probes in total) in approximately 7 hours . Despite moves to develop vicefacility .be/index .htm?soft/maqs .php) . microarray approaches to simultaneously analyse 24 chromosomes The influence of the input DNA quality, concentration and solvents conventional FISH analysis should still be useful for single cell diag- used for extraction on the efficiency of MAQ was estimated. The opti- nosis and will certainly be useful on a per cell basis for any ‘abnormal’ mal concentration was found to be between 24 and 44 ng/µl . embryos to confirm the single cell diagnosis.Prenental diagnostics  P03.13 allowing large scale application . Inconsistent findings between QF-PCR and karyotype Methods: We developed a QF-PCR assay that has been applied on analysis for the prenatal diagnosis of common trisomies in 38 .000 clinical samples . Most frequent indications were increased bio- amniocentesis chemical risk (32%) and advanced maternal age (30%), 6% of these S. Y. Park1, D. J. Kim1, M. H. Lee1, B. Y. Lee1, J. Y. Park1, H. M. Ryu2, J. Y. cases were also associated with increased nuchal translucency; pa- Han2; rental anxiety and abnormal ultrasound were present in 22% and 7% 1Laboratory of medical genetics, Medical research institution, Cheil general of samples respectively . Cytogenetic analysis was performed in all hospital and women’s healthcare center, Kwandong university School of medi- cases and results compared . cine, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Results: All 1278 non mosaic aneuploidies involving chromosomes 21, Cheil general hospital and women’s healthcare center, Kwandong university 18, 13 X and Y were detected with 100% sensitivity and specificity; School of medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. several cases of mosaicism and partial trisomies were also identified. We report an amniocentesis case of discrepant results between QF- QF-PCR detected 95% of clinically significant abnormalities diagnosed PCR and karyotype analysis in the prenatal diagnosis of trisomy18 . by cytogenetic analysis in samples referred for abnormal ultrasound . The result of rapid QF-PCR analysis from uncultured amniotic fluid Affected pregnancies could be terminated without further waiting for cells indicated double autosomal aneuploidy for chromosome 18 and completion of fetal karyotype 21 . However, subsequent cytogenetic analysis from the in situ cultures Conclusions: Large scale application of QF-PCR could reduce the showed only trisomy 21 karyotype with no evidence of mosaicism . Fol- load of prenatal cytogenetics if all pregnancies are carefully monitored low-up studies were performed on the repeated amniocentesis, fetal by non invasive methods . In cases of negative QF-PCR results cyto- cord blood and placental tissue after termination of the pregnancy . genetic analyses might only be performed for fetuses with abnormal QF-PCR and karyotype results showed trisomy 21 from all sampls . ultrasound; affected pregnancies identified by QF-PCR can be termi- For chromosome 18, both QF-PCR and karyotyping from placental nated in a few hours from sampling . In countries where large scale tissue revealed a normal disomic chromosome 18 . Cord blood and cytogenetics is hampered by its cost and lack of technical expertise repeated amniotic fluid cells indicated the aneuploidy of chromosome QF-PCR may be used as the only prenatal diagnostic test . 18 in QF-PCR, but normal disomy 18 with no evidence of mosaicism in karyotyping. We supposed that this inconsistent finding was the result P03.16 of duplication of the paternal chromosome 18 in mitosis after the loss Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 by real-time PcR on fetal DNA of the homologous maternal chromosome 18 at an early postzygotic from amniotic fluid stage . T. Gunel1, K. Şahin1, I. Kalelioglu2, R. Has2, H. Ermis2, K. Aydinli3; 1Istanbul University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and P03.14 Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, QF-PcR on native chorionic villous for false positive and Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. negative detection is a useful tool in fetal karyotyping by direct Trisomy 21 is the most common congenital anomaly . A region called method Down Syndrome Critical Region (DSCR), extending from DNA marker F. R. Grati, B. Grimi, B. Malvestiti, F. Dulcetti, G. Frascoli, S. De Toffol, A. M. Di D21S55 on chromosome 21, is critical for Down syndrome fenotype Meco, A. M. Ruggeri, R. Liuti, S. Milani, A. Trotta, F. Maggi, G. Simoni; such as morphological features, hypotonia and mental retardation . Reasearch and Development, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology, TOMA Recently, there have been major advances performing in the screning Laboratory, Busto arsizio, Italy. and prenatal diagnosis of Down Syndrome . With the advent of real- The prenatal diagnosis(PD) on chorionic villi (CV) more reliable for the time PCR, it is now possible to measure the nucleic acid concentra- identification of fetal karyotype combines the cytotrophoblast (direct tions with high accuracy . This study was undertaken to establish a rap- method, STC) and mesenchyme (long term culture, LTC) analyses . id prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 using real-time PCR of fetal DNA However, when the sample available is poor (5-10mg) the diagnosis from amniotic fluid. Fetal DNA’s from the amniotic fluid of a mother is generally performed liking better for the direct method in order to expecting a baby with regular trisomy 21 and 9 mothers at high risk avoid the maternal cell contamination . This condition is associated for regular trisomy 21 were isolated . Real-time PCR technique was with a higher false negative risk . In our 7 years experience on 24’237 used to measure the dosage of DSCR3gene. The amplification plots CV prenatal diagnosis, we recognised 18 cases of type V True Fetal of 40 cycles for each sample was determined by the real-time PCR us- Mosaicism (TFM) that, if they have been analysed only with STC they ing fetal DNA’s from the amniotic fluid. C (“cycle threshold”: the PCR t would have been subject to a false negative result . The abnormality cycle number at which a significant increase in the components of the found in mesenchyme of 17/18 was an aneuploidy for chromosomes reaction is first detected) values for each sample were obtained and 13,18,21,X,Y . In 11 of them the abnormal cell line was present in a ho- the average C values were calculated . The DSCR3 and GAPDH gene t mogeneous form, hence, possibly recognizable by QF-PCR . On these dosage were statistically determined and a comparison was made be- basis we performed a study to calculate in our survey the false positive tween the results of the risk group and the one with regular trisomy 21 . and negative risk if PD would have been performed only with direct The real-time PCR results showed the DSCR3 gene dosage of one method and to evaluate in 267 poor samples (5-10mg) if QF-PCR on a of 9 samples from the risk group was higher than the one with regular minor fragment allows detection of false positive and negative cases . trisomy 21 . We evidenced 1 false negative and 2 false positive cases and in 14 instances the abnormality found in cytotrophoblast was confirmed by P03.17 QF-PCR . In conclusion, QF-PCR could be an additional useful tool, introducing new methods in prenatal diagnosis can do harm which doesn’t jeopardize the result of direct method, to decrease the more than good. the need for a national strategy false negative risk from 1/1136 to 1/2941 . I. A. Dhaifalah, V. Curtisova, J. Santavy; Palacky universtiy, Olomouc, Czech Republic. P03.15 Screening programs (SP) is indispensable part of health care systems Rapid prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidies by QF-PcR: evaluation in many countries . During the past 50 years new SP are becoming of large scale clinical application available. The innovation in this filed have been transformed into ap- V. Cirigliano1,2, G. Voglino3, E. Ordoñez1,2, A. Plaja4, C. Fuster2, M. Adinolfi5; plicable medical strategies and procedures with great benefits for 1Dept. Genetica Molecular, General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Departament patients . Approval of a test obligates its use . Missing guidelines and de Biologia Cel•lular, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, legitimate to identify centers and laboratories performing the SP have 3Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Lab. Promea-Day Surgery, Torino, Italy, lead to more harm than good in some places . 4Dept. Genetica, General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 5University College London, There is an increasing need for a single national body which provides London, United Kingdom. authoritative, objective decisions on whether, and under what circum- Introduction: Recently it has been shown that rapid QF-PCR can detect stances new SP or diagnostic tests should be made available . Coun- the great majority of chromosome abnormalities in prenatal samples try’s health system care, culture, demography and resources should despite being deliberately targeted to chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and be evaluated . Approval of a test should be accompanied by how the Y . Main advantages of the assay are low cost, speed and automation test might most efficiently be provided and when outdated tests canPrenental diagnostics  be withdrawn . P03.20 Czech Republic have an old tradition in the filed of prenatal screening Optimization of blood collection, fetal DNA isolation, programs with the first amniocentesis at 1971. Women aged 40 and concentration and analysis of fetal DNA present in maternal than of 35 was the indications tell the late 80s . when the triple test have blood been introduced . Regular and detailed registration started at 1985 . In G. Minarik1,2, B. Vlkova2, T. Szemes1,2, P. Celec1,3; the year 1990 the number of invasive testes were 3 % for about 20% 1Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of detection rate for Down syndrome and 20 % other chromosomal ab- Molecular Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia, normalities, in 1998 and 2006 it was 10% for 60 % and 18% for 80% 3Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathological respectively . Physiology, Bratislava, Slovakia. From this point of view a short description of the effect of implementing Invasive methods currently used in prenatal genetic diagnostics repre- the new SP on our center and that over the country will be presented . sent a not negligible risk for the health of both the subjected pregnant woman and fetus . Not suprisingly, the detection and analysis of fetal P03.18 DNA in maternal plasma, representing a non-invasive alternative, at- Proteomic analysis of amniotic fluid in pregnancies with Turner tracted much attention in the past few years . In our study, we focused and Klinefelter Syndrome fetuses on comparing protocols for blood collection, isolation, concentration A. Kolialexi1, A. Anagnostopoulos2, G. Tsangaris2, K. Vougas2, N. Papanto- and detection of fetal DNA present in maternal plasma of pregnant niou3, V. Bagiokos1, A. Antsaklis3, A. Mavrou1; women at various phases of pregnancy . We analyzed effects of addi- 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Proteomics Research tion or omission of 4% formaldehyde solution during blood collection Unit, Centre of Basic Research II, Biomedical Research Foundation of the and surveyed the implementation of DNA concentration after isolation Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 331st Department of Obstetrics & Gyne- procedure using either ethanol precipitation or vacuum concentra- cology, Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. tion. We screened for presence of Y-chromosome specific sequences Objectives: To determine the protein composition of amniotic fluid com- employing three different methods . Two were based on qPCR (one ing from pregnancies with normal, Turner and Klinefelter syndrome designed in our laboratory, one with commercial system specifically fetuses . used for identification and quantification of degraded human DNA se- Material & Methods: Proteomic analysis was performed in stored am- quences) and one was based on PCR and fragment analysis of am- niotic fluid samples of eighteen 2nd trimester pregnancies. In five cases elogenin loci on automated genetic analyzer . We have successfully routine cytogenetic analysis had shown that the fetus had Turner syn- prepared fetal DNA suitable for reliable qPCR and PCR analysis of Y- drome, in four Klinefelter syndrome and in nine cases the fetal karyo- chromosomal sequences with all three tested detection systems . The type was normal (5 females and 4 males) . Samples were analysed by comparison of the collection, isolation, purification and concentration Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis (2DE), coupled with Matrix-As- approaches as well as detection methods can be observed in detail on sisted Laser Desorption/ Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry our poster presentation . (MALDI-TOF-MS) . Selected proteins were further evaluated by West- ern blotting . P03.21 Results: As compared to controls TRFE, LUM, RETBP and ApoA1 Early first trimester detection of fetal cells and DNA in maternal were significantly increased in Turner syndrome cases, whereas blood KNG1, THBR and ApoA4 were decreased . E. Guetta1, L. Gutstein-Abo1,2, A. Tulchinsky1,2, M. Baum3, A. Hourvitz3, G. Four proteins (Apo A1, ZINCA2, LUM and A1AG) were found to be Barkai4,2; up-regulated in samples obtained from pregnancies with Klinefelter 1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel- syndrome fetuses and three (RETBP, A1AT and VDBP) were down Hashomer, Israel, 2Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemis- regulated . try, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3IVF Unit, Conclusions: Different sets of proteins were differentially expressed in Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashom- the various sex chromosome abnormalities . Since these proteins are er, Israel, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sheba Medical Center, likely to cross the placenta and be detected in maternal plasma, if the Tel-Hashomer, Israel. specificity of our results is verified, they may be used as biomarkers for Detection of Y-chromosome sequences in fetal cell-free DNA or cells the noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of sex chromosome aneuploidies . from maternal blood are useful tools in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis that have evolved into a fetal gender test feasible at earlier pregnancy P03.19 stages compared to ultra-sound screening . Noninvasive prental diagnosis of fetal trisomy The goal of this study was to determine the earliest possible time-point F. Crea1, W. M. Puszyk1, V. Cirigliano2, M. A. Hulten3, M. Vatish3, R. W. Old1; for trophoblast and fetal cell-free DNA detection and determination of 1University of Warwick Department of Biological Sciences, Coventry, United fetal sex as a model for comprehensive prenatal diagnosis . Maternal Kingdom, 2General Lab, Genetica Molecular, Barcelona, Spain, 3University of blood samples were collected from IVF patients at 2, 3 and 4 weeks Warwick Medical School, Coventry, United Kingdom. post-implantation . Fetal sex was determined in cells with FISH probes The discovery of fetal DNA as a small component of cell-free DNA in following magnetic sorting with HLA-G, a trophoblast marker . Y-chro- the maternal blood circulation has driven developments in non-invasive mosome SRY sequences were detected in cell-free plasma DNA with prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) for the past decade . Interest has focused real-time PCR . The results were compared with the newborn gender . upon NIPD of fetal trisomy 21, Down syndrome . We have explored Fetal sex was accurately determined in cell-free DNA in 12/16 (85%) DNA regions on human chromosome 21 with the aim of identifying of the samples, with 2 false-positive and 2 false-negative results . Tro- DNA regions that are differentially methylated between adult leuko- phoblast testing yielded 8/15 (53%) accurate fetal gender determina- cytes and placenta . These two tissues represent a model system for tion with 4 false-positive and 3 false-negative results . False-positive cell-free fetal and cell-free maternal DNA, respectively, in the blood results probably reflect the presence of a non-developing male embryo plasma of pregnant women . Among 46 DNA regions analysed in this as evidenced in one sample in which this explanation was supported model system, a single differentially methylated region located in the by PGD analysis . AIRE gene promoter, was identified. Further analysis of the methyla- The IVF samples yielded less accurate results compared with our on- tion of this DNA in the blood plasma of pregnant women indicated that going study of late 1st trimester samples (weeks 7-13, parallel to 5-11 its placental epigenetic signature was not consistently maintained in weeks post-implantation) in which 98% accuracy of fetal sex determi- cell-free fetal DNA . The inconsistency exposes an apparent limitation nation was achieved with cell-free fetal DNA and trophoblast methods . of the adult leukocyte/placenta model system as a means of discover- The uniqueness of the sample group - IVF patients - in which multiple ing epigenetic DNA biomarkers for use in the NIPD of fetal aneuploi- embryos are usually implanted, and the early stage of pregnancy, can dies . Our data indicate that more direct strategies are required, using explain this discrepancy . cell-fee plasma DNA .Prenental diagnostics  P03.22 We developed a new rtPCR for non-invasive prenatal RHD genotyping contamination-free analysis of single cells in cell-based non- and fetal sex determination using maternal plasma . invasive prenatal diagnosis Two Taqman MGB-probes and primers were designed to develop a T. Kroneis1, J. B. Geigl2, J. Waldispuehl-Geigl2, M. Alunni-Fabbroni3, E. Petek2, Multiplex rtPCR for simultaneous amplification of exons 5 and 7 on W. Walcher4, G. Dohr1, P. Sedlmayr1; RHD gene . The multicopy DYS14 sequence on the Y chromosome 1Institute of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Medical University, Graz, was also included in the assay . The test was evaluated blind on 50 Austria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University, Graz, Austria, 3Olym- coded plasma samples of known fetal genotype obtained from RhD pus Life Science Research Europa, Munich, Germany, 4University Clinic of negative pregnant women, archived in our lab at -20Cº over the last Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University, Graz, Austria. two years . Analysis of very rare cells, as this is true for non-invasive prenatal DYS14 products were detected in all 28 samples from male fetuses; diagnosis (NIPD) based upon fetal cells circulating in the peripheral both RHD exons 5 and 7 were detected in 39 samples (23 males and blood of pregnant women present a formidable challenge in respect 16 females) . No false positive were observed . Absence of all three of the need for non-ambiguous data . Currently used marker lack the products indicating female RhD negative fetuses was observed in 6 potential to exclusively discriminate fetal from maternal cells due to cases . Fetal sexing results were 100% concordant, only in one sample unspecific staining, lack of fetal specificity, or low signal intensity. Thus, RhD exons failed to amplify resulting in an RhD negative female fe- pooling of fetal cells to enhance analysis efficiency in subsequent mo- tus . lecular genetic analysis may give ambiguous data due to contamina- Even in old archived plasma samples multiplex rtPCR detection of tion with maternal cells . ffDNA was efficient and reliable allowing the assessment of fetal sex in To circumvent maternal contamination while using the advantage of all cases . Only one sample from a RhD+ female fetus was genotyped pooling cells to increase analysis significance we are working on a pro- as RhD- probably because of ffDNA degradation derived from repeated cedure to define a Post Identification Pool (PIP). The rationale is to use thaw freezing cycles of the original plasma . The procedure proved to markers with inherently limited specificity to (semi-automatically) de- be sensitive enough to be applied on clinical cases . tect fetal candidate cells that are laser-microdissected and forwarded to single cell whole genome amplification (scWGA). Aliquots of the lat- P03.25 ter are then analysed by means of DNA fingerprinting using fluorescent simple and fast isolation of cell-free circulating DNA from multiplex PCR. ScWGA products whose DNA profiles differ from the human plasma and serum maternal control sample are then pooled for further analysis . M. Meusel, C. Kirsch, G. Gutzke; Single fetal and maternal cells derived from one and the same inter- Macherey-Nagel, Dueren, Germany. ruption material were subjected to PowerPlex 16 System® proofing The discovery of cell-free circulating DNA in plasma opened up in- the DNA fingerprinting to be sufficient for discriminating fetal from ma- teresting possibilities for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis as an alter- ternal cells. Currently a modified 16-fold multiplex is being set up to native to established invasive genetic screening procedures such as perform DNA fingerprinting on pre-amplified (scWGA) single cells to amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling . However, the isolation of implement the PIP procedure . circulating DNA from plasma or serum is challenging . Circulating DNA is highly fragmented and of very low concentration . Thus, established P03.23 nucleic acid purification protocols and ready-to-use kits have only a clinical practice of the incorporation of the non-invasive fetal very limited suitability for the extraction and purification of circulating gender assesment in maternal blood DNA . To overcome these limitations we developed the NucleoSpin A. Bustamante Aragones, M. Rodriguez de Alba, I. Lorda-Sanchez, M. Tru- Plasma XS kit specially designed for the isolation of fragmented DNA jillo-Tiebas, M. Garcia-Hoyos, A. Avila-Fernandez, C. Ayuso, R. Carmen; ≥ 50 bp from human EDTA blood plasma. The kit exploits the benefits Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-Capio, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. of a unique binding column with a minimised dead volume and allows Prenatal diagnosis is currently recommended to those pregnancies at for elution in 5-20 µl . Using up to 240 µl plasma the kit offers an easy risk of an X-linked disorder however the invasive obstetric procedures and convenient way for efficient purification of circulating DNA from required entail a risk of miscarriage . Early fetal sex determination in plasma . Data from kit development as well as application data, e .g ., maternal blood can avoid the need for conventional PD in a half of from fetal Rhesus D typing will be presented . these cases . A previous large-scale validation study performed in our Besides prenatal genetic testing cell-free circulating DNA promises to laboratory concluded that this methodology was 100% accurate from be applicable for the screening and assessment of a variety of patho- the 7th week of gestation . logical findings such as cancer, stroke, myocardial infarction, inflam- After incorporating this analysis into the clinical routine we have di- mation or trauma . The use of the NucleoSpin Plasma XS kit for these agnosed a total of 32 pregnancies at risk of an X-linked disorder in- applications will be exemplified. cluding cases of Haemophilia, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, Norrie Disease . . . Two plasma samples were collected from each pregnant P03.26 woman in the first trimester of gestation: one from the 7th week of ges- Update of EsHRE PGD consortium Activities tation and another from the 9th week . Fetal gender was determined by A. R. Thornhill; the presence/absence criteria of the SRY gene by Real-Time PCR . The London Bridge Fertility, Gynaecology and Genetics Centre, London, United Conventional prenatal diagnosis, ultrasound scan or gender at birth Kingdom. confirmed that fetal sex was correctly diagnosed in maternal blood in Since 1997, the European Society of Human Reproduction and Em- all cases . Early diagnosis of fetal sex in maternal blood represents a bryology (ESHRE) Preimplantation Genetics Diagnosis (PGD) Con- great advantage for pregnancies at risk of an X-linked disease be- sortium has collected technical and outcome data, provided referral cause invasive prenatal diagnosis is suppressed in a half of the cases . networks, surveyed and promoted best practice . Membership increas- Since this diagnosis is performed before the 12th week of gestation, es steadily (n=91) with increasing numbers of centres reporting (16- chorion villus sampling can be done in the case is required . 45) and cycles reported (392-3358) between reports 1 and 7 . Dur- ing this time, reported cycle numbers for constitutional chromosome P03.24 abnormalities and monogenic disorders have increased with dispro- Non invasive prenatal detection of two RHD gene exons and portionately larger increases in preimplantation genetic screening fetal sex using cell free fetal DNA in maternal plasma (PGS) cycles reflecting the increasing tendency for IVF laboratories E. Ordoñez1,2, L. Rueda1,2, M. Lozano1,3, P. Cañadas1, C. Fuster2, V. Ciri- to select the ‘best’ embryo for transfer by elimination of chromosom- gliano1,2; ally abnormal embryos . Methodologies for every technical aspects of 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Departament de Biologia Cel•lular, Universitat PGD are becoming more sophisticated, accurate and reliable ensur- Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut Universitari Dexeus, Bar- ing extremely low misdiagnosis rates . PGD babies are comparable to celona, Spain. those derived from IVF with intracytoplasmic sperm injection proce- Cell free fetal DNA (ffDNA) detection by Real-time PCR is routinely ap- dures with respect to pregnancy complications and congenital malfor- plied for non-invasive genotyping of the fetal RhD status in reference mation . The main complication, as with routine IVF, remains the risk laboratories . The assay is easy to automate allowing high throughput . of multiple pregnancy and concomitant higher morbidity and mortality .Prenental diagnostics 0 The Consortium has published best practice guidelines for PGD and P03.29 PGS and recently, a joint report with the European Society for Human A new mutation in the AFP gene responsible for a total absence Genetics (ESHG) broadly examining the interface between genetics of alpha feto-protein on 2nd-trimester maternal serum screening and assisted reproductive technology . To further improve preimplanta- for Down syndrome tion testing, studies are ongoing to investigate PGD laboratory accred- F. M. Petit, M. Hébert, O. Picone, S. Brisset, M. Maurin, F. Parisot, L. Capel, C. itation, appropriate external quality assessment, EQAS (multicentric Benattar, M. Sénat, G. Tachdjian, P. Labrune; evaluation of captured FISH images from single embryonic nuclei) and Antoine Béclère hospital, Clamart, France. measures to facilitate real-time reporting of misdiagnoses and devel- Introduction opment of preventative action to reduce the risk of recurrence . Survey Alpha feto-protein (AFP) is a major plasma protein produced by the data regarding misdiagnosis, EQAS and confirmation of diagnosis on yolk sac and the liver during the foetal period . During the 2nd-trimester embryos will be shared . of pregnancy, AFP combined with βhCG are commonly used for Down syndrome risk evaluation. Deficiency of AFP is a rare phenomenon P03.27 (estimated to occur in 1/105000 newborns) and only one sequence Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic and alteration in AFP gene was reported . Here we report a new mutation metabolic Disorders-the saudi Experience in exon 5 of the foetal AFP gene leading to a total absence of AFP A. I. Al-Aqeel1, W. Quabashi2, S. Coskun2; on 2nd-trimester maternal serum screening for Down syndrome, con- 1Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, firmed on the amniotic fluid. Despite this, foetal development and birth 2King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. were normal . Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with the first cousin Methods marriages accounting for 60-70% of all marriages. Given the difficul- After PCR-amplification, the whole AFP gene was sequenced . To de- ties in management of genetic disorders, reproductive option for fami- termine the amniotic fluid profile, proteins were separated by electro- lies affected with genetic diseases in Saudi Arabia is often limited to phoresis and compared with 10 normal amniotic fluids sampled at the PGD which is permissible under the law and religion whereas prenatal same gestational age (18 weeks) . diagnosis with the intent of termination of pregnancy is neither widely Results practiced nor socially accepted, although it is accepted under certain The new mutation observed was a guanine to adenine transition in conditions . position 543 creating a premature stop codon in position 181 . A new KFSH&RC has been offering PGD for monogenic and chromosomal SNP was characterised in the exon 12 (c .1641A>G) . Albumin rate in disorders, since 2001 . A total of 45 pregnancies initiated . Of which, 25 the amniotic fluid was reduced compared to controls, whereas alpha1 healthy babies were born, 13 pregnancies are ongoing and 7 pregnan- and beta protein fractions were increased . cies were either biochemical or ended up with abortion . Discussion - Conclusion In all these families PGD was undertaken using fluorescent PCR (F- The c.543G>A mutation is the second sequence modification identified PCR) and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single cell, or Multiple so far in the AFP gene, responsible for its complete deficiency. Elec- Displacement Modification (MDA) to amplify the whole genome from trophoresis results suggest that deficiency may modify protein fraction a single cell . A singleton pregnancy ensure after transfer of one het- repartition, particularly albumin, alpha1 and beta fractions suggesting erozygous and one/or normal embryo and prenatal diagnosis by CVS complex molecular mechanisms of compensation . Studies on other confirmed a normal pregnancy. This is the first report of successful families with AFP deficiency are necessary to confirm this observa- PGD in different genetic disorders in Saudi Arabia, and the Muslim tion . world . P03.30 P03.28 the evaluation of chromosomal abnormalities diagnosed Preimplantation Genetic Haplotyping for Duchenne/Becker prenataly in cluj-Napoca,Romania muscular dystrophy-birth of first male babies M. S. Militaru, R. A. Popp, A. Trifa, M. Militaru, F. Stamatian; P. J. Renwick, J. Trussler, A. Lashwood, P. Braude, C. Ogilvie; University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. PGD Centre, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Prenatal diagnosis for chromosomal disorders is performed routinely in Kingdom. populations since most of these disorders have severe consequences Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for sex-linked disorders undertaken such as major malformations and mental retardation .Since advanced by sexing embryos is contentious as approximately 50% of the male technologies in rapid diagnostic tests have been developed to detect embryos discarded will be free of the mutation . Direct diagnosis of common trisomies prenataly it is essential that each laboratory should dystrophin mutations is technically challenging due to heterogeneous evaluate their own prenatal diagnosis profile.In this study we aimed mutations and recombination hotspots . Since January 2006, we have to investigate the type and proportion of chromosomal abnormalities offered an alternative approach for Duchenne/Becker muscular dys- detected in cytogenetic studies prenataly and referral indications in trophy (D/BMD) using Preimplantation Genetic Haplotyping (PGH) . 684 pregnant cases in Cluj-Napoca,Romania between the period of The first 10 cases (9 DMD + 1 BMD) are presented with follow-up to 2002-2007 .The overal chromosomal abnormality rate was found to be February 2008 . In this cohort, 7 of the carrier females had different 49/684(7,76%) .The cytogenetic analysis with GTG banding of amniotic exonic deletions, whilst 3 had different point/micro mutations, includ- fluid cells revelead:trisomy 21(12 cases),trisomy 18(7 cases),monosomy ing a germline mosaic . 15 microsatellite markers spanning the gene X(6 cases),trisomy 16(1 case),trisomy 8(1 case),trisomy 15(1 were used, alongside 5 Y-chromosome markers to detect possible sex case),robertsonian translocations(2 cases),Klinefelter syndrome(3 chromosome aneuploidy . cases),autosomal deletions(3 cases),autosomal monosomy(2 57 embryos were biopsied with 50 diagnosed (88%) and 32 (56%) cases),poliploidy(3 cases),chromosome marker(6 cases),trisomy X(1 suitable for transfer. The multiple displacement amplification (MDA) case),Fra 5q31(1 case) .Careful genetic counseling by expert geneti- used in PGH had a significantly lower (p<0.0001) allele drop out in cists regarding the patients indications is essential for determining the male (23 .1%) than in female (38 .8%) embryos (average 29 .9%) . 11% cost-effective prenatal diagnostic test for each patient . recombination was observed but the density of markers allowed ac- curate location of the cross-over relative to mutation positions . All 10 P03.31 cycles achieved embryo transfer with a 70% pregnancy rate and 50% Prenatal expression of Baraitser-Winter syndrome clinical pregnancy rate resulting in 5 deliveries of 3 normal females, 1 G. Morin1, R. Goubet1, E. Gailly1, M. Mathieu1, B. Delaby2, S. Lanta2, P. Nae- carrier female and 2 normal males . pels2, A. Verloes3, J. Gondry2; This successful PGH approach to X-linked disease is also being ap- 1Unité de Génétique Clinique, Amiens, France, 2Centre de Diagnostic Prénatal, plied to Alport’s syndrome, Haemophilia A and B, Fragile X, Adrenoleu- Amiens, France, 3Département de Génétique - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, codystrophy and Hydrocepahalus . France. Baraitser-Winter syndrome was first reported by these two authors in 1988 in a brother and a sister, and a girl unrelated to the two others . The three patients had iris coloboma, hypertelorism, ptosis, mental re-Prenental diagnostics  tardation, large nasal root, and epicanthus . Two similar observations Cff-DNA levels in plasma samples from women during delivery at term with pericentric inversion of chromosome 2 were reported . In 1995, the were statistically higher than fetal DNA levels in women without labor at possibility of gyration abnormalities and trigonocephaly was noticed . term (p=0 .014) . The same results were found in the groups of preterm Due to the initial familial observation, an autosomal recessive mode of deliveries (28-31wks: p=0 .048 and 32-35wks: p= 0 .003) . A statistically inheritance was suggested . significant difference was not found in the lower age group (>27wks) We report the observation of a young boy, presenting with this condi- which was probably due to the low number of samples . Furthermore, tion . His prenatal history was marked by hygroma colli with normal a statistically significant increase of fetal DNA during deliveries at term karyotype, persisting along the pregnancy, associated from the sec- was found when compared to preterm deliveries (p=0 .05) . ond trimester with renal dilatation and intestinal hyperechogenicity . At Cff-DNA is increased during spontaneous deliveries at term and pre- birth, Noonan syndrome was first considered. PTPN11 analysis was term when compared to pregnant women without labor . Therefore, cff- performed but negative . At the age of 4, due to suggestive dysmor- DNA levels might be used as a marker for preterm deliveries . phic features, the diagnostic of Baraitser-Winter syndrome was made . However the patient had no iris coloboma or gyration abnormality . We P03.34 discuss the similarities with Noonan syndrome, even during the pre- Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities in tomsk natal period . population L. P. Nazarenko, S. L. Vovk, Y. S. Yakovleva, N. B. Torchova, M. O. Filippova, P03.32 M. P. Korf, N. L. Puryskina; Prenatal detection and molecular characterisation of two State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. supernumerary marker chromosomes (smc) derivatives of The aim of current study was to evaluate the frequency and structure of chromosome 22 in two unrelated patients. prenatally detected chromosomal abnormalities in Tomsk population . S. Andreu1, M. Jodar1, G. Arnedo1, O. Villa2,3, B. Perez4, R. Villanueva5, N. The risk for chromosomal aberrations was calculated by taking into Kosyakova6, L. Pérez Jurado2,3, C. Fuster7, A. Escalona1,7; account maternal age and gestation time, fist and/or second trimester 1Analisis MDB. Lab Duran Bellido, Barcelona, Spain, 2Unitat de Genètica. serum markers, fist and/or second trimester ultrasound. Cut-off for in- Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Center for Biomedical Research vasive testing was risk 1 in 250 . A total of 1349 chordocenteses, am- on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 4Centre de Ginecologia i niocenteses, placentocentesis and chorion biopsies were performed Reproducció, Barcelona, Spain, 5Centro Médico Augusta, Barcelona, Spain, during the period of 5 years. Karyotype clarification was performed by 6Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 7Unitat de Bio- conventional cytogenetic analysis . Abnormal karyotypes were found logia Cel•lular i Genètica Mèdica. Facultat Medicina. Universitat Autònoma de in 4 .8% of cases . Numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. were detected in 73 .8% and 26 .2% of cases, respectively . SMC are ‘additional markers’ whose origin and composition cannot be determined by conventional cytogenetics . Genetic counseling of P03.35 patients with SMC can be difficult, especially in prenatal testing, due chromosome abnormalities in amniocenteses with normal fetal to the complexity in establishing a karyotype-phenotype correlation . In ultrasonography fact, it has been estimated that about 37% of prenatal diagnosed SMC Z. Yilmaz1, E. Tarim2, O. Ozer1, T. Bulakbasi1, F. Yanik2, F. I. Sahin1; are associated with an abnormal phenotype . We report two cases of 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- prenatal diagnosed SMC, detected by G-banding and completed by kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics C-banding and NOR-staining. In the first case, the marker was familial, and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. segregating from a mother with non-mosaic karyotype . In the second Before 1994, maternal serum screening (MSS) was not offered to case, the SMC was de novo and present in the 78% of cells . The fol- women 35 years of age or older, unless they did not choose to un- lowing FISH procedures were performed to confirm and specify the dergo invasive diagnostic testing for chromosomal abnormalities . MSS material present in the marker chromosomes: locus-specific identifier, tests are usually performed for detecting trisomy 21 in women under 24-colour FISH, CGH, chromosomal manual microdissection and re- 35 years of age . Their use in women 35 years of age or older has verse FISH. These techniques identified both SMC as derivatives of a detection rate of 67% for all chromosomal abnormalities and 87% chromosome 22. In the first case, the inherited SMC was an iso(22p) for trisomy 21 . In our study, we evaluated karyotype results of am- and the child was delivered successfully without phenotypic abnormal- niocenteses of women with advanced maternal age (AMA), increased ities . In the second case, the SMC was a der(22)(q11 .2), resulting in a risk for trisomy 21 on MSS (MSS-DS, first and/or second trimester partial trisomy of band 22q11 .2, which has been associated with Cat- tests) and with AMA+MSS-DS . None of the patient groups had fetal eye syndrome (CES) in the literature . In this case the pregnancy was abnormalities detected during ultrasound examination . Among 2231 interrupted . It can be concluded with this study that familial markers patients consulted between January 2002 and December 2007, 52 representing an iso(22p) can be correlated with a normal phenotype . (2 .33%) had chromosome abnormalities . 20 of 817 cases (2 .44%) with Also, this work proves the importance of the application of molecular AMA, 23 of 1121 cases with MSS-DS risk (2%) and 9 of 293 cases cytogenetic procedures to know the origin of de novo SMC, in order to with both AMA and MSS-DS risk among (3 .07%) had chromosome give accurate prenatal genetic counseling . abnormalities . We detected trisomy 21 in 23 cases (7 AMA, 8 MSS-DS and 8 AMA+MSS-DS), mosaic trisomy 21 in one case with MSS-DS, P03.33 mosaic trisomy 20 in one case with AMA, sex chromosome aneuploi- cell-free DNA levels during labor at term and preterm deliveries dies in 9 cases (6 AMA, 3 MSS-DS), unbalanced rearrangements in 3 S. Rosenberger1, S. Reisinger1, E. Magnet2, M. Bauer2, A. Groselj-Strele3, U. cases (1 AMA, 2 MSS-DS), marker chromosome in 3 cases ( 1 AMA, Lang2, B. Pertl1; 2 MSS-DS), balanced rearrangement in 12 cases (4 AMA, 7 MSS-DS, 1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gy- 1 AMA+MSS-DS). Although the fetuses had normal findings in fetal ul- necology, Graz, Austria, 3Center for medical research, Graz, Austria. trasound examination, pregnancies with increased risks still had chro- The aim was to evaluate the effect of uterine contractions on cell free mosome abnormalities . fetal-DNA (cff) and total DNA levels in maternal plasma during term and preterm deliveries . Further we determined whether the cff- DNA P03.36 concentration from maternal plasma samples during deliveries at term Hypertelorism-microtia-clefting syndrome, two further prenatal are different from those with preterm deliveries . cases Maternal venous blood samples were collected during deliveries from J. Ghoumid1, H. Ansart-Franquet1, D. Subtil1, N. Pasz1, L. Devisme2, S. Ma- 65 pregnant women with male fetuses . 46 pregnant women delivered nouvrier-Hanu1, J. Andrieux1, M. Holder-Espinasse1; at term and 19 delivered preterm . Cff-DNA levels were analyzed by 1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Centre de Biologie Pathologie, Lille, France. quantitative real-time PCR using the SRY-assay and total DNA levels Hypertelorism-Microtia-Clefting syndrome (HMC syndrome) is a very were analyzed using the beta-Globin-assay . 148 pregnant women at rare autosomal recessive condition, with only nine cases reported in term without labor served as controls for women in labor at term . Pre- the literature . It comprises hypertelorism, microtia, cleft lip and/or pal- term samples (>27wks, 28-31wks, 32-36 wks, >36 wks) were matched ate, microcephaly, variable mental retardation, renal anomalies and for gestational age to control samples without labor . sometimes heart abnormalities .Prenental diagnostics  Here we describe two affected foetuses . Table 1 . During the first pregnancy, an increased nuchal translucency was iden- Total Aberrant % tified at 12 WG. Chromososomes on Chorionic Villus Sample (CVS) were normal 46, XX . Secondarily, heart abnormalities and a bilateral Biochemical Screening Risk 181 2 1,1% cleft lip and palate were noted . Advanced Maternal Age 249 18 7,2% Polyhydramnion 79 10 12,7% This multiple congenital anomalies syndrome led to termination of Olgohydramnion 50 2 4% pregnancy at 20 WG . Pathology examination revealed severe hyper- IUGR 111 4 3,6% telorism, microtia, bilateral cleft lip and palate . CNS Anomaly 48 3 6,3% HMC syndrome was suspected and since it is an autosomal reces- Foetal Hart Defect 16 4 25% sive inherited defect, the genetic counselling was cautious . We recom- Total 734 43 5,85% mended close detailed ultrasound follow-up for further pregnancies . In nearly 6% of analysed samples we found aberrant karyotypes. The most common During the second pregnancy, a recurrence was observed . Indeed, finding was autosomal aneuploidy. Trisomy 21 correlated with advanced maternal the foetal ultrasound showed at 12 WG an increased nuchal trans- age, polyhydramnion and foetal hart defects, while trisomy 18 was predominately lucency and a right cleft lip . Chromosomes on CVS were normal 46, found in foetuses with CNS abnormalities. Structural chromosomal abnormalities were XY . Pathology processed after the termination of pregnancy at 16 WG detected only in 5 cases (0,7%), and had diferent phenotypic expression. revealed hypertelorism, small ears and a right cleft of the upper lip . The parents are non consanguineous . Their karyotypes are normal . A P03.39 CGH-array study is pending on the first foetus. So far no responsible case Report: submicroscopic duplication of D18s535 ina fetus gene is known for the HMC syndrome and the hypothesis of chromo- with normal karyotype somic abnormality remains plausible . G. Dimisianos, R. Neroutsou, E. Manolakos, P. Tsoplou, A. Metaxotou; BIOIATRIKI SA, Athens, Greece. P03.37 QF PCR (Quantitative Fluorescent PCR) was introduced only a few First successful prenatal diagnosis of mDc1A form in tunisia years ago to speed up prenatal diagnosis and act as an adjuvant to revealed intrafamilial phenotypic variability in two siblings standard karyotype analysis . QF PCR utilizes length polymorphisms sharing the same mutation in LAMA gene of Short Tandem Repeats (STR) on selected chromosomes that are O. Siala1, F. Kammoun2, N. Louhichi1, I. Hadj Salem1, M. Gribaa3, H. Eghezal4, amplified and then detected by automatic genetic analysers. STRs are A. Saad4, C. Triki2, F. Fakhfakh1; found in abundance in the human genome and their usefulness as po- 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service de Neurolo- tential forensic markers for human identification purposes with the help gie, C H U Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Laboratory of Human Molecular of PCR has been noted almost 20 years ago . Many STRs have been Genetics, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Department of Cytogenetics and Reproductive utilized in the field of prenatal diagnosis leading to the development of Biology, Farhat Hached University Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, Sfax, QF PCR (Quantitative Fluorescent PCR) with the concurrent advance Tunisia. of technology in genetic analyzers . Here we report a case of a sub- MDC1A is a severe congenital muscular dystrophy caused by muta- microscopic duplication of STR D18S535 in an amniotic fluid sample tions in LAMA2 gene encoding the laminin α2 chain. Prenatal diag- screened routinely for aneuploidies . This partial trisomy involving the nosis represents prevention for many couples given the overwhelm- chromosome 18 was diagnosed by detecting this pattern only in one ing prospect of having another child with this incurable condition . We out of three markers used for chromosome 18 . The rest of the STRs of report the first prenatal diagnosis of MDC1A form in Tunisia and in chromosome 18 tested were normal . After screening the parents it was Africa in a family with previously affected child and identified mutation found that the extra allele had been inherited by the father so the preg- in LAMA2 gene. Amniotic fluid was sampled by amniocentesis under nancy continued normally . Conventional cytogenetic analysis that was ultrasound guidance . Molecular analyses were performed on cultured performed on this amniotic fluid had a normal karyotype. There have amniotic fluid cells after exclusion of maternal cell contamination by been reports of other such duplications in the literature and stringent QFPCR . Postnatal clinical examination was also performed by cere- screening is required to avoid false positive results when screening for bral MRI and by immunostaining on muscle biopsies using two mono- aneuploidies . clonal antibodies directed against the laminin α2. After exclusion of maternal cell contamination, mutation screening on fetal DNA showed P03.40 that he was homozygous for the c .8007delT frameshift mutation, and Prenatally detected trisomy of chromosome 21 the couple was counselled that the foetus would be affected . The pres- I. I. Kavecan, J. Jovanovic Privrodski, M. Kolarski, A. Krstic, L. Gacina, V. Cihi, ence of the mutation was confirmed on total DNA extracted from blood J. Rudez, T. Tarasenko; leukocytes of the newborn . Surprisingly, postnatal clinical examination Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. showed that the younger patient who was diagnosed as affected de- We present incidence of prenatally detected trisomy of chromosome veloped widely milder phenotype of MDC1A form than his severely 21 during last seven years (2000-2007) in Medical Genetic Centre in affected brother; and immunfluorescence showed complete deficiency Novi Sad, Vojvodina northern part of Serbia with 2 .000 .000 inhabit- of the laminin α2 in both patients. These findings suggest that other ans . genetic/or epigenetic factors including modifier gene can control the Suspicion for trisomy 21 and indications for invasive prenatal diagnosis course of the disease . Moreover, the intrafamilial phenotypic variability was made by Clinical Genetics according maternal age (35 and more), in siblings with the same molecular defect complicates the diagnoses paternal age (42 and more), family pedigree, biochemical screening, because presymptomatic LAMA2 mutation carriers can develop a dif- expert ultrasound result such as enlarged nuchal translucency, absent ferent phenotype than pervious diagnosed porosities . nasal bone, echogenic bowels, short femur, and other . During last seven years we detected 99 trisomy of chromosome 21 P03.38 (full trisomy 91 cases, mosaicism 5 cases, translocations 3 cases), indications for cordocentesis and correlation with chromosomal that is 38 .98% of all prenatal detected chromosomal anomalies (N= aberrations 99/254; 38 .98%) . B. O. Petrovic1, A. Ljubic1, J. Joksimovic2; 1Institute for gynecology and obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Medicines and medi- P03.41 cal devices agency of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. screening for different chromosome 18 methylation patterns Over a 7 years period we performed 734 cytogenetic analysis of foe- between placenta and whole blood tal blood taken by cordocentesis . Cordocenteses was performed be- L. Rueda1,2, E. Ordoñez1,2, P. Cañadas1, W. Puszyk3, F. Crea3, R. Old3, C. Fus- cause of late gestation . Indications for cordocentesis were advanced ter2, V. Cirigliano1,2; maternal age, increesed risk determined by biochemical screening or 1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Departament de Biologia Cel•lular, Universitat sonographically detected foetal abnormalities. Indications and findings Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3University of Warwick, Warwick, are given in table 1 . United Kingdom. Since its discovery in 1997, the presence of free fetal DNA in maternal plasma provided new approaches for non invasive prenatal diagnoses .Prenental diagnostics  However, universal fetal markers would allow its diffusion to a wider going prenatal genetic counselling from the area 7 of Madrid . 4930 number of applications and clinical cases . woman where testing by first-trimester combined biochemistry and More recently epigenetics has shown encouraging results toward this ultrasound nuchal translucency screening . In 1998, 13% of the preg- goal . Our aim was to investigate the methylation status of selected nant women renounced amniocentesis opposite a 50% of renounces promoter regions of chromosome 18 genes in maternal blood and pla- in 2007. The implementing of first-trimester screening has reduced the centa samples . number of amniocentesis and made an individual better earlier genetic A total of 36 genes on chromosome 18 were selected after database counselling . search for sequences with different expression patterns in placenta and blood . Primers were designed to analyse as much CpG islands P03.44 as possible in 102 promoter sequences for the presence of different Prenatal Diagnosis of a fetus with 44 chromosomes and methylation patterns in fetal tissue (CVS) and whole blood (WB) . Di- homozygous Robertsonian translocations (14;21) gestion with 4 methylation-dependent restriction enzymes was carried S. Sodia, W. Emberger, H. Zierler, M. Speicher; out on extracted DNA samples prior to PCR amplification to investigate Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria. the presence of differentially methylated sequences . We report the rare finding of a human fetus with 44 chromosomes Two promoter regions were found hypermethylated in CVS and hy- due to homozygous Robertsonian translocations (14;21) . The related pomethylated in WB . One more gene promoter was found with the parents, born in Turkey, were referred to our Genetic Department for opposite pattern being hypomethylated in CVS and hypermethylated genetic counselling at 16th weeks of gestation due to advanced ma- in WB . ternal age . Amniocentesis was performed and the analysis of amniotic In this study we found three genes on chromosome 18 with apparently fluid cells revealed 44 chromosomes with a homozygous Robertsonian differentially methylated promoters between placenta and whole blood . translocations (14;21): We are in the process of developing assays to detect the placental 44,XX,der(14;21)(q10;q10),der(14,21)(q10;q10) . At the time of amnio- form in maternal plasma. These preliminary results confirm the effec- centesis there were no pathological ultrasound findings. Karyotyping tiveness of an epigenetic approach to find biomarkers for the analysis of the consanguineous parents showed in each case the same hete- of free fetal DNA in maternal plasma . rozygous Robertsonian translocations(14;21) . Family history revealed that the translocation has segregated through at least four generati- P03.42 ons . Because UPD testing should be considered in fetuses carrying a Screening and nuchal translucency in first and second balanced Robertsonian translocation involving chromosomes 14 or 15, trimester: efficiency in the selection of pregnant women at risk we excluded in our case UPD 14 . Although Robertsonian translocati- of chromosomopathies ons are common chromosomal rearrangements, homozygous carriers A. Sánchez1,2, N. Clusellas1, C. Morales1, J. Bruguera3, I. Mademont4, R. Quer- are rare . Previously reported single case reports showed no evidence alt1, V. Borobio5, A. Borrell5,2, E. Casals1, A. Soler1,2; for an increased risk for malformations or dysmorphic features in carri- 1Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, ers of homozygous Robertsonian translocations . 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5Servei de Medicina Materno- P03.45 fetal, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. Prenatally detected mosaicism - 46,X,idic(Y)(q11.2)/45,X. A case First trimester screening for trisomy 21 is provided by a combination report of maternal age, fetal nuchal translucency and maternal serum free P. Tammur, K. Kuuse, P. Ilisson, M. Sitska; β-hCG and PAPP-A concentration between 11-13 weeks of gestation. Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia. The detection rate of trisomy 21 is 90% with a false positive rate of Isodicentric Y chromosomes are inherently unstable and may be lost 5% which is superior to the 65% achieved by second-trimester serum during mitosis resulting in mosaicism, generally including a 45,X cell biochemistry . We report a series of 5285 gestations that were referred line . Clinical presentations in patients with mosaicism for a structurally to maternal-fetal medicine department between 2003 and 2007 who abnormal Y chromosome can range from classical Turner phenotype underwent an invasive prenatal diagnosis . A total of 1986 samples through mixed gonadal dysgenesis to phenotypically normal males . were CVS and 3299 were amniotic fluid samples. In first trimester the The variability in sexual phenotype is thought to be related to the tissue 12,7% of the samples were referred due to positive combined screen- distribution, to the proportion of each cell line and to the location of the ing (+SC) and the 13,7% due to increased nuchal translucency (INT) breakpoints . However, prenatal diagnosis of mosaic 46,X,idic(Y)/45,X as unique abnormal parameter . In second trimester the 39% of the is rare, and poses a serious dilemma concerning the prognosis related samples were referred for positive second trimester screening and to the fetal stature, sexual differentiation and the risk development of the 2,5% for increased nuchal translucency . In the second trimester gonadoblastoma . samples the 1,4% of +SC and the 9,3% of INT showed a chromoso- In our case amniocentesis was performed to a 33-year-old women mopathy. In the first trimester samples the 12% of +SC and 25% of because of positive serum screening on the 15 week of pregnancy . INT presented chromosomal abnormalities. In first trimester we must Cultured amniocytes from two different culture flasks revealed mosaic perform 5,5 invasive procedures to find a chromosomopathy in group karyotype 46,X,+mar[36]/45,X[14] . For detecting the origin of marker of patients with the reported indications, whereas in the second tri- chromosome, fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) was performed mester 53 invasive procedures are needed to detect a chromosomal 1)with X and Y centromeric probes (AneuVysion, X, Y-alpha satellite abnormality. These results emphasise the higher efficiency of first tri- probe) and 2) XYpter subtelomere specific probe (Cytocell). FISH mester screening over the second besides the medical advantages of analysis revealed that the marker chromosome was isodicentric Y an early diagnosis . chromosome with two short arms and a small portion of the long arm: 46,X,idic(Y)(q11 .2)[41]/45,X[44] . After further genetic counselling, the P03.43 parents opted for termination of the pregnancy . Postmortem examina- First-trimester screening protocols and their impact in tion revealed male fetus with microanomalies and no major abnormali- cytogenetic counselling ties . Cytogenetic analysis of the placenta showed mosaicism in a dif- C. Cotarelo-Pérez, R. Oancea, M. Fenollar-Cortés, M. Ortega-de-Heredia, J. ferent degree 46,X,idic(Y)(q11 .2)[46]/45,X[4] and mosaicism was also Montalvo-Montes, M. Lautre-Ecenarro; found in fetal tissues . Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain. In the last few years, we have referred an increase of diagnosis pre- P03.46 natal (DP) due to advanced maternal age and more knowledge of the is informed choice in the context of prenatal testing a general population about possible diagnosis methods . The assump- universally held value? tion of first-trimester screening protocols (ultrasound and biochemistry A. van den Heuvel1, E. Dormandy1, L. Chitty2, T. M. Marteau1; methods) has allowed to generalize the DP to all pregnant women, in- 1King’s College London, Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom, 2Insti- dependently of maternal age . We present our results after seven years tute of Child Health and UCLH, London, United Kingdom. with the combined test and its impact on the cytogenetics prenatal Background: Informed choice is central to prenatal testing and en- diagnosis . We analyzed data from 5743 singleton pregnancies under- dorsed by many national and international guidelines for prenatalPrenental diagnostics  service delivery . Recent evidence suggests that there is considerable tigation was carried out on amniotic fluid sample. The fetus’s kayo- variation in the extent to which these guidelines translate into practice . type was triploid with 69, XXX chromosome complement in all the This is particularly evident in cross-country comparisons . This paper metaphase spreads obtained from three different cultures, using GTG presents findings from a values survey that assessed the extent to banding technique . Upon termination of the fetus, gross abnormalities which informed choice in the context of prenatal testing is a universally indicative of triploidy were present in the fetus . held value . This is one of a few cases reported so far where abnormal maternal Method: Values attached to choice in the context of prenatal diagnosis serum screening indicative of trisomy 18, ends up as a triploid fetus . were assessed among 1) general populations (n=1200) and 2) obste- Maternal serum screening is an essential approach for detecting chro- tricians (n=1117) in Europe (UK, Netherlands, Italy and Greece) and mosome abnormality prenatally, and thus helping with prevention of Asia (China and India) . the birth of a genetically abnormal fetus . Results: Findings from both samples suggest that there is a sharp di- vide between first Northern European countries and second, Southern P03.49 European and Asian countries in the extent to which choice is valued . A new prenatal diagnosis of Nager syndrome on monochorionic- Most respondents from Northern European countries perceived that biamniotic twin pregnancy undergoing prenatal testing should reflect a parental choice (71%- H. Ansart-Franquet1, V. Houfflin-Debarge1, J. Ghoumid1, N. Pasz1, L. Devis- 86%), compared with a minority from Southern European and Asian me2, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, J. Andrieux1, M. Holder-Espinasse1; countries (16%-33%) . Comparison across the populations suggests 1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Centre de Biologie Pathologie, Lille, France. that health professionals are more strongly in favour of choice than The Nager syndrome, also termed preaxial acrofacial dysostosis, is a general populations . Given the political endorsement of informed rare condition characterised by limb and facial deformities . Limb anom- choice, the latter may reflect a tendency for professional identities to alies consist of hypoplasia or absence of radius, radioulnar synostosis, dominate over personal values . and hypoplasia or absent thumbs . The mandibulofacial dysostosis is Conclusion: Implications of these findings for policy and practice will be characterised mainly by severe micrognatia and malar hypoplasia . discussed within the framework of the ethical principle of ’autonomy’ . Since its first description in 1948, more than 80 cases have been re- ported in the literature, although there are only two reports of prenatal P03.47 diagnosis . We report here a further case of Nager syndrome diagnosed couple’s karyotyping in recurrent miscarriage: A case report at 22 weeks of gestation in a monochorionic biamniotic twin pregnan- with t(13;14) cy . The prenatal diagnosis was performed on ultrasound because of S. Shinde, B. B. Ganguly; severe microretrognathia and significant forearm shortening on both MGM Center for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, New Bombay, India. foeti . Termination of pregnancy was performed at 25 WG . Chromo- An individual who is a carrier of a translocation may not have any somes were normal 46XY. The pathology report confirmed the diagno- problem with their growth, development and health but depending on sis of Nager syndrome in both twins . Growth discordance was noted the chromosomes involved, they may experience reproductive prob- between the fetuses . Both presented a large cleft palate, ear dysplasia lems such as infertility, miscarriage and having a child with abnormal and a severe microretrognathia . They had bilateral thumb agenesis chromosomal complement . In the present study, chromosome study with single palmar crease. The X-ray confirmed the microretrognathia. was carried out on young couple who was married for 1 .5 yrs and One foetus had bilateral radioulnar synostosis with hypoplasia of the had three consecutive missed abortions . However, chromosome study right radius, and bilateral thumb agenesis . The other twin presented was not carried out in any of the abortus . Couples karyotyping follow- bilateral thumb agenesis too, but only a partial radioulnar synostosis ing PHA-stimulated blood culture detected constitutive abnormality in on the left side . A CGH-array analysis on fetal DNA is pending. husband with 46,XY,t(13;14)(q22 .1;q24 .3) pattern . The translocation between the two chromosomes was a balanced one with no significant P03.50 phenotypic effect . The wife had a normal female karyotype . The pos- cytogenetic analysis of chorionic villi samples (cVs) in missed sible genetic make up of the male gametes and subsequently of the abortions fetus could be: i) both normal 13 and 14, ii) rearranged 13 with normal K. Sentija, Z. Duic, I. Krivak Bolanca, S. Katalenic Simon; 14, iii) rearranged 14 with normal 13, and iv) both rearranged 13 and University Clinic Merkur, Zagreb, Croatia. 14 . Mathematically, she has a 1 in 4 (25%) chance of having baby The aim of our study was to analyse the frequency and type of chro- entirely chromosomally normal and the others will be a translocation mosomal aberrations of chorionic villi samplings (CVS) in patients with ‘carrier’ just like father or carrier of a recombinant 13 or 14 . There- missed abortion, performed in our clinic during last three years . fore, 3/4 of her babies are at risk for being chromosomally abnormal . Methods: CVS analyses obtained by transabdominal biopsy in first These babies could have severe congenital malformations and if they and second trimester of 57 pregnant women with ultrasonographic manage to survive birth and the neonatal period, profound metabolic evidence of missed abortion were performed . For chromosome analy- disturbances and mental retardation could persist life long . However, sis conventional cultures of CVS and GTG-banding techniques were prenatal diagnosis in CVS or amniotic fluid must be carried out for used . evaluation of chromosomal composition in fetus and obstetric man- Results: Of total 579 CVS analysed, 57 CVS were performed for agement accordingly . missed abortion . The mean maternal age was 35,86 (22-46) years, and mean gestational week was 9,75 (8-16) . Fetal karyotyping was P03.48 successful in 54 cases, while 3 cases were excluded from study for Triploidy identified through Maternal Serum Screening in low proliferative activity . Of 54 analysed, 36 (66 .66%) cases had an second trimester abnormal karyotyp, while no cromosomal abnormalities could be diag- F. Behjati1,2, I. Bagherizadeh2, M. Oveisi2, Z. Hadipour2, A. Saremi2, Y. Shaf- nosed in 18 (33 .33%) cases . Of 36 abnormal karyotyps, predominant aghati1,2; abnormality were autosomal trisomies in 22 (61,11%) cases, includ- 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation ing various chromosome groups (B,C;D,E,G), most of them represent Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Medical Genetics, Sarem nonviable defects . Follows 6 (16,65%) polyploidies and 4 (11,11%) Women’s Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. X monosomies (46,XO) . Relatively rare type of double abnormality Amniocentesis was carried out at 17 weeks gestation on a 27 years old in 2 cases (5,55%) (48,XY;D14+,E17+; 48XX;C7+,D13+) were ob- woman following an abnormal maternal serum screening test (MSS) . served . Mosaicism (46,XY/47,XY) was present in one case (2 .77%) MSS test was carried out primarily to estimate the risk of trisomy for where autosomal trisomy could not be determinated . Translocation chromosomes 21 and 18 . The maternal serum markers used were (46,XY)t(D13,D14) was also present only in one (2 .77%) case . alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG), and Conclusion: Alghtough CVS analysis in our study did not exclud nor- unconjugated estriol (UE3) together with maternal age . The fetus was mal karyotype, our results suggest that missed abortion is strongly as- identified as screen-positive for Edward’s syndrome (trisomy18), with sociated with chromosome abnormalities . The factors responsible for low UE3, normal AFP and hCG levels . The calculated risk for trisomy missed abortion with a normal karyotype are presently unknown and 18 was more than 1:50 . require further study . To identify any possible chromosomal abnormality, cytogenetics inves-Prenental diagnostics  P03.51 P03.53 mLPA validation for prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal Cell selection in culture of amniotic fluid cells: report of three anomalies: retrospective study of 125 consecutive chorion villi cases with low level of true mosaicism samples N. Clusellas1, C. Morales1, I. Mademont2, R. Queralt1, A. Soler1, C. Badenas1, D. Diego-Alvarez, C. Ramos, B. Gomez-Dominguez, R. Cardero-Merlo, A. A. Sánchez1; Bustamante-Aragones, M. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Auz-Alexandre, J. Gallego-Merlo, 1Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. A. Gimenez-Pardo, F. Infantes, C. Ayuso, J. Diaz-Recasens, M. Garcia-Hoyos, Mosaic aneuploidy is is found in 0,3% of all amniocentesis . When de- R. Riveiro-Alvarez, E. Vallespin, A. Avila-Fernandez, D. Cantalapiedra, M. Ro- tected in prenatal diagnosis is a troublesome problem on interpreta- driguez de Alba, I. Lorda-Sanchez; tion and genetic counselling . We present three cases with low level of Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. mosaicism: Rapid screening for common aneuploidies (trisomy 13, 18, 21 and 1 .- Twenty cells anlysed from two independent vessels showed those involving sexual chromosomes) by interphase nuclei FISH or 47,XXX, which is a good prognostic result . But a culture performed multiplex QF-PCR has become a common offer in prenatal diagno- in another laboratory showed a 45,X/47,XXX with a 75% of monoso- sis . Although it reduces maternal anxiety by discarding the most fre- mic cells . We revised our slides and found 7/40 of 45,X cells, which quent chromosomal anomalies, some other like terminal deletions are changed the genetic counselling . missed . In addition, rapid detection of unbalanced products of parental 2.- The first culture showed 1/50 of 47,XY,+21 cells, the second and balanced translocations requires the use of additional specific FISH the third showed 5/50 and 2/25 trisomic cells, respectively . This was probes . In contrast, MLPA technique with subtelomeric probe-mixes an ambiguous result, with 6% of +21 cells . We performed QF-PCR provides information about copy number changes of every chromo- analysis for common aneuploidies with a portion of fresh amniotic fluid some in a rapid (24 h) and simple protocol requiring few material . Al- and the result was compatible with trisomy 21 . though specific probe-mixes for the detection of common anomalies in 3: The cell culture in this case was slow and poor, in order to ensure prenatal diagnosis have been validated, the aim of the present study the diagnosis, we decided to perform QF-PCR . The result was a nor- was to evaluate the use of subtelomeric probe-mixes for the rapid de- mal male . Finally, we could obtain some metafases for cytogenetic tection of aneuploidy, unbalanced reciprocal translocations and termi- analysis and the result was 37 cells with a 45,X karyotype . The gesta- nal chromosomal rearrangements of every chromosome on a hundred tion was interrupted because of ultrasound findings. We repeated cyto- and twenty-five consecutive chorion villi samples . Terminal deletion or genetics, FISH and QF-PCR studies and the result was 45,X/46,XY . duplication was suspected when two different probes for a chromo- Conclusions: There is a selection in the culture that may disturb the somal arm appeared deleted or duplicated, respectively . Aneuploidy real percentage of abnormal cells . Then, the percentage of abnormal was suspected if probes for both arms of a chromosome appear de- cells does not reflect the state of the fetus. The use of complementary leted (monosomy) or duplicated (trisomy) . Results demonstrate the techniques such as QF-PCR and FISH may help to the final result. capability of MLPA on detecting not only numerical but also structural chromosomal anomalies on prenatal samples . Thus, this technique P03.54 can also be a rapid and simple approach for the detection of balanced Identification of feto-maternal differentially methylated or unbalanced products of translocations . regions on chromosome 18 and chromosome 21. towards the development of fetal epigenetic markers for trisomies 18 and 21 P03.52 E. Papageorgiou1,2, H. Fiegler2, N. P. Carter2, P. C. Patsalis1; 22p derived supernumerary marker chromosome identified 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Well- prenatally by mLPA come Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, United R. Fernandez Gonzalez1, P. Blanco Soto1, J. Ubeda Arades1, B. Ferreiro1, A. Kingdom. Gonzalez de la Vega2, M. Sanchez Hombre2, A. Gomez Pastor3, M. A. Orera1,2; The discovery of free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has raised the 1Hospital Gregorio Maranon, Madrid, Spain, 2Circagen, Madrid, Spain, 3Com- possibility for future development of noninvasive prenatal diagnosis plejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. (NIPD) . We have been using Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation Supernumerary Marker Chromosomes (SMC) have a frequency of (MeDIP) assay and DNA oligonucleotide array technology to screen around 0 .05% in prenatal diagnosis .Risk for congenital anomalies for differentially methylated sequences between maternal blood and ranges from 7% for SMC derived from acrocentric chromosomes to placental (fetal) DNA that could be exploited for NIPD . The oligo arrays 28% for SMC derived from autosomes . used are specific for chromosome 18 and chromosome 21.The probes We present a prenatally detected SMC in a 32 years old woman, with are 50-60bp long with a median spacing of 170bp for chromosome18 a previous spontaneous miscarriage . The ultrasound performed at 11th and 70bp for chromosome21 . gestational week detected a cystic hygroma . Chorionic villus sampling The results have shown regions of several consecutive oligo array was done at that time and FISH for 13, 18, 21, XY chromosomes (An- probes to be differentially methylated between whole blood and pla- euvysion, Vysys) was normal . No foetal karyotype could be obtained, centa . A detailed analysis has revealed 42 regions on chromosome18 and despite normal ultrasounds during follow up, an amniocentesis and 34 regions on chromosome21 that can potentially be used as fe- was performed at the 16th gestational week . The karyotype of the fetus tal DNA epigenetic markers . The methylation status of the SERBINB5 was 47,XY+mar . The marker chromosome was centromeric, satellited promoter region and two additional regions on chromosome18 as well and smaller than chromosome 21 . Because of the risk of Congenital as ten regions on chromosome21 have been confirmed by real time Heart Disease, we performed a FISH with TUPLE1 probe (Catch 22) quantitative PCR in six whole blood and six placental DNA samples . (Vysys) that was normal . Parental karyotypes were also normal . Furthermore a high degree of variability has been observed between In order to identify the origin of the SMC, we performed Multiplex Liga- first and third trimester placentas whereas a lower degree of variabil- tion Probe Amplification (MLPA) with Salsa P070 for Telomeres (MRC- ity has been detected between individual samples of the same gesta- Holland) . The result was compatible with partial trisomy of 22p . Con- tional age . Additionally, to imitate the low percentage of fetal DNA ob- sidering the result of FISH and MLPA, we conclude that the breakpoint served in the plasma of pregnant women, we have prepared mixtures lied between the end of IL17R and the beginning of HIRA, carrying of 5% fetal DNA with maternal DNA and tested the enrichment of fetal some or all the genes associated with Cat Eye Syndrome . The parents DNA by using MeDIP . Preliminary results have shown enrichment of decided to terminate the gestation . fetal specific methylated DNA sequences absent in whole blood DNA This case illustrates the difficulties in prenatal genetic counselling samples . when a SMC is involved and the need to use all technologies available to better predict the outcomes of these pregnancies . P03.55 Partial trisomy 3q and monosomy 15q due to paternal t(3;15)(q26.33;q26.1); paternal detection by m-cGH and FisH, prenatal USG, postnatal and autopsy findings K. Piotrowski1, M. Constantinou2, Z. Celewicz3, J. Patalan4, P. Waloszczyk5, S. Zajączek1, B. Kałużewski2; 1Cytogenetics Unit, Szczecin, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medi-Prenental diagnostics  cal University, Lodz, Poland, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, eases, 158 of them had been X- linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) “Mother and Child Hospital”, Szczecin, Poland, 4Dept of Pediatrics “Mother and , 2 other isolated defects of peroxisomal β-oxidation and 38 defects of Child Hospital”,, Szczecin, Poland, 5Dept of Pathology Specialistic Hospital peroxisomal biogenesis (DPB) . “Zdunowo”, Szczecin, Poland. The 158 afected X-ALD/AMN males proceed from 95 families that re- A 31 years old gravida was referred at 13 week of pregnancy for pre- quested prenatal diagnosis (PD) in 34 pregnancies . In all the affected natal diagnosis due to previous four undiagnosed pregnancy loss . Dur- foetuses, parents opted by termination . Couples that were against this ing non-invasive screening at 14 week of pregnancy cystic hygroma option decided not request PD . In most cases the mother was a carrier (1.33 cm), features of cardiac insufficiency, multiply bone anomalies detected in the course of family studies, who proves the relevance of and prune belly syndrome suspicion were noted .Urgent karyotype the recommendation to the parents of the index cases to communicate analyses of both parents with resolution 450 - 650 bb . not detected the genetic risk to other family members . As far as we know, only in any anomalies .Amniocenthesis (with suspicion of X`s chromosomes one case, the couple hide the information to the family, resulting later anomaly) was performed at 15 week and didn’t detect any pathologies on in the birth of one affected child . A couple that undertake 4 pregnan- in classical cytogenetics analyses, but mCGH investigation (2,44 OLI- cies with the result of 4 affected male foetuses, requested preimplanta- GO m-CGH Agilent) showed deletion in 46XY foetus chromosomes of tory sex selection, but they don’t succeed in two consecutive cycles of distal 15q26.1qter and duplication of 3q26.33qter, confirmed by FISH in vitro fertilization . with use of telomeric probes (Tel Vision 3qSO and 15qSO) and de- Families with other Peroxisomal disorders asked for DP in 11 pregnan- scribed as 46XY, ish der (15)t(3;15)(qter+,qter-)pat . Aberration was cies, 4 at risk for an isolated defect of peroxisomal β-oxidation and 7 result due to next detected paternal balanced subtelomeric transloca- at risk for PDB . tion 46,XY,ish t(3;15)(qter-qter+;qter+qter-) .In next USG observations Intrauterine Growth Retardation, hypoplastic long bones, feets and P03.58 hands anomalies, heart defect in form of CoA, hypoplastic DA, VSD, A case of de novo 16p rearrangement diagnosed prenatally polycystic kidneys and defect of abdominal muscle were diagnosed . I. D. Papoulidis1, A. P. Athanasiadis2, M. B. Petersen3, E. Drosopoulou2, E. After uuneventful pregnancy a boy (2130g, 40 cm, Apgar 6,6,7) was Siomou1, C. Malamaki1, F. Partheniou1, T. Liehr4, Z. G. Scouras2; born preterm at 36 week . Due to their poor status (particularly renal 1Eurogenetica S.A., Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, anomalies and insufficiency) possibility of cardiosurgery correction Thessaloniki, Greece, 3Institute of child health, Athens, Greece, 4Institute of hu- was excluded and he died at 40 day of life.Autopsy confirmed and pré- man genetics and anthropology, Friedrich-Schiller-University, Jena, Germany. cised all detected in foetal USG anomalies and more like: in the heart A case of a terminated pregnancy of a 30-year-old woman is reported aorta-truncus pulmonalis anastomoses, additional perimembranous in which ultrasound examination at 22 weeks’ gestation showed two VSD, bilateral hydronephrosis with uretheral and urachal hypoplasia umbilical cord vessels, enlarged polycystic right kidney, implying poly- and polysplenia . cystic kidney disease, and a normal left kidney . Conventional chro- mosome analysis (GTG banding) revealed addition of chromosomal P03.56 material to the long arm of chromosome 16; however the limited Total cell free and cell free fetal DNA quantification in resolution of conventional prenatal karyotype analysis prevented the preeclamptic pregnant womans identification of the origin of the additional material. MLPA (Multiple Li- L. Lazar, B. Nagy, A. Morvarecz, J. Rigó Jr.; gation-dependent Probe Amplification) analysis was performed, which Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. showed neither duplication nor deletion in chromosome 16 . Both par- Background: Presence of cell free fetal DNA in plasma of pregnant ents were found to have a normal karyotype . Expected data will in- womans is a well known phenomenon . The quantity of DNA is differ- clude Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis to identify the ent in normal and pathological pregnancies . The aim of our study was chromosomal origin of the additional material . Furthermore, array CGH to measure and to compare the quantity of total free and fetal origin analysis will be performed to define the chromosomal breakpoints and DNA in the plasma of preeclamptic patients, and patient with normal the size of the additional material . pregnancy and to reveal the correlations with pregnancy age and body mass index (BMI) in both groups . methods: Blood samples were col- P03.59 lected, and plasma was separated from 71 paeclamptic and 71 pa- Polyploidy in early spontaneous abortions tients witouth simptoms of preeclampsia . Quantitative real-time PCR I. Tonković Đurišević, D. Mužinić, R. Lasan, K. Crkvenac Gornik, L. Letica, M. analysis of the SRY region of Y chromosome and globin gene was per- Burek, D. Begović; formed in order to detect and to measure the quantity of cell free fetal Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University DNA and total free DNA in plasma . Results: The mean pregnancy age Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. in preeclamptic and control group was 37 and 34 weeks respectively, Polyploidy is a condition in which there is more than two sets of chro- BMI ranges between 20 .6-38 .2 and 16 .7-30 . The mean value ± SD, of mosomes. A total of 321 cases of first trimester spontaneous abortions total free DNA was: 6 .16E-03±0 .23E-03 ng/mL and 2 .755E-03±0 .32E- between 4 and 13 weeks of gestation were analyzed cytogenetically by 03 ng/mL, in SRY positive cases the quantity of free fetal DNA we direct - preparation method using chorionic villi . Among 54% of abnor- measured 3 .363E-04±1 .28E-05 ng/mL and 1 .04E-04±0 .92E-05 ng/mL mal karyotypes, trisomy was predominant . The second most common respectively . The diefference between two groups in both cases was abnormality was triploidy found in 25 (7,8%) cases . Triploidy may arise significant (P= .001) . conclusions: The quantity of free DNA is signifi- from fertilization of haploid egg by two haploid sperm or by maternal cantly higher in preeclamptic cases than in patients with normal preg- or paternal meiotic errors . Tetrapoidy is a rare ploidy abnormality and nancy and depends on mathernal weight . In concordance with other was detected in 3 (0,9%) cases, 92,XXYY and 92,XXXX sex chromo- studies the quantitative measurement of total cell free and cell free some complement . fetal DNA could be a predictive marker in early diagnosis and preven- Among the triploid abortions the gonosomal constitution of XXY pre- tion of preecalmpsia . vailed (14 cases), followed by XXX (8cases) and XYY (3 cases) . The maternal age ranged from 18 to 35 age and the gestational age from P03.57 6 to 13 weeks . In this study the frequency of poliploidy abortions de- Reproductive decision of spanish families with genetic risk for creased with maternal age, what confirms that increased maternal age peroxisomal diseases is not a risk factor and mechanism of poliploidy . T. Pampols1,2, M. Coll1,2, M. Ruiz3,2, M. Girós1,2; Triploidy and tetraploidy together account for 18% of chromosomal ab- 1Institut de Bioquimica Clinica.Servei de Bioquimica i Genetica Molecular.Hos- normalities and give rise to a significant proportion of human pregnan- pital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de cy wastage . Poliploidyies are numerical abnormalities, are sporadic, Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Instituto de Inves- and they do not usually recur in subsequent pregnancies . tigación Biomédica de Bellvitge(IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain. Peroxisomal disorders are severe neurodegenerative diseases caused by defects in genes that control single steps of metabolic peroxisomal pathways as well as the proteins involved in the peroxisomal biogen- esis . Since 1988 we have diagnosed 198 cases of Peroxisomal dis-Prenental diagnostics  P03.60 and karyotype analysis approve that PGD is a reliable option for the patients with the results of perinatal testing from istanbul memorial Hospital several indications to have a non-affected offspring. C. Aslan1, G. Ozgon1, O. Oner1, B. Onal1, F. Fiorentino1, C. Yilanlioglu2, S. Kahraman2; P03.61 1Genoma Turkey, istanbul, Turkey, 2Memorial hospital, istanbul, Turkey. Pathological cytogenetical findings in fetal prenatal diagnosis Introduction J. Jovanovic Privrodski, I. Kavecan, A. Krstic, L. Gacina, M. Kolarski, V. Cihi, The aim of this study is the retrospective data collection of patients J. Rudez, T. Tarasenko; (especially PGD patients) between 2000-2007 for amniocentesis and Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. for cvs between 2003-2007 to understand that the PGD might be a In Medical Genetic Centre in Novi Sad (Institute for Children and Youth reasonable option for translocation carriers, advanced maternal age Health Care Vojvodina), prenatal genetic screening of fetal abnormali- (ama), single gene disorder (sgd) carriers, patological USG findings, ties is performed using detailed analisys of pedigree, maternal and recurrent implantation failure (rif), recurrent pregnancy lost (rpl), bad paternal age, biochemical screening (pregnancy associated plasma obstetric history . protein -PAPP-A, free beta-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin Mat- method: Cell cultures were used for amniotic fluid specimens and -free beta hCG in 11-14th weeks of gestation; alpha-fetoprotein -AFP, tissue culture for coryon villi sampling (CVS) . Culture developments unconjugated estriol -uE3, PAPP-A, in 16-18th weeks of gestation) and were observed and underwent harvesting steps in the optimum tim- expert ultrasound . If married couple have risk for fetal chromosomal ing (after 10-12 days) . Slides were stained with giemsa staining tech- abnormalities, Clinical genetics indicate invasive prenatal diagnosis . niques (GTG) and 30 cells were counted . During last five years (2003-2007.) in Medical Genetics Centre in Novi Between years 2000-2007, amniocentesis were performed to 615 pa- Sad were made 19019 Genetic consultations, and 11488 invasive pre- tients and 82 CVS between 2003-2007 in our center . The indications natal procedures (9938 amniocentesis, 1550 cordocentesis) . We found and chromosome analysis results are in the table .1 below . 169 pathological findings (1.47%), from amniocenthesis (N=145/9938; Results: 1 .46%) and from cordocenthesis (N=24/1550; 1 .54%) . The most fre- Table1 Results of amniosentesis quent chromosomal anomalies was Down syndrome (42 .01%), Ed- Normal or balanced wards syndrome (9 .46%), Patau syndrome (5 .32%), Turner syndrome (n=54) (6 .51%), Klinefelter syndrome (9 .46%), and other chromosomal anom- FISH (n=55) mosaic 47,XXY alies (27 .24%) . PGT (n=91) Abnormal(n=1) Normal or balanced Single gene Normal (n=36) - P03.62 disorder(n=36) Karyotyping vs MLPA in spontaneous (late) pregnancy losses. Normal (n=141) - - Trisomy 18 T. Dijkhuizen, H. H. Faber, G. Drok, K. B. J. Gerssen-Schoorl, B. Sikkema- Mosaic X Raddatz, K. Bouman; IVF(n=146) Patologic USG(n=3) 46,--,t(1;2)(p36 .1;q12),del(2)(q1 Department of Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands. Abnormal (n=5) 2q13) Early spontaneous abortions (less than 16 weeks of pregnancy) have Maternal age (n=1) Trisomy 18 a variety of chromosome aberrations, most of them aneuploidies of Translocation (n=1) 46,--,dic(8),t(8;18)(q13;q11 .1) whole chromosomes . Chromosome abnormalities occur to a lesser Normal(n=361) - - extent in second and third trimester pregnancy losses . Chromosome Trisomy21(n=4) analysis provides valuable information about the possible cause of fe- Tryploidy tal death and the recurrence risk . Yet it is hampered by a high rate Patologic USG(n=7) 45,X of culture failure. Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe Amplification 46,--,t(4;6),t(5;6),t(11;18),der(9) (MLPA) overcomes the problem of culture failure if DNA is extracted add(9) directly out of the fetal tissue before culture . Using a subtelomere dedi- Abnormal triple test Sponta- Trisomy21(n=2) cated test, it can provide information on the ploidy status of all chromo- (n=2) neous Abnormal (n=17) 46,--,t(2;7) some (arm)s . (n=378) 46,--,;recp t(13;16) In the present study we compared routine chromosome with MLPA Translocation (n=4) 46,--, t(10;13) analysis in a series of more than hundred fetal tissue samples of spon- inv(10) taneous (late) second and third trimester pregnancy losses . Routine Male factor (n=1) Mosaic X chromosome analysis succeeded in 20% of cases, of which 8% had an Trisomy 18 abnormal chromosome complement . For MLPA, two different subtelo- Maternal age (n=3) Tryploidy mere specific tests (P036 and P070) were used to examine all chro- Mosaic XXY mosomes for ploidy status . We obtained interpretable results in 83% of cases . Abnormal ratio spreads were observed in 6% of them . Detailed Table.2 Results of CVS data will be presented on the poster . Indications Chromosome Analysis Results In conclusion, MLPA increases the success rate for chromosome AMA (n=8) Normal (n=8) analysis dramatically by overcoming the problem of culture failure . Al- Abnormal First Trimester Normal (n=29) though it is suggested that culture failure could be caused by the fact Test(n=30) Trisomy 21 that the fetus has a chromosome abnormality, the percentage of ge- Normal (n=10) netically abnormal tissue samples remains similar for both techniques, Trisomy 18 MLPA and karyotyping . Trisomy 21 Patological USG Findings (n=16) Mosaic X P03.63 45,X Prenatal diagnosis of mosaicism for different structural 46,--,t(3;11),t(5;14) unbalanced cell lines involving chromosome 18 47,--,der(15)t(4;15) Bad Obstetric History (n=5) Normal (n=5) A. Soler1,2, J. Bruguera3, I. Mademont4, C. Morales1, N. Clusellas1, C. Bade- Normal (n=1) nas1,2, A. Sánchez1,2; Male Factor (n=2) 46,--,inv(12) 1Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular. Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, Abnormal Triple Test (n=2) Normal (n=2) 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundació Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER, Single gene Normal Barcelona, Spain. +HLA(n=9) (n=9) Confined placental mosaicism is detected in 1-2% of pregnancies un- Normal PGD Cases (n=12) dergoing first-trimester CVS. Structural mosaicism is a rare event, of- (n=2) PGD FISH(n=3) ten difficult to interpret. However, chromosome 18 appears to be most 46,-- frequently involved in these structural rearrangements, according to ,t(10;12) published cases . We report a further case detected by prenatal diag- Discussion: In this study, we present that performing amniocentesis and cvs cultures nosis . CVS was performed on a pregnant woman due to increasedPrenental diagnostics  nuchal translucency . Cytogenetic analysis after short-term culture to carry multiple anomalies . The most frequent structural abnormali- showed four different abnormal cell lines involving chromosome 18, ties detected were facial anomalies (91 .3%[n=21]), holoprosencephaly and the karyotype was described as: (60 .9% [n=14]) and heart defects (56 .5%[n=13]) . Abnormal amniotic mos 46,XX,18p+[15]/r(18)[14]/i(18q)[1]/45,XX,-18[3] . Amniocente- fluid volume was present in 5 cases. Common findings included uri- sis was subsequently performed . Ultrasound examination showed a nary obstruction (n=10[43 .5%]), microcephaly (n=7[30 .4%]) and poly- septate translucency as the only abnormal finding. QF-PCR analysis dactyly (n=7[30.4%]). Following anomalies were verified in four cases showed homozygosity for all 18p markers, suggesting a 18p mono- (17 .4%): cerebral ventriculomegaly, omphalocele, distended bladder, somy . The karyotype obtained was 46,XX,del(18p) in all cells . The pre- single umbilical artery and clubbed feet. Other findings: 3 cases of gnancy was terminated and pathologic studies are being performed at abnormal hands, abnormal feet positioning, echodense kidneys and present. We propose a model to explain the cytogenetic findings. A first agenesis of nasal bones; two cases of genital defects and agenesis postzygotic error, probably an unequal sister chromatid exchange gi- of one ear; one case of ascitis, edema of the scalp, pleural effusion, ving rise to a cell line with del(18p) and the complementary with 18p+, ectopic kidney, atypical cranial ossification, bowel dilatation and ab- may have most likely happened before the first post-zygotic division, dominal mass . since no normal cells have been detected . Isochromosome(18q) and Conclusion: Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 13 may provide options re- ring(18) seem to be secondary to del(18p), and monosomy 18 may garding pregnancy management . Recent advances in sonographic im- have derived from the ring(18) cell line, given the instability of rings . An aging may lead to a frequent update of the findings, without invalidat- unequal distribution of the different cell lines between the trophoblast ing the applicability of prior reports . Thus, this updated information can and the inner cell mass, and differences on the viability of each cell be useful for trisomy 13 prenatal characterization and diagnosis . line in different tissues, may explain why the fetal tissues only show the 18p deletion whereas the trophoblast presents the other cell lines . P03.66 Rare case of structural abberation of chromosome 18 P03.64 R. Skalikova1, D. Konvalinka1, J. Dvorackova1, J. Vseticka2, M. Uvirova1, I. Uptake of prenatal diagnosis after established carrier status of Urbanovska1, J. Kopeckova1; a balanced structural chromosome abnormality in couples with 1CGB laboratoř, a.s., Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Private ambulance of clinical recurrent miscarriage genetics, Ostrava, Czech Republic. F. Vansenne, J. C. Korevaar, M. T. M. Franssen, N. J. Leschot, F. van der Trisomy 18 - Edwards syndrome is the second most common aneu- Veen, P. M. M. Bossuyt, C. A. J. M. de Borgie, M. Goddijn; ploidy in newborns, with a prevalence between 1 in 3,000 to 1 in 8,000 . Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. More than 80 % of cases are caused by free trisomy of chromosome Three to six percent of couples with recurrent miscarriage are carriers 18, whereas the rest of cases are translocations and other structural of a structural chromosome abnormality . These carriers are offered aberrations . Subject of this presentation is prenatal capture of rare and prenatal diagnosis (PND) in subsequent pregnancies . It is unknown special chromosomal constitution of trisomy 18 . what the effect is of disclosure of the abnormal result of karyotyping in Due to positive biochemical screening (routine biochemical screening carrier couples on the uptake of PND in subsequent pregnancies . This within the second trimester of gestation) in 17th week of gestation, the study evaluates the uptake of PND in carrier couples compared with amniocentesis and karyotype determination have been indicated in non-carrier couples . 24-year-old mother. Conventional karyotyping of amniotic fluid cells We collected data of 239 carrier and 389 non-carrier couples present- revealed the presence of pseudoisodicentric 18 chromosome, karyo- ing for parental karyotyping after two or more miscarriages < 20 weeks type: 46, XY, psu idic (18)(p11 .32) . According to recent literature re- of gestation in six centers for Clinical Genetics in the Netherlands, cords the breakpoint at 18p11 .32 has not been described yet . from 1992-2001 . PND procedures in subsequent pregnancies were Based on result of investigation, parents have decided to terminate recorded for a minimum of 24 months . the pregnancy in 20th week of gestation and it was fully genetically in- dicated . Karyotype determination of parents has been performed with Within the carrier couples 150 out of 239 (63%) underwent a PND- normal result . It indicates to de novo origin of this aberration in fetus . procedure in at least one subsequent pregnancy compared to 111 out Aborted fetus underwent bioptic investigation . Result of the biopsy of 389 non-carrier couples (29%) (p<0 .01) . Only 60 out of 239 carrier confirmed diagnosis of Edwards syndrome. Nevertheless, comparison couples (25%) underwent a PND procedure in all pregnancies . of proband`s phenotypic features with clinical manifestation of free In the maternal age group < 36 years 136 out of 206 carrier couples chromosome 18 trisomy is very interesting . Some of the symptoms, (66%) underwent at least one PND procedure . present almost in all trisomy 18 cases, have not been found . Most In the maternal age group ≥ 36 years there was no significant differ- obvious is the lack of clenched hands with crossed fingers and missing ence between carrier (14 out of 33, 42%) and non-carrier couples (47 congenital heart defect, which are already present during intrauterine out of 98, 48%) in the uptake of at least one PND procedure (p=0 .41) . development . Detection of a structural chromosome abnormality in couples with re- current miscarriage has a marked influence on their decision to un- P03.67 dergo PND, although one third of all carrier couples refrained from contribution to prenatal genetic counselling in trisomy 20 PND in all pregnancies . mosaicism: two new cases S. Santucci1, C. Menozzi2, E. Racalbuto3, M. Bergamaschi4, M. C. Galassi5; P03.65 1Sezione Genetica Medica Territoriale Dipartimento Salute Donna AUSL, Mo- Trisomy 13: cytogenetic and prenatal findings dena, Italy, 2Laboratorio Citogenetica Medica, AO Policlinico, Modena, Italy, R. G. Paleari1, I. N. Machado2, J. K. R. Heinrich2, C. L. Campanhol1, K. C. An- 3Laboratorio Mendel Genetica Medica, Modena, Italy, 4Ostetricia-Ginecologia drade3, R. Barini3; Ospedale Pavullo AUSL Modena, Modena, Italy, 5Ostetricia-Ginecologia Ospe- 1Cell Culture and Cytogenetic Laboratory, CAISM, Unicamp, Campinas, Brazil, daleCarpi AUSL, Modena, Italy. 2Cell Culture and Cytogenetic Laboratory, Fetal Medicine Unit, CAISM, Uni- Trisomy 20 is one of the common mosaic trisomies detected in amnio- camp, Campinas, Brazil, 3Fetal Medicine Unit, CAISM, Unicamp, Campinas, centesis and it is associated with normal outcome in over than 90% of Brazil. cases . However, an abnormal outcome has been observed in 5-10% Objective: To describe prenatal sonographic findings and cytogenetic of cases including fetal demise, intrauterine growth restriction and mul- spectrum of fetuses with trisomy 13 in a tertiary fetal medicine center . tiple congenital anomalies . Methods: Retrospective review of cytogenetic laboratory databases To contribute in defining fetal prognosis , we report two new cases of identified cases of trisomy 13 from January 1997 to December 2007. trisomy 20 mosaicisms detected in amniocentesis requested for ma- Sonographic and cytogenetic findings were evaluated. ternal age . Results: Trisomy 13 was identified in 23 out of 298 cases referred to Following genetic counselling concerning fetal prognosis and on the cytogenetic investigation. Free trisomy was identified in most cases basis of normal second level US performed at 20 weeks, couples (n=20[87%]) and chromosome structural abnormalities were identified chose to continue pregnancies without proceeding with further inva- in 3 cases [13%] of 47XY+13,der(13;14)(q10;q10) . Although in 2 fetus- sive controls . es one isolated anomaly was detected, twenty-one cases were found Two healthy babies were born .Prenental diagnostics  To date, follow-up failed to reveal abnormality on physical or psycho- versity of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Cardiovascular motor development at 1 month or at 1,12,18 months, respectively . Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,, Little Rock, AR, United States, 3Fondazione Livio Patrizi, Rome, Italy. P03.68 Uniparental disomy (UPD) describes the inheritance of both homo- Prenatally detected trisomy 7 mosaicism in a child with logues of a pair of chromosomes from only one parent . The clinical Blaschlolinear skin pigmentary variation and developmental impact of UPD and associated imprinting disorders, such as Prader- delay. Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) increasingly M. Mori1, F. Santos1, A. Díaz de Bustamante2, M. Palomares1, L. Fernández1, have come to our attention . Chromosome 15 UPD testing is also rel- M. Muñoz3, P. Lapunzina1; evant in various prenatal diagnostic conditions including apparent con- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, fined placental mosaicism (CPM), homologous and nonhomologous 2Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital de Móstoles, Madrid, Spain, 3De- Robertsonian translocations involving chromosome 15 and 14, and as partment of Paediatrics, Hospital de Fuenlabrada, Madrid, Spain. genomic biomarker for detecting chromosome origin . We developed We report on a girl showing Blaschkolinear skin pigmentary variation and validated a two fluorescent STR multiplex assays for a rapid and associated with developmental delay and minimal facial dimorphisms . economic detection of UPD 15 by capillary electrophoresis . Eight infor- The proband´s mother was referred for prenatal diagnosis at week 15 mative markers have been selected on the basis of their expected het- of gestation, due to nuchal translucency of 3 .5 mm and unique umbili- erozygosity and chromosomal localization . We developed two differ- cal artery . A chromosomal analysis was performed in cultured amnio- ent four-plex PCRs: multiplex 1 containing microsatellites D15S1007, cytes in two consecutive studies, both showing 46, XX [40%] / 47, D15S205, D15S1019 and D15S130; multiplex 2 containing markers XX,+7 [60%] . A study in fetal blood lymphocytes excluded uniparental D15S988, D15S979, D15S128 and D15S131 . In order to assess and disomy 7 by microsatellites analysis, and revealed a normal karyotype validate the polymorphic information content (PIC), allele frequencies (46 XX) . During pregnancy only intrauterine growth delay was noted . and heterozygosity of selected markers we typed 100 unrelated indi- At 45 days of age, the patient was evaluated not disclosing any clini- viduals . Statistical analysis revealed a probability to obtain an informa- cal anomaly and the chromosomal analyses were repeated revealing tive assay of 99 .1% for multiplex 1 and 98 .8% for multiplex 2 . Genotyp- the previous results . The proband was periodically evaluated showing ing results of the two four-plexes were compared with those generated a progressive developmental delay . In the last review, at 22 months in singleplex reactions for the same samples revealing a concordance of age, Blaschkolinear skin pigmentation anomalies were detected in rate of 100%. To summarize, UPD exclusion/confirmation is expected both lower extremities and thorax associated with sparse hair, abnor- to be needed in an increasing number of cytogenetic and clinical cases mal dentition and a moderate developmental delay . This brings up the and we believe that the availability of a rapid test for its recognition possibility that the mosaic trisomy 7 line should still be present in skin should be highly suitable by both genetic laboratories . cells and it could be present in any other tissue . When a mosaic trisomy 7 is diagnosed prenatally in cultured amnio- P03.71 cytes, and it is not confirmed in a fetal lymphocyte karyotype, it is Mild/borderline ventriculomegaly as a marker for structural essential to follow up these patients postnatally to establish an early chromosome abnormalities physical, occupational and language therapy in order to improve their K. Writzl1, A. Veble1, M. Volk1, V. Cerar2, B. Šajina Stritar2, S. Pušenjak2, B. developmental outcome . Absence of pigmentary alterations along Peterlin1; Blaschko lines at birth is not exclusive, as they could appear any time 1Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Perinatol- during childhood . ogy Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. P03.69 Ventriculomegaly is a descriptive term for enlargement of the intra- Foetal ultrasound findings in trisomy 18 cranial ventricular system. It is defined as a ventricular atrium at any A. Ljubic1, B. Petrovic1, J. Joksimovic2; gestation, which measures 11 mm or greater . The frequency of chro- 1Institute for gynecology and obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Medicines and medi- mosomal anomalies reported in the literature in fetuses with ventricu- cal devices agency of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. lomegaly ranges from 3 to 27% . Separate analysis for mild and moder- Among liveborn children, trisomy 18 is the second most common auto- ate ventriculomegaly is not carried out . somal trisomy after trisomy 21 . The disorder/condition is caracterised We report two prenatal cases with mild ventriculomegaly and structural by severe psychomotor and growth retardation, microcephaly, mi- chromosome abnormalities . crophthalmia, malformed ears, micrognathia or retrognathia, microsto- Case 1: prenatal ultrasound at 21 weeks of gestation noted the fetus mia, distinctively clenched fingers, and other congenital malformations. to have mild ventriculomegaly (Vhposterior = 11 mm) . Chromosome Approximately 95% of conceptuses with trisomy 18 die in embryonic or analysis following amniocentesis demonstrated a 1p36 deletion, which foetal life; 5-10% affected children survive beyond the first year of life. was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Subse- The aim of this study was to estimate the correlation between patho- quent analysis revealed an unbalanced translocation between 1p and logical foetal ultrasound findings and trisomy 18. 10q resulting in 1p36 .1->pter deletion and 10q26 .3->qter duplication . Over the past five years (2003-2008) we analyzed fetal blood samples Case 2: at 21 weeks of gestation mild ventriculomegaly (Vhposteri- for chromosome abnormalities . Samples were taken by cordocente- or = 11 mm) and intracardiac hyperechogenic focus were detected . sis and processed using standard techniques . All specimens were G- Cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniocytes revealed an inverted banded using trypsin-Giemsa . Sixteen metaphase cells were analyzed duplication of the short arm of chromosome 9 . The karyotype was: for chromosomal constitution in each sample . 46,XY,dup(9)(p13p24) . In both cases parents opted for termination of From 1248 samples of fetal blood analyzed for chromosomal abnor- pregnancy . malities, there were 11 (0,88%) with complete trisomy 18 . We found no We conclude that borderline ventriculomegaly may occur in asso- mosaicism, or partial trisomy 18 . From 11 fetuses with trisomy 18, 9 ciation with structural chromosomal abnormalities, and propose that (81,8%) had some anomaly detected by ultrasound. Ultrasound find- karyotype is offered and FISH analysis is done where a cryptic rear- ings were polyhydramnion, IUGR, oligohydramnion, heart defect, hy- rangement is suspected following classical G-banding techniques . drocephalus and omphalocele . In the last 5 years in our laboratory, the incidence of trisomy 18 was P03.72 0,9% . In all cases, trisomy 18 was complete . About 81% of the fetuses Prenatal diagnosis of restrictive dermopathy with trisomy 18 had ultrasonographically detected anomalies . C. Daumer-Haas1, L. T. T. Huong2, N. T. Duong2, I. Hausser3, M. Wehnert2, K. P. Gloning1; P03.70 1Pränatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, stRs multiplex assay for rapid and economic detection of UPD Greifswald, Germany, 3Dermatologische Klinik, Universität, Heidelberg, Ger- 15 many. R. Cascella1, C. Peconi1, C. Sinibaldi1, E. Giardina1, A. Nardone1, G. Novelli1,2,3; Restrictive dermopathy (OMIM 275210 ) is a rare lethal autosomal re- 1Department of Biopathology and Centre of Excellence for Genomic risk As- cessive disorder characterized by rigid skin, facial dysmorphism (hy- sessment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Uni- pertelorism, small nose, open mouth) , multiple joint contractures, skel-Prenental diagnostics 0 etal anomalies (thin ribs, hypoplastic clavicules) and lung hypoplasia . imaging (X-ray, MRI) and autopsy was done . We report prenatal ultrasound findings and molecular genetic diagno- Out of 18 fetuses 11 were with chromosomal abnormalities(61%): sis of this disorder in a woman whose first child died a few hours after der(1) (p36,1;p21,3), mosaic trisomy 8, trisomy 18 (two cases), tri- birth . From clinical appearance restrictive dermopathy was suspected . somy 21 (one case), 47,XXX, 45, X, 47,XXY, 49,XXXXY, “de novo” There was distant consanguinity of the parents . inv(9)(p11q13), and a homozygous inv(6)(p23q23) . Seven patients Ultrasound examinations in the 29th week of a further pregnancy sho- presented monogenic syndromes(39%):skeletal dysplasias(3 cases: wed growth retardation, short extremities, reduced fetal movements Short-Rib Polydactyly Saldino-Noonan Type, Thanotophoric Dysplasia and abnormal shrunken amnion membranes. Additional findings of ab- San Diego Type and Jarcho-Levin syndrome), alobar holoprosenceph- sent clavicules, thin ribs, an abnormal face with small nose and open aly(2 cases), iniencephaly(one case), Dandy-Walker syndrome(one mouth strongly suggested the diagnosis of restrictive dermopathy . The case) and cranial teratoma (one case) . The fetus with iniencephaly shrunken and separated amnion membranes seem to be recorded for showed also paracentric inversion of “both” chromosomes 6 . The the first time in restrictive dermopathy. The child was born in the 32nd parents, both were carriers for inv(6q) . Following clinical diagnosis all week of gestation after premature rupture of membranes and died 30 families received genetic counselling and fetal DNAs were isolated for minutes after birth . It showed the expected facial anomalies, a very possible Gene mutation analysis . tight translucent skin with venal pattern and contractures . Morphology We believe that management of fetal malformations is an extensive, of the skin revealed typical findings in restrictive dermopathy with ab- heavy “team work” yet the best way of structuring bases for pheno- sent rete ridges of the epidermis, hypoplastic appendage structures, type-genotype correlations . very thin dermis and rarefied elastic fibres. The assumed diagnosis of restrictive dermopathy was confirmed by P03.75 molecular genetic analysis . A homozygous mutation c .1085-1086insT congenital lamellar ichthyosis: tGm1 gene mutation analysis in the ZMPSTE24 gene was detected . In the following still ongoing and prenatal diagnosis of a twin pregnancy pregnancy early molecular genetic prenatal diagnosis could be offered B. Ozyilmaz1, M. Tosun1, B. Demir1, C. Goktas1, T. Oztas1, S. Bale2, G. Ogur1; after chorionic villi biopsy resulting in an unaffected fetus . 1Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey, 2GeneDx, Gaith- ersburg, MD, United States. P03.73 Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis include several subtypes: Fraser syndrome in two Fetuses: clinical, Radiological And lamellar ichthyosis, Harlequin ichthyosis and non-bullous congenital Pathological Evaluation ichthyosiform erythroderma . Differential diagnosis of these subtypes F. Ekici, O. Sezer, M. Tosun, F. Karagoz, M. Ceyhan, B. Ozyilmaz, M. Ture, E. can be obtained with strict clinical criteria which is crutial for gene-mu- Malatyalioglu, G. Ogur; tation selection . In this report we present prenatal diagnosis of “Con- Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey. genital Lamellar Ichthyosis” of a mother with twin pregnancy whose Fraser syndrome (FS;OMIM 219000) is an extremely rare autosomal previous child was diagnosed with lamellar ichthyosis . recessive disorder characterized by cryptophthalmos, cutanaeous syn- The previous affected child had a history of erythroderma and ectro- dactyly, ambiguous genitalia, laryngeal/genitourinary malformations, pion since birth . At referral to our center, he presented dry skin with craniofacial dysmorphism and mental retardation . Here, we present dark scales over his entire body . Scales were also present over the two fetuses with FS diagnosed after termination of pregnancy because cutaneous surfaces of flexural accentuation . Hyperkeratotic fissures of severe fetal abnormalites . covering palms and soles of the hands and feet were remarkable . Fa- Case1: At the 18th week a cordocentesis was performed to the first cial skin under eye level was intact and eyelids exibited mild ectropion . pregnancy of a consanguinous 26 year-old father and 21 year-old The patient had no other medical problems, and his growth and devel- mother because of intraabdominal ascites, unilateral renal agenesis, opment have been normal . and cystic adenomatoid malformation of lung (type3)[CCAML3] . Fetal TGM1 gene analysis of the index patient showed homozygous muta- karyotype was 46,XY . After genetic counselling, parents decided to ter- tion at Exon 5, G278R . Amniocentesis was performed for biamniotic minate the pregnancy . Fetus presented bilateral cryptopthalmos, hy- twin pregnacy . TGM1 gene analysis revealed heterozygous TGM1 pertelorism, ear/nose anomalies, tetramelic cutaneous syndactyly, sin- Exon 5 G278R mutations in both fetuses rendering both fetuses be- gle artery/vein, small penis, and scrotal hypoplasia . Autopsy revealed ing clinical carriers . Karyotypes of the fetuses were normal . Family unilateral right renal agenesis, left renal dysgenesis but no CCAML3 . decided to continue the pregnancy . At birth twins were normal . Case2: Amniocentesis for was performed at 25+3th week of gestation of a 29 year-old father and 26 year-old mother because of ultrasound ab- P03.76 normalities:intraabdominal ascites, bilateral renal agenesis, CCAML3, smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, Prenatal Biochemical and oligo-anhydramnios, nuchal edema, intracardiac hyperechogenic fo- molecular Diagnosis cus, hyperechogenic bowel . Parents were consanguinous . One previ- B. Özyılmaz1, G. Celep1, L. E. Kratz2, M. Witsch-Baumgartner3, G. Ogur1; ous pregnancy ended spontaneously; another was medically aborted . 1Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey, 2Kennedy Krieger Karyotype was 46,XX . Parents decided to terminate the pregnancy . Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Mol. Fetus showed facial asymmetry, right sided cryptophthalmos, ear/nose Clin. Pharmacology, Innsbruck, Austria. anomalies, tetramelic cutaneous syndactyly, umbilical hernia, anterior Introduction: Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome is an autosomal recessive abdominal wall defect, immature external genitalia, and anal atresia . disorder presented with clinical hallmarks like characteristic facial phe- X-ray revealed 11 ribs. Autopsy confirmed bilateral renal agenesis; go- notype, cleft palate, thumb-toe abnormalities and ambiguous genitalia . nads were immature, undifferentiated . Prenatal and postnatal diagnosis is possible by the detection of low cholesterol and high 7DHC levels in both serum and amniotic fluid. In P03.74 this report we present a 40 day-old baby diagnosed SLOS Type 1 and Outcome of fetuses with central nervous system anomalies prenatal diagnosis in the family’s subsequent pregnancy . detected by ultrasound during pregnancy: clinical, cytogenetic, Case Presentation: The case presented with growth retardation, cleft radiological and pathological data from 18 fetuses palate, facial dysmorphism, unilateral oligodactyly, unilateral congeni- G. Ogur, M. Tosun, Ö. Sezer, M. Ceyhan, T. Alper, F. Ekici, B. Özyılmaz, O. tal cataract and ambiguous genitalia . Biochemical parameters showed Aydın, M. Türe, E. Malatyalioglu; low serum cholesterol and high serum 7DHC levels . The child was di- Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey. agnosed as SLOS . Due to family’s demand, prenatal diagnosis during Fetal brain anomalies constitute a heterogeneous group of disorders the subsequent pregnancy was performed; the parents were checked with different prognostic outcome . Affected fetuses mostly come to at- for DHCR7 gene mutations . c.384-IVS5+4del and p.S397L mutations tention because of ultrasound (US) and often on indication termination were found to be heterozygous in the mother and father respectively . of pregnancy, before 24th of gestation, and with parental consent, oc- c.384-IVS5+4del is a previously unidentified mutation for SLOS. curs . Here we report outcome of 18 fetuses with brain malformations An amniocentesis was performed at 16th week of gestation . Amniotic initially seen on routine US screening during pregnancy . After termina- fluid showed normal levels of 7-Dehydrocholesterol and molecular tion of pregnancy a thorough examination of the fetus, followed by analysis revealed normal DNA results . Cytogenetic analysis revealedCancer genetics  a 46,XY karyotype . lies in two cases it were deletion of whole APC gene . This work was Conclusion: Biochemical analysis of the amniotic fluid through 7DHC founded by the Ministry of Education and Science, Poland, grant num- levels is a rapid and efficient prenatal diagnosis test for SLOS and is ber 2PO5A10728 family relieving before a results of molecular analysis is achieved . Both pre- and post-natally, association of cleft palate, ambiguous genitalia P04.002 and oligodactyly in a patient should promt the physician to evaluate Frequent association of sporadic desmoid tumors with germline SLOS . APc mutations T. A. Muzaffarova1, O. V. Novikova2, I. V. Droshneva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Kar- P03.77 pukhin1; Partial monosomy of chromosome 8p and partial trisomy 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Mos- of chromosome 7p associated with a Fryns syndrome-like cow Herzen Oncology Institute, Moskow, Russian Federation. phenotype: Prenatal diagnosis As it is known somatic APC mutations are present in desmoid tumors . C. Fourneau, S. Rombout, B. Grisart, C. Verellen-Dumoulin; However there is no information about the role of germline APC muta- Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Goss- tions in patients with desmoid tumors and without history of familial selies, Belgium. adenomatous polyposis (FAP) . We wanted to insist on the importance of a good resolution chromo- We examined 31 patients (17 female and 14 male) with apparently some analysis for finding subtle chromosomal abnormalities in prena- sporadic desmoid tumors and without clinical features or family history tal diagnosis specially when there are abnormal ultrasound findings. of FAP . Peripheral blood lymphocytes from these patients were inves- We report a prenatal diagnosis performed following the discovery at tigated for the APC gene mutations . ultrasound of a diaphragmatic hernia and a Dandy Walker malforma- Germline APC mutations were found for 6 of 31 the patients (19%) . tion at 16 weeks of pregnancy . Four mutations - 1462del5, 1465delAG, 1525insT and R2505Q were A descision was made to interrupted the pregnancy and the fetal au- found for the first time. The mutation 1465delAG was seen twice. The topsy revealed signs of a Fryns syndrome that is thought to be inherit- mutations were located predominantly between 1450 and 1525 co- ed in an autosomal recessive way : craniofacial dysmorphism (macro- dons of the APC gene (4 of 5 mutations) . cephaly, short webbed neck, coarse face, flat and broad nasal bridge, The age of desmoid diagnosis among patients with the APC mutations anteverted nostrils, hypertelorism, microretrognathia, large mouth with was ranged from 1 month to 23 years .Colonoscopy was performed thin lips, low-set ears with posterior angulation), Dandy-Walker malfor- for two patients with germline APC mutations and highest age . There mation, diaphragmatic hernia, small penis with hypospadias . were no polyps in colon of 25 years old female . Another patient, 19 Cytogenetic analysis on the amniotic fluid showed a partial monosomy years old female had gastric polyps and no colon polyps . In our sample 8p associated with a partial trisomy 7p which was initially interpreted there were six patients with multiple desmoids tumors and five of them as a duplication 8p . were found with germline APC mutations . One patient with APC muta- When the parents karyotypes were established, we discovered that tion had intraabdominal desmoid at age 4 year.Thus for the first time the father had a terminal reciprocal translocation between the short it is shown association of sporadic desmoid tumors with APC germline arm of chromosome 8 and the short arm of chromosome 7 with karyo- mutations . The patients with germline APC mutations are character- type 46,XY,t(7;8)(p21;p23) . ized by early disease onset and severe desmoid phenotype . The fetus had thus inherited an unbalanced translocation with karyo- type 46,XY,der(8)t(7;8)(p21;p23)pat . P04.003 Array CGH and FISH analysis are under way in order to characterize molecular Analysis of the APC gene in Families Affected by FAP: the break points . 2 Novel mutations M. Noruzinia1, N. Vasli2; P04. Cancer genetics 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of genetics, School of Sciences, Azad Olum Tahghighat University, Tehran, Iran, P04.001 Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the APc gene mutations status in Polish FAP patients Introduction: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, D. Nowakowska2, T. Banasiewicz3, J. Paszkowski3, dominantly inherited susceptibility to colon cancer with high pene- P. Krokowicz3, E. Czkwanianc4, W. Cichy3, J. Lubinski5, G. Kurzawski5, A. Do- trance, characterized by more than 100 adenomatous polyps in the browolska-Zachwieja3, J. Steffen2, M. Drews3, R. Slomski1; colon and rectum . Additional features may include desmoids tumors, 1Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Oncology, Warsza- polyps in the upper gastrointestinal tract, osteomas and congenital wa, Poland, 3Karol Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) . APC (Adeno- Poland, 4Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland, 5Depart- matous Polyposis Coli) gene is mutated in most of these carriers . Pre- ment of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, symptomatic genetic diagnosis in this syndrome is obligatory as near Poland. 100% of carriers of deleterious mutations will present colon cancer by Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a genetically conditioned 40 years . The APC gene has 15 exons and an ORF with 8538 nucleo- predisposition to occurrence of numerous adenamatous polyps in co- tides which code a protein with 2843 amino acids . lon and rectum . The polyps arises in second decade of life and left Materials & Methods: CSGE on APC was set up and used as screen- untreated develop to the tumor . Other extracolonic features may in- ing method to analyze APC alterations . Direct sequencing was used to clude polyps in the upper parts of the gastroenterological tract, des- confirm the presence of mutation or polymorphism. moid tumours, ocular lesions, osteomas, dental abnormalities, and Results: we found deleterious mutations in all patients . Two novel mu- malignancies in other organs . FAP incidence is estimated at 1/10,000 . tations c .3921_3925del AAAAG in MCR and c .1862C>G in exon 14 of FAP arises due to germ line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis APC were found in 2 families with classical FAP coli (APC) gene, which was first described in 1991. The APC gene Conclusion: Conformation Sensitive Gel Electrophoresis can be used mutations are studied at the Institute of Human Genetics in Poznan for as a simple, cost-effective and sensitive mutation screening test in last 10 years . The Institute of Human Genetics in Poznan cooperates complex genes where sequencing as the gold standard of mutation with medical centers from all country, what permitted us to create the detection techniques is expensive to use in the first line. DNA bank for Polish FAP patients . Till now samples from 340 families were collected . Seven hundred DNA samples from Polish FAP families P04.004 were banked so far . The APC gene we screened for mutation in 300 15 years of familial adenomatous polyposis diagnostics in the probands. We identified 74 point mutations in 124 FAP families. The czech Republic detected mutation can be considered characteristic for Polish popula- K. Veselá, J. Štekrová, M. Florianová, K. Zídková, J. Kotlas, M. Kohoutová; tion due to 34 types of them has not described in other population . Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine Charles Among detected mutations seven occurred in two or to the greater University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. number of families . Occurrence of the APC gene large rearrangements Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syn- was studied in 95 families. We identified rearrangements in 24 fami- drome with almost 100 % risk of colorectal cancer . FAP exists in twoCancer genetics  forms . The typical FAP is characterized by hundreds to thousands of milial aggregation and unknown prevalence with predilection for Eu- colorectal adenomatous polyps and by extracolonic manifestations . An ropean population . attenuated form of FAP (AFAP) is characterized by less than 100 ad- Aim: To study the prevalence and characteristics of HPS in our region enomas and later onset of the disease . Incidence of FAP/AFAP in the (600,000 inhabitants) . Czech Republic is 1/ 5000 - 7500 . Methods: Retrospective search of patients from the familial cancer Since 1993 we have detected presence of mutations in adenomatous registry, gastroenterology and pathology departments fulfilling WHO polyposis gene (APC) and in the last 5 years also mutations in the criteria, or showing essential traits of HPS . base excision repair MUTYH gene in FAP families . The mutation in Results: 12 patients from 9 different families fulfilled WHO criteria with MUTYH gene leads to MUTYH associated polyposis (MAP) . The MAP a mean of 39 HP per patient (pp), 75% (9/12) mainly right sided; 3 .44 is an autosomal recessive form of polyposis with manifestation similar adenomas (pp); 2 .33 serrated adenomas (pp), and an incidence of co- to AFAP . lon cancer of 33% (4/12) (mean age= 41y) . Remarkably, in two families We have examined 280 unrelated patients with a suspicion of FAP/ HPS seemed to be transmitted as a hereditary condition . In the rest, AFAP . By the combination of different molecular genetic tests (DGGE, 60% of the patients had at least one 1st degree relative with colon PTT, MLPA, DHPLC, and sequencing) mutation detection rate was 77 cancer (mean age=56y) and 30% had relatives with >5 HP . Besides, % in classical FAP and 40 % in AFAP for APC gene in case the patients we have characterized 6 extra individuals from 5 different families not met strict diagnostic criteria . For MUTYH gene was mutation detection fulfilling WHO criteria but who met more than one of the essential char- rate lower than we supposed . In Czech population we discovered 48 acteristic of HPS . unique APC mutations and 3 large deletion of gene . Conclusion: The prominent number of patients with hyperplastic pol- If the causal mutation is identified, all carriers of the mutation undergo yposis and the familial aggregation in our series support the hypoth- second genetic consultation and the results of molecular genetic test- esis of a higher prevalence of this condition in our region, suggesting ing are used both when stating the predictive diagnosis and in the clini- a common genetic background . Furthermore, in specially predisposed cal management of patients, eventually for the prenatal testing . populations, a reassessment of WHO criteria is probably needed for Supported by grant MSM 0021620808 the diagnosis of additional cases . P04.005 P04.007 molecular analysis of the APC and MYH genes in Galician and the study of the mutations of BmPR1A and smAD4 genes in the catalonian FAP patients: a different spectra of mutations? group of Polish JPs patients N. Gomez-Fernandez1, S. Castellví-Bel2, C. Fernandez-Rozadilla1, F. M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, R. Slomski1, M. Teisseyre3, P. Mankowski1, E. Czk- Balaguer2, M. Magdalena1, O. Lortes1, J. Muñoz2, I. Madrigal3, M. Mila3, A. wanianc4, D. Nowakowska5, B. Kozak-Klonowska6, A. Plawski1; Vega1, A. Castells2, A. Carracedo1, C. Ruiz-Ponte1; 1Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University 1Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica-SERGAS, Grupo de Medic- of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Hepa- ina Xenomica-USC, CIBER-ER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Department tology and Immunology, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warszawa, of Gastroenterology, Institut de Malalties Digestives i Metabòliques, Hospital Poland, 4Department of Pediatrics and Gastroenterology, Institute of Polish Clínic, CIBEREHD, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3Biochemistry and Molecular Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland, 5Genetic Counseling Unit Cancer Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic, CIBER-ER, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. Center and Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, Poland, 6Regional Oncology Cen- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant-in- ter, Kielce, Poznan, Poland. herited colorectal cancer syndrome caused by germline mutations in Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome (JPS, MIM # 174900) is an autosomal the APC gene . Recently, patients with multiple colorectal adenomas dominant disorder, characterized by predisposition to developing juve- and also patients with FAP but without detectable germline APC muta- nile polyps . These polyps are hamartomatous lesions of gastrointesti- tions have been found to carry biallelic mutations in MYH . nal tract, especially colon and rectum. The juvenile polyps are typified We analysed the mutational spectrum of the APC gene in 80 unrelated by markedly expanded lamina propria containing dilated cystic glands, patients (46 Galician and 34 Catalonian) with classical FAP or multiple an inflammatory infiltrate and show a normal epithelium with dense polyposis, and we also investigated the contribution of MYH germline stroma .The frequency of Juvenile polyposis syndrome is estimate to mutations in those APC-negative patients . occur once in every 100000 newborn . Risk of gastrointestinal malig- Germline mutations including large deletions in the APC gene were nant transformation in JPS patient is increased and ranges more then found in 38% of patients . The two commonest hotspots at codons 60% . Occurrence of the colon cancer is two fold higher in the upper 1061 and 1309 of the APC gene, account for 15% and 12% respec- parts of the gastrointestinal tract . Development of the juvenile polyps is tively of the APC-positive families, but were reported mainly in Cata- caused by mutation in one of two genes associated with JPS . First of lonian families . Thus, mutation at codon 1061 represents the 23% (5 them is bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1A gene (BMPR1A also /13) of the Catalonian positive families whereas was not found in 17 known as ALK3), which encodes a type I cell surface receptor, a ser- APC-positive Galician families . The same trend was observed for the ine/threonine kinase receptor, involved in bone morphogenetic protein codon 1309 mutation . Similar results had been already observed in a signaling pathway (BMP) . Second one is SMAD4 gene (also known previous study with Galician families and could be due to the genetic as MADH4 or DPC4) . The protein product of this gene is intracellular isolation of this population . Haplotype analyses of these recurrrent mu- mediator of TGFβ superfamily signaling pathway. In result of research tations should be carried out in Catalonian families to investigate the we observed four mutations . Using screening methods were found two possibility of a common ancestry . mutations in the BMPR1A gene and two in the SMAD4 gene . Present- Twenty percent of the APC-negative patients carried biallelic MYH ed results are preliminary stage study which main aim is to determine germline mutation, and the two most frequent mutations reported the mutation spectrum of the BMPR1A and SMAD4 genes in Polish (p .Y165C and p .G382D) were observed . Therefore, MYH analysis is JPS patients. The study was financed by the Ministry of Education and recommended for all APC-negative families, although MYH cannot ex- Science, Poland, grant number 2PO5E02630 plain all cases of FAP . P04.008 P04.006 timing and importance of genomic instability in colorectal Frequent identification and familial aggregation of hyperplastic tumourigenesis and association with clinico-pathological polyposis syndrome in the spanish region of Navarra features A. Alonso1, A. Guerra2, M. Montes3, S. Moreno1, F. Garcia-Amigot1, M. Artigas1; A. D. Beggs1,2, M. Abulafi2, A. Arnaout2, I. P. M. Tomlinson3, S. V. Hodgson1; 1Medical Genetics Dpt. Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona. Navarra, Spain, 1St Georges University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2Mayday Univer- 2Gastroenterology Dpt. Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona. Navarra, Spain, sity Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Research UK, London, United 3Pathology Dpt. Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona. navarra, Spain. Kingdom. Background: Hyperplastic polyposis syndrome (HPS) is a rare disor- Aims: der characterized by multiple hyperplastic polyps (HP), and a limited 1) To test the hypothesis that somatic genetic instability is a necessary number of adenomas, serrated adenomas and colorectal cancers . driver of early colorectal carcinogenesis Scarce previous series (1-38 patients) have reported exceptional fa- 2) To investigate the sequence of molecular carcinogenic changes .Cancer genetics  Techniques Sofia, Bulgaria. There is good evidence for the hypothesis that colorectal carcinoma Inactivation of the genes involved in DNA mismatch repair is asso- initiation is progression from benign adenoma to carcinoma via a se- ciated with microsatellite instability (MSI) and loss of heterozygosity ries of sequential somatic genetic and epigenetic changes . However (LOH) . Mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 genes are usually the cause of it is not known whether genomic instability is a necessary initiating hereditary colorectal cancers (CRC), such as HNPCC, while microsat- factor . ellite instability in sporadic CRC often results from epigenetic inactiva- We are currently recruiting patients with a known family history of tion of hMLH1 due to DNA promotor methylation . colorectal carcinoma or who are undergoing surveillance colonoscopy We examined MSI in 98 patients with sporadic CRC and the methyla- for recurrent polyps . These patients attend screening colonoscopy, tion status of the MLH1 and MSH2 promotor regions in the cases with where polyps are identified and removed. To date, 137 patients have MSI/LOH. MSI was evaluated in a panel of five microsatellite markers been recruited with a total of 195 polyps . (BAT26, D5S346, D18S35, D2S123 and FGA) and the hypermethyl- A pilot study, looking at markers (K-ras, BRAF, MSI, LOH) of genomic ation assessed by methyl-specific PCR (MSP) of bisulfite converted instability in 168 polyps in 107 patients demonstrated that this was DNA . The PCR products were analyzed on agarose gel electrophore- technically feasible . sis, following by direct sequencing . We will collect 50 hyperplastic polyps and 300 adenomatous polyps, Our results demonstrated MSI/LOH in 29 patients (29 .5%) with spo- including 30 serrated adenomas, and 10 polyps from patients with radic colorectal cancer . Among them the promoter hypermethylation Lynch syndrome . of MLH1 was observed in 14 (48 .3%) of the cases, whereas promotor Isolated crypts will be extracted from polyps and tested for genomic in- hypermethylation of MSH2 was observed only in one case (3 .4%) . The stability using several parameters: chromosomal loss/gain, copy num- epigenetic changes of MLH1 were associated with loss of the protein ber variation, LoH, MSI and CPG-Island Promoter Methylation . We will expression . also screen for mutations in known target genes . Conclusions: Widespread promotor methylation of tumor suppressor Results will be compared with normal tissue, to determine when/if genes is a common mechanism of gene inactivation during tumori- genomic instability occurs, and it’s relationship to other (epi)genetic genesis . Our results suggest that microsatellite instability in Bulgarian changes patients with sporadic CRC and the epigenetic inactivation of hMLH1 Conclusions in association with DNA methylation occurs in similar frequency to rela- We hope to elucidate the earliest drivers of colorectal carcinogenesis: tive studies of sporadic colorectal cancer . The promoter hypermetila- when each form of genomic instability occurs, whether they initiate tion of MSH2, although a rare event, is also a possible cause of mis- carcinogenesis and how this relates to family history and clinico-patho- match repair system deficiency in this type of CRC. logical features . P04.011 P04.009 implication of MSH mutations in colorectal cancer (cRc) microsatellites instability and mismatch repair genes mutations patients carrying a monoallelic MYH mutation in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer M. D. Giráldez1, F. Balaguer1, T. Caldés2, N. Gómez-Fernández3, C. Ruiz-Pon- C. IANCU1, C. Vrabie2, D. Iancu1, G. Girbea1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Constanti- te3, J. Muñoz1, V. Gonzalo1, T. Ocaña1, J. Clofent4, A. Carracedo3, A. Castells1, nescu1, E. Neagu1, L. Barbarii1; S. Castellvi-Bel1, A. E. G. Gastrointestinal Oncology Group5; 1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Institute 1Gastroenterology, Hospital Clínic, IMDiM, CIBEREHD, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, “Victor Babes”, Bucharest, Romania. Spain, 2Oncology Molecular Lab, Hospital Clínico Universitario San Carlos, Ma- Background: Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is drid, Spain, 3Grupo de Medicina Xenomica-USC-FPGMX-CIBERER, Santiago an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by de Compostela, Spain, 4Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Meixoeiro- germ-line mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes . Therefore diagno- CHUVI, Vigo, Spain, 5Asociación Española de Gastroenterología, Barcelona, sis of genomic deletions of one or more exons of the MSH2 and MLH1 Spain. genes and the analyse of microsatellite instability (MSI) from a minimal Background . CCR risk associated with germline monoallelic MYH mu- amount of highly damaged DNA is difficult. tations remains controversial . Nevertheless, a slight increased risk has Methods. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue samples from been suggested . MYH and MSH6 proteins act together during the DNA 25 HNPCC patients were analysed for microsatellite instability (MSI) reparation process . It has been shown that individuals harboring muta- using a panel of 7 markers (BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24, MONO- tions in both genes could have an increased CRC risk . 27, Penta C and Penta D) included in a commercial kit . MLPA tests Aim . To evaluate the prevalence of MSH6 mutations in CRC patients were also performed to screen for major mutation in the mismatch re- carrying a monoallelic mutation in MYH . pair genes MLH1 and MSH2 . Patients and methods . We analyzed the prevalence of MSH6 muta- Results . The study revealed a 58% microsatellite instability pattern for tions in a CRC patients cohort with and without a monoallelic MYH mu- the 25 unrelated Romanian HNPCC patients . 5 to 10% of major altera- tation (group I, n=26 and group II, n=50, respectively), and in another tions detected on the MLH1 and MSH2 genes are subject for further cohort including healthy controls with and without a monoallelic MYH characterization . mutation (group III, n=21, group IV, n=21, respectively) . Patients and Conclusions . So far, family history, MSI and MMR gene mutation anal- controls were recruited from EPICOLON and Hospital Clinic, respec- ysis become critical parameters for HNPCC genetic characterization tively . Mutational screening was performed by TaqMan, SSCP, DHPLC and genetic counseling . and sequencing . Results . We detected three germline MSH6 mutations in group I P04.010 (11 .5%), a missense variant (R635G), a change in 3’UTR region microsatellite instability and promotor hypermethylation of (4098A>C) and a nonsense mutation (Q982X) . We did not detect any MLH and MSH in Bulgarian patients with sporadic colorectal MSH6 mutation in groups II and IV, whereas only one was found in cancer group III (4 .8%) (M1326G) . MSH6 mutations were more frequently A. V. Mitkova1, T. Vlaykova2, G. Stancheva1, T. Kadiyska3, M. Gulubova4, E. found in CRC patients with a monoallelic MYH mutation than in non- Kostadinov5, D. Damyanov5, G. Cirovski6, Y. Yovchev6, I. Kremensky3, V. Mitev7, carriers (11 .5% vs 0%, p=0 .037) . R. Kaneva1; Conclusions . CRC patients harboring a monoallelic MYH mutation may 1Molecular Medicine Centre, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Dept. carry more frequently a MSH6 mutation than patients without them . Chemistry and Biochemistry, Trakia University, Stara Zagora, Bulgaria, 3Na- We could hypothesize that the CRC predisposition associated with a tional Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynaecology mutation in each gene could add up and confer an increased risk . “Majchin Dom”, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Dept. General and Clinical Pathology, Trakia University, Stara Zagora, Bulgaria, 5Dept. Gastroen- terology, University Hospital “Queen Giovana”, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Dept. General Surgery, Medical Faculty, Trakia University, Stara Zagora, Bulgaria, 7Dept. Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia,Cancer genetics  P04.012 P04.014 A novel PtEN mutation in an italian family with hyperplastic Age related differences in molecular profiles of colorectal polyposis of the colon in the context of cowden syndrome cancers in patients from the Republic of macedonia D. Turchetti1,2, L. M. Pradella1, C. Rossi1, A. Alberani3, F. Ferrara3, P. A. Fanti4, M. Hiljadnikova - Bajro1, T. Josifovski2, A. Kapedanovska1, Z. Serafimoska1, G. Romeo1; Z. Sterjev1, N. Matevska1, M. Panovski2, N. Petrusevska2, L. Suturkova1, A. J. 1UO e Cattedra di Genetica Medica - Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Poli- Dimovski1; clinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Oncologia - Presidio 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ospedaliero Bellaria-Maggiore, Bologna, Italy, 3UO Gastroenterologia ed Endo- 2Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. scopia Digestiva - Presidio Ospedaliero Bellaria-Maggiore, Bologna, Italy, 4UO Colorectal cancer (CRC) is considered a disease of elderly, though Dermatologia - Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. 2-3% occurs in patients <40 years of age . Published data on the dif- Clinical manifestations of Cowden Syndrome, which is caused by mu- ferences between young and elderly patients are quite controversial . tations in the PTEN gene, are extremely variable . Among gastrointes- Our study aims at comparing the molecular profiles between tumors tinal manifestations, hamartomatous polyps are the typical lesions, but of younger (age <40y) and older (>40y) patients from the Republic of other polyp types, including hyperplastic, have been reported . Macedonia . A total of 343 patients with sporadic (FAP & HNPCC ex- We describe a family in which hyperplastic polyposis was the reason cluded) tumors treated by surgery were enrolled in the study . DNA was for referral to the genetic clinic and that was found to carry a novel isolated from peripheral blood and fresh tumor tissues obtained imme- PTEN mutation . diately after surgery, and paired samples were evaluated for the pres- The proband, a 46 year-old man, was referred to the cancer genetic ence of MSI and/or LOH using Real-Time PCR or multiplex qfPCR . clinic because of the endoscopic finding of colonic polyposis. Histology The evaluation included 23 SNP or STR markers located at 1p, 2p, 2q, showed the polyps to be hyperplastic . Moreover, upper gastrointestinal 4q, 5q, 8p, 11q, 12q, 17p, 17q, 18p, 18q, 21q from either NCI panel or endoscopy detected esophageal acanthosis and papillomatosis and located in regions harboring genes implicated in CRC pathogenesis . HP-related gastritis . Physical examination revealed the presence of Younger patients comprise 6% of CRC in our population . They are macrocephaly (65cm), obesity and cutaneous papillomas . The mother, predominantly males (76% vs . 57% of older patients) with tumors in 62 year-old, had also been diagnosed with hyperplastic polyposis and proximal colon (40 vs . 27%) and with MSI-H genotype (23 vs . 9 .6%) . with carcinoma ex-adenoma of the left colon, for which had undergone On the contrary, the frequency of LOH is higher in tumors from older hemicolectomy at age 61 . Previously, she had had hysterectomy for patients: 59 vs . 36% at 18q, 55 vs . 20% at 8p, 42 vs . 25% at 1p and uterine fibroids at age 47 and mastectomy for invasive ductal carci- 37 vs . 30% at 5q . In 46% of younger and 30% of older patients neither noma of the breast at age 51 . Physical examination showed macro- MSI nor LOH was detected . Our data suggest that CRC pathogenesis cephaly (59cm), obesity, cutaneous papillomas and subcutaneous evolves through different pathways in patients with early compared to lipomas . patients with late onset of the disease . PTEN mutational analysis in the proband revealed the germline het- erozygous mutation 303delA in the exon 5, which was confirmed in the P04.015 mother . This mutation, which to our knowledge has never been de- Mutational analysis of the PIK3CA kinase domain in endometrial scribed before, generates a stop at codon 111, producing a truncated carcinoma protein which looses three functionally relevant domains . D. V. Konstantinova1,2, R. P. Kaneva3, T. K. Kadiyska1, R. G. Dimitrov4, S. I. To help clarify the pathogenic mechanism of the mutation, we are now Ivanov5, T. V. Dyankova5, E. Tiufektchieva6, K. P. Meinhardt7, N. I. Doganov4, I. performing molecular studies on pathologic tissues removed from the M. Kremensky1, V. I. Mitev8,3; patients . 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Deprtment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Molecular Medi- P04.013 cine Center, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic of Operative Dysregulation of RAs signaling in colorectal carcinomas Gynecology, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, I. Bottillo1, I. Torrente1, T. Ahlquist2, S. A. Danielsen2, G. I. Meling3, R. A. Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Clinic of Oncogynecology, National Centre Lothe2, B. Dallapiccola1,4; of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Obstetrics and 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7Department of for Cancer Research, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Pathology, Univiisity Hospital “Aleksandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, Norway, 3Surgical Department, Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, 8Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapi- Bulgaria. enza University, Rome, Italy. Somatic mutations in PIK3CA, which encodes the p110α catalytic sub- Half of all colorectal carcinomas (CRC) have dysregulation of the RAS unit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3K), have been identified in signaling, increasing the cellular proliferative potential and resistance a wide variety of tumors including endometrial carcinoma (EC) . Muta- to apoptosis . KRAS is known to be commonly mutated in CRC, while tions in PIK3CA cluster to exons 1 (p85), exon 9 (helical domain), and mutational status of the NF1 gene, acting as a negative regulator of exon 20 (kinase domain) of the gene . RAS signaling, is not known . We analyzed a series of CRC for muta- Recently, mutations in exon 20 have been linked to unfavorable clini- tions in KRAS, BRAF, and NF1 . NF1 coding region screening was copathological characteristics of EC patients such as grade and lym- performed by dHPLC (denaturing high performance liquid chroma- phovascular invasion . tography), sequencing and MLPA (multiple ligation-dependent probe We have determined the frequency of exon 20 PIK3CA mutations amplification). KRAS and BRAF were analyzed by sequencing . 40% among 60 endometrial carcinomas and have related their presence (26/65) of the samples carried a mutation in KRAS, 22% (14/64) in to metastatic disease . Five of the patients had metastasis (to ovary, BRAF, and 13% (3/24) in NF1 . We found that 62% (40/65) of the sam- sigma and parametrium) . ples had alterations in one or more of the components, meaning they We performed direct cycle sequencing of PIK3CA exon 20 . have a dysregulation of the RAS pathway . BRAF and KRAS mutations We found 4 missense mutations in 6 tumors (10%) . We found were mutually exclusive . BRAF mutation was strongly associated with c .3140A>G (p .H1047R) in 3 cases . We also found c .3073 A>G microsatellite instability (MSI), female gender, and proximal location . (p .T1025A) and c .3145 G>C (p .G1049R) . In one case we found a mu- Among the 24 samples analyzed for mutations in NF1, we found 2 tation which, to our knowledge, has not been reported previously: c . missense and 2 splicing mutations . All NF1 mutations occurred in MSI, 3074 C>T (p .T1025I) . proximal, and female-derived tumors with BRAF mutation . In addition, Two of the patients with exon 20 PIK3CA mutations had metastatic dis- we found that 3 of the samples had duplication of parts or the whole ease (33%), while 3 of 54 (5 .5%) patients with no mutations had me- NF1 gene . In conclusion RAS pathway is dysregulated by mutually tastasis (p=0 .07) . The mean age at diagnosis for patients with PIK3CA exclusive mutations of KRAS and BRAF in the majority of CRC . We mutation was 62 .8, and for patients without a mutation - 63 .3 . show that the activity of RAS signaling is likely to be enhanced in more Somatic mutations in exon 20 of PIK3CA have been shown to be on- than 10% of the tumors since they harbor mutations in both BRAF and cogenic as they lead to an increased PI3K activity . The PI3K regulate NF1 . signaling pathways such as cell proliferation, survival and adhesion . Our results confirm that PIK3CA alterations may play an important roleCancer genetics  for endometrial carcinogenesis and invasion . chemistry of MMR proteins . Families with microsatellite instability and/ or loss of expression of MMR proteins were considered MMR-deficient. P04.016 Families were classified in three groups: A: MMR mutation detected Identification of four new patological mutations in HNPCC (Lynch syndrome) (n=36); B: MMR-deficient families with no MMR mu- patients of the Basque country tation detected (n=10); and C: MMR-proficient families (n=24). C. Martinez-Bouzas1, E. Beristain1, N. Puente-Unzueta1, N. Viguera1, E. Ojem- Proband’s age of diagnosis was younger in Lynch syndrome families barrena1, J. Errasti2, K. Mugica3, M. I. Tejada1; (A, 40 y; B,50; C, 46 y; p=0 .028) . The presence of extracolonic tumors, 1Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain, 2Hospital de Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gas- the absence of polyps and the number of first-degree relatives with teiz, Spain, 3Instituto Oncologicao de Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain. HNPCC-associated tumors were higher in Lynch syndrome families . Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is the most com- MMR-proficient families showed a predominance of left colon tumors mon form of hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC), accounting for 1%- with no mucinous phenotype and a lower presence of metachronous 5% of cases and is associated with germline mutations in the mis- tumors . match repair genes (MMR) . We have studied families with HNPCC for These results confirm that the presence of a MMR mutation is associ- three years granted by the Public Health Department of the Basque ated with an specific phenotype, while MMR-deficient families with no Country . The aim of this work is to establish whether the proportion detected mutation show a mixed phenotype likely reflecting misclas- of mutation in our population is similar to others previously published . sification. Fifty-five index cases were analysed using heteroduplex, sequencing and MLPA. Thirty patients fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria and twenty- P04.019 five fulfilled the Bethesda criteria. Ninety relatives were also tested. Pathogenicity analysis of six unclassified missense variations in We found in total twenty-three variatons (41 .8%): eight (14,5%) in MMR genes identified in a selected population of Castilla-León MLH1; nine (16,4%) in MSH2; and six (10,9%) in MSH6 . Of these (spain) variations, eighteen were pathologic mutations, four of them being L. Pérez-Cabornero1, E. Velasco1, M. Infante1, D. Sanz1, N. Martinez1, L. novel . Furthermore, other three new variations were found, but without Hernández1, N. Martínez1, E. Lastra2, C. Miner1, M. Durán1; aminoacid change . The 43 .3% of Amsterdam criteria patients had one 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain. pathological mutation and so had 28% of the Bethesda criteria . Of the Lynch syndrome is the most common hereditary syndrome predispos- thirty-nine relatives with mutation, six have only developed cancer . The ing to colorectal cancer . Mostly, it is caused by DNA variations in the majority of pathological mutations in Amsterdam criteria were found in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 . Of con- the MLH1 and MSH2 genes . In the MSH6 the pathological mutations siderable relevance in the clinical management of colorectal cancer is were found in Bethesda criteria patients, that presented many different to know if the missense variants referred to as unclassified variants types of cancer . In this study we haven’t found any rearrangements in (UVs) are or not cancer-causing . We report the mutational screening the MLH1 gene, as were described in other populations . In conclusion, of 100 index cases from the Counsil Genetics Unit of Castilla-León. with this work we are contributing these new mutations to the wide Of the 21 (21%) who carried germline mutation, 11 (52%) were cat- spectrum that alredy exits . egorized as pathogenic (frameshift, large rearrangements, splicing defects) and 10 (48%) as unclassified missense variants. The focus P04.017 of this report is the classification of six of these missense variants as Uncertain pathogenicity of msH2 variants N127s and G322D bening or pathogenic: MLH1 c .1852_1853AA>GC p.K618A; MLH1 challenges their classification c .2146G>A p.V716m; MSH6 c .2633 T>C p.V878A; MSH6 c .431 G>T S. Ollila1, D. Dermadi Bebek1, M. Greenblatt2, M. Nyström1; p.s144i and two novel variations MSH6 c .3425 C>T p.t1142m; MLH1 1Departmet of Biosciences, Division of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Hel- c .1574 G>A p.s505N. To test this, we have analyzed clinical and ge- sinki, Finland, 2Vermont Cancer Center, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, netic aspects including i) comparison between allelic frequency of the United States. variant in the cases and 700 unaffected controls from a National DNA Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is associated Register ii) a co-segregation study of the mutation with the disease with germline mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes . Inherited within pedigree iii) evolutionary conservation of the involved amino- missense mutations, however, complicate the diagnostics since they acid and type of aminoacid change iv) a prediction of the degree of do not always cause unambiguous predisposition to cancer . This leads affectation at the protein function by two bioinformatics programs “Sort to variable and contradictory interpretations of their pathogenicity . intolerant from tolerant” (siFt; http://blocks .fhcrc .org/sift/SIFT .html) Here, we establish evidence for the functionality of the two frequently and Polimorphism Phenotype (PolyPhen; www .bork .embl-heidelberg . reported variations, MSH2 N127S and G322D, which have been de- de/PolyPhen) . The combination of all these approaches helps us to scribed both as pathogenic and non-pathogenic in literature and da- predict whether these contribute to the disease phenotype or merely tabases . We report the results of three different functional analyses represent rare polymorphisms characterizing the biochemical properties of these protein variants in vitro . We applied an immunoprecipitation assay to assess the MSH2- P04.020 MSH6 interaction, a bandshift assay to study mismatch recognition A Database to support the clinical interpretation of Human and binding, and a MMR assay for repair efficiency. None of the exper- mismatch Repair Gene Variants iments provided evidence on reduced functionality of these proteins R. H. Sijmons, R. M. W. Hofstra; as compared to wild-type MSH2 . Our data demonstrate that MSH2 University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. N127S and G322D per se are not sufficient to trigger MMR deficiency. Germline mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes MLH1, MSH2, This together with variable clinical phenotypes in the mutation carriers MSH6 and PMS2 can cause Lynch syndrome . Truncating MMR gene suggest no or only low cancer risk in vivo . mutations generally offer a clear handle for genetic counselling and allows for pre-symptomatic testing . In contrast, the clinical implications P04.018 of most missense mutations and small in-frame deletions detected in Familial and clinicopathological differences in Amsterdam- patients suspected of having Lynch syndrome are unclear . We have families according to their mismatch repair status constructed an online database dedicated to these unclassified vari- M. Pineda1, L. Benito2, C. Yagüe2, M. Salinas2, C. Lázaro1, S. González1, G. ants (UVs) of the MMR genes . It can be easily searched for information Capellá1, I. Blanco2; on the results of functional assays and other findings, including tumour 1Laboratori de Recerca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de characteristics, segregation within families and frequency in controls . Llobregat, Spain, 2Unitat de Consell Genètic, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospi- The clinical classification of MMR gene UVs will be a huge challenge. talet de Llobregat, Spain. Recently formed committees within the International Society for Gas- The aim of this study was to establish the familial and clinicopathologi- trointestinal Hereditary Tumours (InSiGHT) are working towards col- cal differences within Amsterdam-families according to their mismatch lecting data and developing classification algorithms. Our MMR gene repair (MMR) status . missense database will be one of the tools to support that process . It Seventy families fulfilling Amsterdam criteria II were included. MMR can be searched at www .MMRmissense .org status was determined by microsatellite analysis and/or immunohisto-Cancer genetics  P04.021 Mutations c .306+5G>A and c .1865T>A (p .Leu622His) of MLH1 gene comparative scanning of polymorphisms in mitochondrial Dloop are the first founder MLH1 mutations identified in Spain. This fact region in colorectal and breast cancer would have important implications for the design of molecular diagnos- M. Akouchekian1,2, M. Houshmand2,3; tic strategies in the HNPCC Spanish families . 1Hanover university, Hanover, Germany, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, P04.023 Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Genetic, Special Medical Center, Teh- Further evidence for heritability of an epimutation in one of ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. twelve cases with mLH1 promoter methylation in blood cells ABstRAct clinically displaying HNPcc Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been found in many kinds M. Morak1,2, H. Schackert3, N. Rahner4, B. Betz5, C. Walldorf4, B. Royer-Po- of human cancer and especially the 1 .1 kb displacement loop (D-loop) kora5, K. Schulmann6, W. Dietmaier7, G. Keller8, T. Massdorf1, A. Laner2, G. region was found to be a “hot spot” for mutation in mtDNA of tumors . Leitner2, E. Holinski-Feder2,1; Mitochondria play an important role in shifting the cell from death to ab- 1University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, normal cell growth thus contributing to the neoplastic process, because 2Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Surgical Re- of their essential roles in energy metabolism and generation of reactive search, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genet- oxygen species (ROS) also initiation of apoptosis and aging . The pur- ics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Hein- pose of this study is to scan the mutation frequencies in hypervariable rich-Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Medical Department, regions of mitochondrial D-Loop in colorectal and breast cancer pa- Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 7Institute of Pathology, University tients comparatively . The results of our investigation are summarized of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, Technical Uni- in the following table . when each polymorphism is tested individually versity, Munich, Germany. using the fisher exact test the frequency of two single-nucleotide poly- ABSTRACT morphism SNPs were found to be significantly different between the Germline mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes, tumours with colorectal cancer (CRC) and breast cancer patient (p≤0.05).while the high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) and loss of MMR protein expres- SNP C16261T (p=0.0005) is significantly more in breast cancer pa- sion are the hallmarks of HNPCC (Lynch-syndrome) . While somatic tients than CRC patients, the frequency of SNP T16519C (p=0 .0019) MLH1 promoter hypermethylation is generally accepted in the tumori- is less in breast cancer patients than CRC patients . genesis of sporadic tumours, abnormal MLH1 promoter methylation in In this contribution the fact that SNP C16261T may be a consequence normal body cells is controversially discussed as a mechanism predis- for breast cancer and SNP T16519C for CRC is discussed . posing patients to HNPCC . Colorectal cancer 94 patients suspected of HNPCC-syndrome with a mean age of onset Fisher’’s Exact Test Breast cancer cases (n=6) Cases (n=40) of 45 .5 years, MLH1-deficiency in their tumours but no germline mu- p value % Positive % Positive tation underwent methylation-specific PCR-screening for MLH1 pro- 0 .0005 83 .3 5 10 4 moter methylation . 1 16 .6 1 25 10 In peripheral blood cells of twelve patients an MLH1 promoter meth- 1 0 0 10 4 ylation, in seven informative cases allele-specific, was found. Normal 0 .0019 0 0 70 28 colonic tissue, buccal mucosa, and tumour tissue available from three P04.022 patients also presented abnormal hemiallelic methylation in the MLH1 Identification of two MLH founder mutations in spanish promoter . The heredity of aberrant methylation is questionable . Pro: Hereditary Nonpolyposis colorectal cancer families MLH1 promoter methylation was found in a patient and his mother giv- E. Borràs1, M. Pineda1, I. Blanco2, G. Llort3, T. Caldés4, M. Urioste5, C. ing evidence for a familial predisposition for an epimutation in MLH1 . Martínez-Bouzas6, B. Graña7, A. Torres8, T. Ramón y Cajal9, J. Sanz10,8, S. Contra: a de novo set-up of methylation in one patient, a mosaic or González1, C. Lázaro1, G. Capellá1; incomplete methylation pattern in six patients, and no evidence for in- 1Laboratori de Recerca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia, IDIBELL, heritance of MLH1 promoter methylation in the remaining families . Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Unitat de Consell Genètic, Institut Català Our findings provide strong evidence that MLH1 promoter methylation d’Oncologia, IDIBELL, Hospital Duran i Reynals, Hospitalet de Llobregat, in normal body cells mimics HNPCC and constitutes a pathogenic pre- Spain, 3Unitat de Consell Genètic, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospital Ger- lesion in MLH1. The identification of hypermethylation as an epigenetic mans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 4Laboratorio de Oncología Molecular, Hos- defect has important implications for surveillance recommendations, pital Clínico Sant Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 5Departamento de Genética Humana, as these patients should be treated like Lynch-Syndrome patients, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncologicas, Madrid, Spain, 6Laboratorio whereas the heritability of methylation is still under investigation . de Genética Molecular, Hospital de Cruces, Bizkaia, Spain, 7Unitat d’Avaluació del Risc de Càncer i Consell Genètic, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospital P04.024 Universitari Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain, 8Unitat de Consell Genètic, Hospital Founder effect of a pathogenic MSH mutation identified in four Universitari Sant Joan, Reus, Spain, 9Servei d’Oncologia Mèdica, Hospital de la Hereditary Non-Polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPcc) families Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 10Institut d’Oncologia Corachan-Cen- M. Menéndez1, S. Castellví-Bel2, M. Pineda1, R. de Cid3, J. Muñoz2, F. tre Mèdic, Barcelona, Spain. Balaguer2, V. Gonzalo2, M. Giráldez2, I. Blanco4, G. Llort5, T. Ramón y Cajal6, S. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal González1, A. Castells2, G. Capellá1; disorder caused by mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes, most 1Laboratori de Recerca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia, IDIBELL, often in MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 genes . Tumors of HNPCC-spectrum Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Servei de Gastroenterologia, Institut de Malal- are associated with microsatellite instability and loss of mismatch re- ties Digestives i Metabòliques, Hospital Clínic, CIBEREHD, IDIBAPS, Barce- pair proteins expression . In some populations, founder mutations ap- lona, Spain, 3Programa Gens i Malaltia, Centre de Regulació Genòmica-UPF, pear to explain a substantial fraction of HNPCC cases . Barcelona, Spain, 4Unitat de Consell Genètic, Institut Català d’Oncologia, We report here the identification of two mutations in MLH1 gene, IDIBELL, Hospital Duran i Reynals, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 5Unitat de c .306+5G>A and c .1865T>A (p .Leu622His), in 12 and 11 Spanish Consell Genètic, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospital Universitari Germans HNPCC families, respectively . Both mutations segregate with the dis- Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 6Servei d’Oncologia Mèdica, Hospital de la ease, and tumors show microsatellite instability and loss of expression Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. of MLH1 protein . RNA studies demonstrate that c .306+5G>A mutation HNPCC is caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes generates two aberrant mRNA transcripts . Experimental approaches MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 . The novel MSH2 c .[2635-3T>C; are being performed to elucidate the pathogenicity of the c .1865T>A 2635-5C>T] mutation was identified in 4 HNPCC families, cosegregat- (p .Leu622His) mutation . ing with the disease . This mutation, located in intron 15, was predicted Haplotype analysis is performed using three single nucleotide polymor- to alter the correct mRNA processing by in silico analysis . phisms of MLH1 gene, three intragenic and four extragenic microsat- Our aim was to perform the c .[2635-3T>C; 2635-5C>T] mutation ellite markers, located between D3S1609 and D3S3564 . We identify screening in HNPCC and control populations, to evaluate the founder two common haplotypes associated to c .306+5G>A and c .1865T>A, effect in our population by haplotype analysis and to confirm the patho- suggesting a founder effect . genic effect of the mutation by MSH2 expression studies .Cancer genetics  Mutation screening was performed by SSCP and CSCE in genomic tive and false-positive results due to gene conversion events, we DNA from 256 HNPCC index cases and 239 controls . Haplotyping scanned colorectal cancer patients including strong candidates for a was performed analysing 4 MSH2 extragenic microsatellite markers PMS2 germline mutation based on immunohistochemistry analysis (D2S288, D2S2227, D2S1247 and D2S1248) in 50 controls and muta- of their tumours . We show that several mutations detected in the 3’ tion carriers by using the PHASE program . We analysed the effect of part of PMS2 using the current mutation scanning designs are actually the mutation in mRNA processing by RT-PCR and in MSH2 expression false-positives and that also mutations can be missed . by qRT-PCR using RNA from 5 mutation carriers and 18 controls . None of the remaining HNPCC cases or controls analysed harboured P04.027 the mutation. We identified a common telomeric haplotype and two screening for genomic rearrangements of the MMR and APC centromeric haplotypes, both rare in our population . Although we were genes in Galician families with hereditary colorectal cancer not able to identify any abnormal transcript by RT-PCR with the design C. Fernández-Rozadilla1, N. Gómez-Fernández1, I. Madrigal2, O. Lortes1, M. used, we observed a 50% reduction of mRNA MSH2 expression in Mila2, M. Magdalena1, S. Castellví-Bel3, A. Vega1, A. Castells3, A. Carracedo1, carriers when compared with controls . C. Ruiz-Ponte1; Haplotype analyses suggest a founder effect of the c .[2635-3T>C; 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenomica-SERGAS, Grupo de Medic- 2635-5C>T] MSH2 mutation and expression studies support a patho- ina Xenomica-USC, CIBER-ER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Biochemistry genic role of this mutation . and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic, CIBER-ER, IDIBAPS, Bar- celona, Spain, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Institut de Malalties Digestives P04.025 i Metabòliques, Hospital Clínic, CIBEREHD, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. Biallelic mUtYH germline mutations and endometrial cancer Lynch syndrome and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) are two R. Tricarico1, B. Ciambotti1, P. Bet2, C. Di Gregorio3, L. Varesco2, M. Genuardi1; well-known inherited colorectal cancer syndromes caused by germline 1Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, Medical Genetics Unit, University of mutations in susceptibility genes (MMR, APC, MYH) . Molecular diag- Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Center for Hereditary Tumours, National Institute nosis has until very recently relied only on detection of germline point for Cancer Research, Genoa, Italy, 3Division of Pathology, Hospital of Carpi, mutations in these genes . Nevertheless, it is known that large rear- Modena, Italy. rangements also play an important role in pathogenesis and should MAP (MUTYH-Associated Polyposis) is an autosomal recessive condi- therefore be considered . tion predisposing to colorectal cancer, due to inherited defects of the Thirty-nine FAP and 16 Lynch syndrome unrelated Galician families MUTYH gene causing an excess of somatic G>T mutations in the APC that were negative for germlime mutations were analysed by MLPA and KRAS genes . To date, few extracolonic manifestations have been to determine the frequency of large rearrangements . Positive results observed in MAP patients, and the clinical spectrum of this condition were further confirmed by other methods (FISH, cDNA analysis). is not yet fully established . Recently, one patient with a diagnosis of Three different deletions in APC were detected in 4 families (8% of the endometrial cancer and biallelic MUTYH germline mutations has been total APC families): an exon 4 deletion, an exon 1-15 deletion, and two described (Barnetson et al ., Clin Genet 2007: 72: 551-555) . However, whole gene deletions . Carriers of whole allelic deletions presented a it is not yet clear if biallelic germline mutations in MUTYH increase severe polyposis phenotype with an early onset of symptoms . the risk of endometrial tumours . We report on two MAP patients with In Lynch syndrome families, 3 deletions where found in MSH2 (exon 7- biallelic MUTYH germline mutations who developed endometrial carci- 16, exon 2-3 and one whole gene deletion), whereas only one deletion noma . In one of the patients, a diagnosis of Lynch syndrome was origi- was found in MLH1 (exon 4-6), making up to 14% (10% MSH2 and 4% nally considered, and subsequently ruled out by immunohistochemi- MLH1) of the Lynch syndrome germline mutations . Large rearrange- cal analysis of mismatch repair proteins and microsatellite instability ments were mainly detected in families fulfilling Amsterdam criteria. analysis . The endometrial tumours were evaluated for PTEN, PIK3CA, The overall results resemble those previously published in other popu- KRAS, BRAF and CTNNB1 mutations . A G>T transversion at codon 12 lations and confirm that large rearrangements represent an important of the KRAS gene was observed in one tumor . A single 1-bp frameshift percentage of FAP and Lynch syndrome germline mutations . They deletion of PTEN was observed in the same sample . Overall, these re- should therefore be taken into account in molecular genetic testing of sults suggest that endometrial carcinoma may represent a component Galician families . manifestation of MAP . P04.028 P04.026 New germline mutations of the MLH mismatch repair gene in Gene conversion rates between Pms2, a mismatch repair gene brazilian hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer involved in Lynch syndrome, and its pseudogene Pms2cL; M. V. Dominguez1, E. S. Monteiro2, D. M. Carraro1, B. M. Rossi2; impact on the reliability of current mutation scanning 1Laboratory of Genomic and Molecular Biology of Treatment and Investigation H. M. van der Klift1, C. M. Tops2, E. C. Bik2, M. W. Boogaard2, K. Pavlikova3, H. Center of Hospital A.C.Camargo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Pelvic Morreau4, P. Devilee1,4, J. T. Wijnen1,2; Surgery of Hospital A.C. Camargo, São Paulo, Brazil. 1Department of Human Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Depart- Background: Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is ment of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Institute of biology an autosomal dominant syndrome predisposing to the early develop- and medical genetics, University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech Republic, 4De- ment of various cancers including those of colon, rectum, endometrium, partment of Pathology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands. ovarium, small bowel, stomach and urinary tract . HNPCC is caused by Mutation detection in PMS2, a Mismatch Repair gene involved in germline mutations in the DNA mismatch repair genes, mostly MLH1 Lynch syndrome (formerly Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Can- and MSH2 . The mutation spectrum in the Brazilian population is still cer or HNPCC), is complicated by the presence of the pseudogene poorly documented . PMS2CL . It has been shown that gene conversion can occur between Aim: To report our experience on the mutation screening and investi- the 3’ part of PMS2 and this 700 kb proximally located pseudogene . gation of the pathogenicity of the mutations . in MLH1 and MSH2 genes We investigated 83 familial colorectal cancer cases and 25 healthy in 20 unrelated Brazilian kindreds with suspected HNPCC . controls by semi-quantification of paralogous sequence variants (nu- Methods: Twenty brazilian patients with familial clustering of CRC cleotides that differ between PMS2 and PMS2CL) in sequence chro- were genetically tested. The families were identified by applying the matograms of non-specific PCR products (amplification of PMS2 and Amsterdam and Bethesda Criteria . Point mutations in the MLH1 and PMS2CL sequences simultaneously) and show that, from exon 12 on- MSH2 genes were screened by denaturing high performance liquid wards, all PMS2 specific nucleotides on which commonly used MLPA chromatography (DHPLC) followed by direct sequencing . and PMS2 specific PCR primers are based, can be subject to gene Results: Two novel nonpathogenic mutations (2 of 20 [10%]) in MLH1- conversion with an increasing frequency of up to 50 % at the 3’ end of exon 15 (intron) nt . 1707 a->g and MLH1-exon 13 (intron) nt . 1632 the gene . Current mutation scanning designs are thus extremely prone g->a were identified in brazilian CRC patients. to generate false-negatives or even worse false-positives in this part Conclusion: According to the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) of the gene . and the International Society of Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumors With a newly developed protocol including non-specific sequencing, (InSIGHT) Database, this is the first report of this mutation. cDNA analysis and Southern Blot analysis that excludes false-nega-Cancer genetics  P04.029 P04.031 characterisation of familial breast tumours using array-based Preliminary genetic investigations of BRcA genes within comparative genomic hybridisation technology: the common hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOc) families in north- heterogeneity with sporadic breast tumours eastern Romania L. Melchor1, E. Honrado1, M. J. García1, S. Álvarez2, A. Osorio1, K. L. Nathan- L. Negura1, E. Carasevici1, A. Negura2, N. Uhrhammer3, Y. J. Bignon3; son3, J. Benítez1; 1Gr. T. Popa Medicine and Pharmacy University, IASI, Romania, 2Al. I. Cuza 1Human Genetics Group, Human Genetics Programme, Spanish National University, IASI, Romania, 3Jean Perrin Molecular Oncology Center, Clermont- Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Molecular Cytogenetics Group, Human Ferrand, France. Genetics Programme, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are major cancer predisposition genes, respon- 3Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine and Abramson Cancer sible for a large percentage of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. (HBOC) families . Screening for mutations in these genes is now stan- Familial breast cancer (~5% of breast cancer cases) maybe due to dard practice for HBOC cases in Europe, and permits medical follow- mutations at the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes (~30% of families with up and genetic counselling adapted to the needs of individuals in such breast cancer) or to mutations in other unknown genes to date in the families . As very little information is available in Romania, we started non-BRCA1/2 or BRCAX families (~70%) . To characterise the genom- the first characterization of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer risk ic differences amongst the distinct breast cancer classes using the in north-eastern Romania . Our study consists in HBOC families iden- array-based comparative genomic hybridization technique, we have tification and recruitment, DNA collection achievement from these pa- collected 20 tumours associated with BRCA1 mutation, 24 tumours tients, implementation of molecular technology for mutations analysis from mutation carriers in BRCA2, 32 BRCAX-tumours, and 19 spo- and oncogenetic follow-up of mutations bearers . radic samples . We managed to identify and recruit so far several HBOC families with Breast tumours associated with mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 had unique features such as 5 ovarian plus 1 breast cancer, or 8 breast greater genomic instability than BRCAX or sporadic samples, and a cancer cases within the same family line . All recruited families are now trend to alter specific chromosomal regions. However, we have demon- under systematic DNA sequencing for BRCA screening . strated a common heterogeneity between familial and sporadic breast We also investigated, within HBOC families and sporadic cases, the cancer in terms of estrogen receptor (ER) status and breast cancer status of three known founder mutations (185delAG and 5382insC on subtypes . First, ER-negative tumours showed higher genomic instabil- BRCA1 and 6174delT on BRCA2), by optimization and comparison ity and a specific genomic aberration pattern compared with ER-posi- of several multiplex-PCR techniques . This part of our study showed tive tumours. Second, familial breast tumours have been profiled into a very important random factor within all multiplex-PCR methods . We molecular subtypes: basal, ERBB2, luminal A, and luminal B . BRCA1- demonstrate that although they are cheap, rapid and easy techniques, tumours were associated with the basal phenotype, which presented they often generate false results like primer dimmers, undesirable am- the highest genomic instability, whereas BRCAX samples were related plification products apparition or heteroduplexes. Therefore we always to the luminal A subtype . Luminal B tumours had the greatest number recommend combining multiplex-PCR with other pre-screening meth- of high-level DNA amplifications. ods (SNP, heteroduplex analysis) for a good selection before DNA se- Two regions with high-level DNA amplifications in familial breast can- quencing . cer have also been studied: 8p11-p12 and 13q34 . The former one was Our study was possible by financial support from Romanian Acad- related to higher cell proliferation, whereas the latter one was charac- emy . teristic of basal tumours, had 1’6Mb length, and was correlated with overexpression of candidate genes such as TFDP1 . P04.032 implementation of a comprehensive strategy for mutational P04.030 analysis of BRCA and BRCA genes in our clinical setting: BAX gene mutations and Breast carcinoma: A study of Description of the algorithm and preliminary results phenotype-genotype correlation J. del Valle, L. Feliubadaló, E. Tornero, M. Menéndez, M. Mirete, E. Montes, M. M. Hosseini1, M. Houshmand2, K. Banihashemi3, M. Sayedhassani4; Calaf, G. Capellà, C. Lázaro; 1Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Laboratori Recerca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Republic of Iran, 3GPEF, MSRP, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Research We have recently set up an accurate and cost-effective strategy to and clinical center for infertility of Yazd, Yazd, Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic screen for variations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes . Our algorithm of Iran. consists in a sequential cascade of complementary techniques using It has been known for a while that the proapoptotic BAX protein in- genomic DNA . First, we study copy number variations by using com- duces cell death by acting on mitochondria and its gene is located mercial MLPA kits (MRC-Holland) . Samples showing positive MLPA on 19q13 .3-q13 .4 . On the other hand it has been demonstrated that results are always confirmed by a different approach. Samples with BAX can be essential for death receptor-mediated apoptosis in cancer no copy number variations undergo SNPlex analysis, designed spe- cells cifically to detect 38 Spanish common polymorphisms and 9 recurrent In this study a kind of phenotype-genotype correlation research for mutations. Direct sequencing is applied to confirm recurrent mutations. breast carcinoma and BAX gene mutations has been done . The corre- Negative samples for the previous steps are submitted to our chosen lation between breast cancer stage and its prognosis has been evalu- technique for mutational search for nucleotide changes, the CSCE ated with the mutation types of the BAX and their statistical analyses approach (conformation sensitive capillary electrophoresis) . CSCE were the matter of interest through a series of clinical and genetic analysis allows detecting altered electrophoresis patterns when DNA variables . The sample consists of 50 female patients with mean age changes are present in heterozygosis in a given fragment . The screen- of 40-50 . who involved with Breast Cancer compared to a healthy con- ing of the whole coding region of both genes is performed by analysing trol group of the same race and ethnicity with approximately the same 79 different fragments . Abnormal patterns are sequenced to determine mean age who also never had a history of breast cancer in their close the DNA change responsible for the observed mobility shift . When a relatives . DNA change is suspected to alter the correct splicing of the genes, Our study shows some basic findings to make a Bax mutation da- mRNA studies are performed . We are applying this comprehensive tabase phenotypically interrelated with the clinical prognoses which approach since July 2007 in our routine setting and although numbers could be a fundamental guide to clinical treatment options through a are still too low, results are promising and comparable to those report- series of genetic screening . ed in the literature . We detected about 2-3% copy number alterations, 3-5% recurrent mutations and 15-18% point mutations in a selected population of high-risk patients . Several mutations affecting the splic- ing have been also characterized at mRNA level .Cancer genetics  P04.033 P04.035 Rapid screening of BRcA1 and BRcA2 spanish mutations by BRCA1 and BRCA2 variability in breast/ovarian cancer families High Resolution melting analysis from the Basque country I. de Juan Jiménez, E. Esteban Cardeñosa, S. Palanca Suela, E. Barragan I. -. Zubillaga1, M. Carrera2, K. Mugica2, C. Vidales1; González, P. Bolufer Gilabert; 1Policlinica Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain, 2Instituto Oncologico, San Sebas- Molecular Biology Laboratory, Valencia, Spain. tian, Spain. Background: BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the major genes responsible for BRCA1 and BRCA2 are tumor suppressor genes that are related with hereditary breast (BC) and/or ovarian cancer . Since BRCA1/2 are large inherited susceptibility to breast/ovarian cancer . We are analyzing the genes the majority of mutation detection procedures include screening polymorphic variants of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in families with clin- methods which are time-consuming and expensive . High-resolution ical criteria of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer . After DNA isolation, the melting (HRM) is a recent promising screening method that combines mutational analysis were performed by DNA sequencing of all BRCA1 the simplicity, cost-effectiveness and rapid identification of genetic and BRCA2 exons and flanking regions. Twentythree different types variants . The aim of the study is to evaluate HRM in the screening of of BRCA2 and twenty BRCA1 polymorphic mutations were identified the reported Spanish mutations . in twenty breast/ovarian cancer families . The patients selection was Methods: We studied 40 BRCA1 and 47 BRCA2 DNA samples con- made after a genetic counseling procedure, according the diagnos- taining different Spanish mutations . We also included a reference tic criteria recommended by de Spanish Society of Medical Oncology group of 20 unknown DNAs from patients with sporadic BC . The assay (SEOM) and also using the BRCAPRO informatic model . was carried out on LightCycler 480 (Roche) using LightCycler® 480 HRM Master and performing 21 and 25 independent PCR for the study P04.036 of BRCA1/2 gene mutations, respectively . The melting analysis was Novel and common BRCA1 mutations in familial breast/ovarian performed with LightCycler® 480 Gene Scanning Software v .1 .0 . All cancer patients from Lithuania mutations and genetic variants detected were confirmed by sequenc- R. Janavicius1,2, J. Kasnauskiene1,2, V. Kucinskas1,2; ing the PCR products . 1Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Vil- Results: The HRM could discriminate the 87 BRCA1/2 Spanish muta- nius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics,Vilnius University, tions analyzed from wild-type DNA . Besides, 82 out 87 mutations were Vilnius, Lithuania. clearly differentiated from each other . In the sporadic BC group we did Background: Mutations in the BRCA1 gene are found in many families not detect any deleterious mutations, however, we detected polymor- with multiple cases of breast and ovarian cancer . Twenty seven un- phisms and unclassified variants in both genes. related female patients diagnosed with breast cancer and/or ovarian Conclusions: HRM is a valuable method for rapid screening of BRCA1/2 cancer have attended cancer genetics clinic during period of 2006- Spanish mutations . Besides, this procedure allows the genotyping of 2007 year . different mutations included and is capable of differentiating unknown Methods: BRCA1 gene testing was initiated with direct sequencing for genetic variants present in the PCR product . common founder mutations: 4153delA in exon 11, 5382insC in exon Acknowledgements: to the “Fundación para Investigación La Fe”, FIS 20 and enzyme restriction digestion for 300T/G in exon 5 . After the PI060505 and AP-042/07 . exclusion of common mutations, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and prescreening by denaturing gradient gel P04.034 electrophoresis (DGGE) with confirmation by direct sequencing were Novel deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations found in the population of performed . Eastern spain Results: Overall, pathogenic BRCA1 gene mutations were prevalent E. Esteban Cardeñosa1, S. Palanca Suela1, I. de Juan Jiménez1, E. Barragán in 8 (30%) unrelated proband patients: 3 (15%) with breast cancer González1, I. Chirivella González2, Á. Segura Huerta2, C. Guillén Ponce2, E. (two 5382insC, one 4153delA), 2 (50%) with ovarian cancer (5382insC Martínez de Dueñas2, P. Bolufer Gilabert1; and 4153delA each) and 3 (100%) with breast and ovarian can- 1Molecular Biology Laboratory, Valencia, Spain, 2Units of Genetic Conselling in cer (5382insC, 4153delA and novel previously not reported deletion Cancer of the Valencian Community, Valencia, Spain. 4635delG in exon 15) . No 300T/G mutation and BRCA1 rearrange- From the identification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 as major genes respon- ments were detected . sible of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer more than 1,800 patho- For patients diagnosed with breast cancer ≤35 year, BRCA1 mutation genic mutations have been reported in the Breast Cancer Information detection rate was 27% (3/11) and mutations were absent in breast Core, many of them related with ethnic and/or geographic conditions cancer patients group diagnosed after 36 years (0/6) . (Neuhausen SL, 1999) . The objective of the study is to describe the Conclusions: Testing for two common BRCA1 mutations should be twenty novel deleterious mutations identified in the Valencian Com- considered in female cancer cases* when: (a) breast cancer diag- munity . nosed before the age of 36 year; (b) medullary breast carcinoma; (c) In the three first years of performance of the Program of Genetic Coun- breast and ovarian cancer; (d) nonmucinous epithelial ovarian tumor selling in Cancer of the Valencian Community we studied the BRCA1 regardless the age (*or first degree relative/second through male). Full and BRCA2 mutations in 596 unrelated breast/ovarian cancer pa- BRCA1 gene analysis is warranted in patients with strong family his- tients. The method followed consisted of multiplex PCR amplification tory of breast cancer . of all exons of the genes, mutation screening by the study of homo- duplex/heteroduplex and mutation identification by sequencing of the P04.037 PCR products . Occurrence of BRcA1 cryptic splice site mutation: iVs5-12A>G We found 52 different deleterious mutations (21 in BRCA1 and 31 in in hereditary breast cancer families in the czech republic BRCA2), among the 112 positive index patients . In BRCA1 gene we E. Machackova1, J. Hazova1, S. Tavandzis2, M. Lukesova1, L. Foretova1; found 12 frameshift, 3 nonsense, 3 missense and 3 splicing mutations . 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 2JG Mendel Cancer In BRCA2 we found 24 frameshift, 5 nonsense and 2 splicing . Twenty Centre, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic. of these mutations have not been reported previously, 5 in BRCA1 High Resolution Melting (HRM) analysis revealed presence of BRCA1 (c .1689delG, c .3700delC, p .Y1429X, c .4424_4425delCT and c .5430_ cryptic splice site mutation IVS5-12A>G in high-risk breast/ovarian 5452del23) and 15 in BRCA2 (c .489_490delCT, c .1835insT, c .1874_ cancer patients . This change was described to form a cryptic splice 1877delAGGA, c .2929delC, c .5025delT, c .5344_5347delAATA, site resulting in the addition of 11 nucleotides at the intron 5/exon 6 c .5946_5947dupCT, c .6118delA, c .6722delT, c .7400insA, p .Y2621X, boundary . The BRCA1 mutation IVS5-12A>G was not detectable by c .8270_8271delCA, c .8860+2T>G, c .9218delA and p .Q3156X) . the previously used heteroduplex analysis (using MDE gel) at the From our data two main conclusions could be drawn: (a) the remark- MMCI . Therefore, the retrospective study of 480 high-risk familiar able proportion of novel mutations (20/52; 38 .4%) and (b)that the ma- breast/ovarian cancer patients without previously identified BRCA1/2 jority of these mutations (15/20; 75%) were found in BRCA2 gene . mutation were analysed for exon 6 by HRM using LightScanner instru- ment . The BRCA1 mutation IVS5-12A>G was found in 11 high-risk probands. Adjoining these new findings to our previous results, the IVS5-12A>G mutation in BRCA1 gene represents 5,3% of all BRCA1Cancer genetics 00 mutations detected in hereditary breast cancer families . All together, P04.040 the mutation detection rate in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes reached 39,8% chromosomal damage after in vitro treatment with radiation or in hereditary breast cancer families (309 families carrying BRCA mu- mitomycin c in lymphocytes of BRCA/BRCA mutation carriers tation out of 778 analysed families with at least 2 diagnosed breast S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez1,2, T. Ramón y Cajal3, C. Alonso3, A. Corral4, P. Carras- and/or ovarian cancer cases before the age of 50) . co5, J. Sanz3, C. López3, M. Ribas5, M. Baiget2, O. Diez1,2; Any report about presence of BRCA1 mutation IVS5-12A>G in Slavic 1Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital de la Vall d’Hebron, population is missing in the BIC database . Therefore other methods Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Genètica, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, were tested for their capability to detect this mutation . We found that Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei d’Oncologia Mèdica, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant HRM as well as DHPLC can perfectly detect the IVS5-12A>G muta- Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Grup de Mutagèsi, Universitat Autònoma de Barce- tion, however detection with SSCP highly depends on running condi- lona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Servei de Radiofísica i Radioprotecció, Hospital de la tion . By using SSCP or HA the BRCA1 mutation IVS5-12A>G might Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. be easily overseen . Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Mutations in BRCA1 and Republic: Grant MZ0MOU2005 BRCA2 account for a fraction of inherited susceptibility to breast (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC) . The BRCA1/BRCA2 gene products help to P04.038 maintain genomic integrity after DNA damage . To investigate this ca- Expression of BRcA1 and tP 53 genes in different types of pacity in BRCA1/2 heterozygous cells, we have evaluated their in vitro tumor sensitivity to chromosomal damage induced by two mutagenic agents: J. Ramic1, L. Kapur1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, D. Macic1, K. Radic1, N. Bilalovic2, K. ionising radiation and mitomycin C (MMC) . Bajrovic1; STUDY SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Lymphocyte cultures were 1Institute for genetic engeneering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and established from 20 BRCA1 mutation carriers (12 with cancer and 8 Herzegovina, 2Department of pathology, University Clinical Center Sarajevo, without), 21 BRCA2 mutation carriers (11 with cancer and 10 without) Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. and 11 non-carrier controls . The chromosomal damage (chromosome The TP53 is one of the main suppressors in many types of tumor ail- breakage and chromosome loss) induced in vitro was assessed quan- ments . BRCA1 is another tumor suppressor gene involved in DNA tifying bi-nucleated cells with micronuclei (MN) . MN can be used as repair and it is best known by its role in the development and prolifera- a measure of DNA repair capacity . Six cultures were set up for each tion of various types of breast and ovarian cancers . Previous studies subject (2 treated with 2Gy gamma irradiation from Co-60, 2 treated indicate that mutations in these genes are related to pathogenesis and with 0,05 μg/ml of MMC and 2 without treatment). development of the disease . RESULTS: The BRCA1/BRCA2 heterozygous lymphocytes did not Aim of our study was to determine if there is any relation between ex- show a higher level of radiation-induced MN compared to the non-car- pressions of these two genes and also to determine level of expression rier controls lymphocytes . In contrast, the BRCA2 lymphocytes, from of BRCA1 gene in colon cancer . Expression level of TP53 in different both women with and without cancer, presented higher levels of MN cancers was compared to the expression of BRCA1 and beta -actin after exposure to MMC than the lymphocytes of BRCA1 carriers and that was used as a control gene . This study included samples from women without mutation . 76 subjects with breast, ovarian and colon cancer . Genetic material CONCLUSION: The haploinsufficiency of BRCA1/BRCA2 in periph- was extracted from bioptic specimens retrieved from Department of eral blood lymphocytes does not affect the repair of radioinduced DNA Pathology from University Clinical Center Sarajevo . Expression of the lesions . But the absent of one BRCA2 functional allele is associated to observed genes was measured by real time PCR on Applied Biosys- a higher level of chromosomal damage induced by MMC probably due tems 7300 device using SYBR green method . to an impaired DNA repair capacity . P04.039 P04.041 Contralateral prophylactic mastectomy in BRCA1/2 mutation the prevalence of three mutations in BRcA genes in Romanian carriers with breast cancer women with familial breast cancer E. Dagan1,2, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,3; D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, D. Usurelu1, D. Letitia1, 1Rambam Health Care Campus, Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, I. Radu1, T. Burcos2, E. Popa2, I. Popa2, S. Stanilescu2, L. Gavrila1; 2University of Haifa, Department of Nursing, Haifa, Israel, 3Technion-Institute of 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea Clinical Hospital, Bucha- Technology, The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel. rest, Romania. The occurrence of bilateral breast cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation carri- Background . BRCA1 and 2 mutations confer a substantial lifetime risk ers varies subject to factors such as age at diagnosis of 1st tumor and to breast and ovarian cancer . The spectrum of mutation in these genes family history for breast-ovarian cancer . BRCA1/2 mutation carriers has been not previously investigated in our country . are counseled to undergo prophylactic mastectomy (PM) and oopho- Aim . To evaluate the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in rectomy (PO) . The incidence of contralateral prophylactic mastectomy women with demonstrated history of breast cancers . was evaluated in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers diagnosed with unilateral Material and methods . We started this study in 2007 and selected 30 breast cancer from one oncogenetic clinic in Northern Israel . Caucasian patients with breast cancer which was confirmed by clinical Socio-demographic and clinical profiles of 59 eligible BRCA1/2 muta- and paraclinical approach . All patients have at least one relative with tion carriers were collected . Women who opted for contralateral PM early breast cancer onset . Signed informed consent for all participants were compared to those who choose medical surveillance . was obtained before inclusion in study . We used blood samples to test Of the 59 women, three (5 .1%) underwent contralateral PM and 33 the presence of BRCA1 185 AG, BRCA1 5382 insC, BRCA2 6174 delT (55.9%) underwent PO and five (8.5%) had both contralateral PM and mutations using commercial kit and classical PCR based methods . In PO . The three women who underwent contralateral PM were younger addition we screened by indirect methods a region of BRCA1 (1000 than 40 years of age at diagnosis . Mean age at diagnosis was not sta- bp) for other mutations . tistically different between those who opted for PM and those who pre- Results. We identified the heterozygous BRCA1 5382 insC mutation ferred surveillance . However, women who chose contralateral PM were in three patients, confirmed by both methods. The other two muta- significantly younger than those who preferred follow-up (48.12±5.27 tions have been not detected . Thus, we consider that both methods and 59 .81±9 .96, respectively, p=0 .001) . The only socio-demographic have similar efficiency in detection of these mutations. We also found variable found to be associated with PM was graduate level of educa- no mutations in investigated regions using indirect methods . Conclu- tion; all eight women had academic education . sion . Our preliminary results showed that BRCA1 5382 insC could be These findings suggest that most breast cancer patients diagnosed the most common mutation in Romanian women with familial breast with BRCA1/2 mutation declined PM. It is yet to be clarified whether cancer . preferences of risk reduction management in Israel, are subject to woman’s prevailing values or medical recommendations .Cancer genetics 0 P04.042 - Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal, 5Molecular Biology Depart- BRCA1/2 mutations: screening strategy for the analysis of ment and Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncol- Portuguese high-risk breast/ovarian cancer families ogy, Lisbon, Portugal. M. Santos1, P. Machado1, S. Fragoso1, P. Rodrigues2, S. André3, F. Vaz4; introduction: The insertion of an Alu fragment in position c .156_157 1Molecular Biology Departament-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, of BRCA2, causing exon 3 skipping, was confirmed to be a Portu- Portugal, 2Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncol- guese founder mutation and the most frequent BRCA2 rearrangement ogy, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Pathology Department-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, described . We also optimized a methodology for the screening of this Lisbon, Portugal, 4Molecular Biology Departament and Breast Cancer Risk mutation . Patients and methods: All new high-risk patients coun- Evalution Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal. selled for BRCA1/2 screening in our Centre are pre-screened for this Background: Five to ten percent of breast cancers are hereditary and mutation with a 3-step PCR method (Patent pending): 1) exon 3 PCR 50-80% due to BRCA1/2 mutations . Because screening of BRCA1/2 and sequencing, 2) nested PCR with primers 3AluF/3AluR and 3) RT- mutations is complex and indeterminate results are frequent, only PCR and cDNA sequencing . Other Centres, in Portugal and abroad, high-risk patients should be counselled for this diagnosis . The pos- are implementing this PCR-based method to screen for this mutation . sibility of an informative result also depends on diagnostic method- Additional family inquiries are made due to the founder effect of this ologies performed . Purpose: elaboration of an algorithm for BRCA1/2 mutation . Results: Twenty-nine apparently nonrelated Portuguese mutation screening in Portuguese high-risk breast cancer families . c.156_157insAlu-positive families were diagnosed in our Centre and Methods: Integration of clinical and previous molecular data showing one BC/OC family of Portuguese ancestry was also diagnosed in that c .156_157insAlu in the BRCA2 gene is a Portuguese founder mu- Caen, France, using our method. Also, a first degree relative of one tation , BRCA1 immunohistochemistry helps in selection for screening of our new probands had been studied in USA and diagnosed with an as well as the prevalence of multiplex ligation dependent probe ampli- unknown variant (Q2731E) . Exhaustive family inquiries allowed us to fication (MLPA) detected rearrangements . Results: We suggest the connect 3 of these new and apparently non-related families with fami- following algorithm: 1-All samples are first screened for the founder lies already identified. conclusion: The correct option to screen the mutation (6-8% positives); 2- if negative in 1 recurrent rearrangements c.156_157insAlu BRCA2 Portuguese founder mutation is the 3-step (g .Ex13ins6kb and g .Ex11_15del) are screened by PCR; 3- negatives PCR method we described . Our data suggests that other methodolo- in 1 and 2 are screened by conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis . gies may miss this mutation, preventing these families from obtaining The first gene to analyze depends on tumor phenotype: BRCA1 first an informative result . if BRCA1 immunohistochemistry is negative and/or is a triple nega- tive tumor. BRCA2 first if a BRCA1 phenotype is excluded and/or his- P04.045 tory of male breast cancer or BRCA2 associated tumours (gastric, M . Prevalence of large rearrangements in Portuguese hereditary mieloma, pancreas); 4- if still negative MLPA is performed . breast/ovarian cancer families Conclusion: This algorithm might fit into a complete screening program S. Fragoso1, J. Eugénio1, P. Machado1, S. Santos1, P. Rodrigues2, H. Vicente2, and be superior to current practice in terms of providing more informa- S. Bento2, A. Esteves2, F. Vaz3; tive results . 1Molecular Biology Department- Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic- Portuguese Institute of Oncol- P04.043 ogy, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Molecular Biology Department and Breast Cancer Risk correlation between BRcA1 mutations and BRcA1 expression Evaluation Clinic- Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal. level in breast cancer specimens Background: Hereditary breast/ ovarian (HBO) cancer is mainly re- N. Lojo - Kadric1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, D. Macic1, N. Bilalovic2, K. Bajrovic1; lated with BRCA1/2 mutations . Given the increasing number of rear- 1Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Her- rangements reported and the observation that the most frequent BRCA zegovina, 2Institute of Patology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. mutation in our country is a BRCA2 rearrangement (c .156_157insAlu), Tumor suppressor BRCA1 gene is associated with increased risk for present in about 50% of our BRCA1/2 positive families, the contribu- developing breast and ovarian cancer . Approximately 80% of heredi- tion of other large genomic rearrangements to the Portuguese BRCA tary breast cancer cases have mutations in BRCA1 gene . This gene mutation spectrum must be analysed . Aim: to evaluate the frequency is expressed in several organs, including breast and ovary . BRCA1 of large rearrangements in the BRCA1/2 genes in Portuguese HBO encodes a 220 kDa protein which consist of 1863 amino acids . Ex- families . Patients and methods: Ninety high-risk families, previously pression of BRCA1 gene is decreased in the most early - detected negative for BRCA1/2 mutations by conformation sensitive gel electro- sporadic breast cancer cases, and it decreases continuously with de- phoresis, were screened for the g .Ex13ins6Kb BRCA1 by PCR using gree of malignancy . specific primers and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification The goal of this experiment was to investigate whether expression (MLPA) . Results: Two additional rearrangements, both in the BRCA1 of BRCA1 is affected by mutations on BRCA1 gene . Tumor bioptic gene, were observed: g .Ex13ins6Kb (1 family) and g .Ex11_15del (1 specimens from patients fulfilling criteria to belong to high to medium family), accounting for 22% (2/9) of the BRCA1 mutation spectrum in risk group for breast cancer development have been consecutively col- our families . With the MLPA BRCA2 kit, 1 patient was found to be lected at Sarajevo Clinical Center during the period of two years . DNA positive for the 1100delC mutation in CHEK2 and 3 patients had copy was isolated from tumor tissue samples using standard salting out pro- number changes in this gene . No large BRCA2 rearrangements were cedure. Mutations in BRCA1 gene were identified by MLPA reaction. observed . conclusion: Besides the screening of the founder BRCA2 For expression level measurement, RNA from tumor specimens was rearrangement in our population, index high-risk cases negative for isolated using guanidine isotiocyanate method, followed by reverse BRCA1/2 point mutations should be analysed for other possible ge- transcription . Measurement of expression levels of BRCA1 gene was nomic BRCA rearrangements . Although infrequently, CHEK2*1100delC performed in 7300 Real Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) with is present as a low penetrance allele in our population . Additional stud- SYBR green method . After collecting data, correlation calculations ies are necessary to clarify the relevance of copy number changes in were performed . Results from MLPA analysis were correlated with CHEK2 gene . expression levels of BRCA1 gene . Results are displayed in graphic figures. P04.046 Zoom-in Array-CGH in BRCA, BRCA, MLH, MSH and APC P04.044 genes : detection and characterization of five new germline large the 3-step PcR methodology is the correct option to screen the rearrangements c._insAlu BRCA Portuguese founder mutation E. Rouleau1, S. Tozlu1, C. Andrieu1, C. Lefol1, V. Bourdon2, T. Nogushi2, C. P. M. Machado1, A. Hardouin2, S. Santos1, S. Fragoso1, P. Rodrigues3, S. Nogues1, S. Olschwang2, H. Sobol2, I. Bieche1, R. Lidereau1; Bento3, S. Braga3, A. Luís4, A. Esteves3, F. Vaz5; 1Centre Rene Huguenin, St Cloud, France, 2Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, 1Molecular Biology Department-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, France. Portugal, 2Laboratoire de Biologie Clinique et Oncologique- Centre François Genetic predisposition to breast, ovarian, colorectal cancers results Baclesse, Caen, France, 3Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic-Portuguese mainly from alterations in BRCA1, BRCA2, MLH1, MSH2 and APC Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic genes . Except for BRCA2, rearrangements represent 10 to 15% ofCancer genetics 0 deleterious mutations . Many routine detection techniques are avail- P04.048 able, but none gives a panoramic view of the gene and characterizes EmQN Best Practice Guidelines for molecular Analysis in breaking points . Hereditary Breast/Ovarian Cancer We have developed a zoom-in array-CGH for detecting and charac- N. E. Larsson1, Å. Borg2, O. Sinilnikova3, S. Hodgson4, C. Müller-Reible5, U. terizing rearrangements based on Agilent® high-resolution oligonucle- Kristoffersson1; otide array-CGH technology . The Centre René Huguenin designed 1Department of Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Depart- three specific arrays for the BRCA1 (1679 oligonucléotides) & BRCA2 ment of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 33Unité Mixte (1389), MLH1 (1031) & MSH2 (789) and APC (1573) genes . de Génétique Constitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents, Hospices Civils de Prior to use this approach in routine, we analyzed 18 DNA samples Lyon-Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 44Department of Cancer Genetics, with a large deletion or duplication detected with QMPSF, MLPA or St George’s Hospital, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 5Depart- qPCR : 10 BRCA1/BRCA2, and 3 MLH1/MSH2 from Centre René Hu- ment of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. guenin and 4 APC from Institut Paoli Calmettes . Breast cancer is the most frequent form of cancer in women . Genetic All the large rearrangements from single small exon to the whole gene predisposition underlies 5-10% of all breast cancer and up to 40% of were detected (size estimated to within 1-2 kb) . Five never-reported cases in patients under the age of 35 years . The discovery of BRCA1 events were characterized (table) . Except for the whole APC gene de- and BRCA2 in 1994 and 1995, respectively, was anticipated to greatly letion, the event was characterized thanks to a simple PCR . increase our knowledge of hereditary breast cancer . This was immedi- Zoom-in Array-CGH described here gives the opportunity to rapidly ately followed by an increasing demand for genetic testing from health screen a group of genes involved in breast and colorectal cancer . De- care to predict future cancer risks . Since then, breast cancer genetics spite its cost, this method can assist with the development of simple has become a major part of the workload of clinical genetics clinics . PCR-based genetic test. Additional studies are needed to define its The identification of the BRCA1/2 mutations and the communica- position in routine testing . tion of the genetic information are essential for women at high risk for breast cancer . As a result, guidelines for genetic counselling and Five new germline large rearrangements characterized with zoom-in laboratory quality assessment in cancer genetics have been devel- array-CGH and sequencing oped at local and national levels both in Europe and in the USA . The Genes Events size European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) drafted best BRCA deletion exon 3 11 452 bp practice guidelines on breast/ovarian cancer genetic testing as a first BRCA duplication exons 17-20 14 756 bp attempt towards European harmonisation in 1999 . In 2007, OECD has APC deletion exons 12-14 6 360bp with insertion 351bp MLH duplication exon 4 1 664 bp issued general recommendations for molecular genetic testing . The MSH deletion exons 8-10 26 349 bp best practice guidelines presented here are the results of discussions among European breast cancer geneticists at a workshop in Würz- P04.047 burg, Germany, October 24-25, 2007 with the aim of updating the 1999 Estrogen receptor-α (ESR) gene polymorphisms in iranian EMQN guidelines . women with breast cancer: a case control study S. Abbasi1, P. Ismail2, F. Othman2, C. Azimi3, R. Omranipoor4, Z. Ousati P04.049 Ashtiani5, M. Mojarrad5, S. Abdi-Oskouie5, F. Mahboubi Nejad5; HFE and TFR polymorphisms in the risk of breast cancer in são 1School of Allied Medical Sciences, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, miguel population (Azores, Portugal) Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. J. Brilhante1, C. Ballart1, T. Eloi1, C. C. Branco1,2, R. Ca- of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra, Serdang, Malaysia, 3Depart- bral1,2, V. Santos1, V. Carneiro1, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; ment of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, School of 1Hospital Divino Espirito Santo de Ponta Delgada, EPE, Azores, Portugal, 2In- Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of stituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. Iran, 4Department of Surgery, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Center, Iron overload has been noticed as a feature of breast cancer (BC) . School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic HFE mutations, which lead to iron uptake increase, have been evaluat- Republic of Iran, 5Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Medical ed as risk factor . Some studies concluded that BC risk increase is also Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dependent on HFE-interacting genes, such as the transferrin receptor Receptor-mediated estrogen activation participates in the development (TFR) and the combination between HFE-TFR genotypes . and progression of breast cancer . Evidence suggests that alterations To assess if HFE mutations, TFR-S142G polymorphism and HFE-TFR in estrogen signaling pathways, including ESR1 occur during breast genotypes are related to BC risk, we compared C282Y, H63D and cancer development . ESR1 polymorphism has been found to be asso- S142G frequencies in 86 BC women and in 183 gender/age matched ciated with breast cancer in Caucasians . Epidemiologic studies have healthy controls . Samples were obtained after written informed con- revealed that age-incidence patterns of breast cancer in Middle East sent . differ from those in Caucasians . Genomic data for ESR1 in either pop- The C282Y allele frequency in the BC group was 4 .07%, higher than ulation is therefore of value in the clinical setting for that ethnic group in control group, 3 .28%; while H63D mutation showed a similar fre- and we have investigated whether polymorphisms in the ESR1 are quency in BC, 21 .51%, and controls, 21 .04% . Although both groups associated with breast cancer risk . were stratified according to menopausal status, odds ratio (OR) analy- A case-control study was conducted to establish a database of ESR1 sis for cancer risk associated with HFE mutations was not statistically polymorphisms in Iranian population in order to compare Western and significant. Regarding S142G polymorphism, the frequency of S142S, Iranian distributions and to evaluate ESR1 polymorphism as an indica- S142G and G142G genotypes were equivalent in both groups . In order tor of clinical outcome . The ESR1 gene was scanned in Iranian patients to extend the search for a supposed BC susceptibility for HFE-TFR newly diagnosed invasive breast tumors,(150 patients) and in healthy genotypes, we analysed BC and controls according to compound gen- individuals (147 healthy individuals) . PCR single-strand conformation otypes . Again, OR for all HFE-TFR genotype combinations revealed polymorphism technology and 33P-cycle sequencing was performed . no increased risk for BC . The sets of silent single nucleotide polymorphisms were found, as re- In conclusion, the results suggest that HFE mutations are not associ- ported previously in other studies, but at significantly different frequen- ated with an increased risk for BC . TFR polymorphism was not an cies . Among these SNPs, the frequency of allele 1 in codon P325P independent risk factor and did not modify the disease risk . Further- (C1337G) was higher in breast cancer patients (10 .3%) than in control more, variants of the HFE-TFR have, apparently, no direct effect on the individuals (8 .8%; P =0 .538), although the difference was not statisti- incidence of breast cancer in the Azorean female population . cally significant. The allele 1 in codon H267L (A1162T) exhibited an as- sociation with the occurrence of family history of cancer among breast cancer (0 .8%; P=0 .004) . Our data suggest that ESR1 polymorphisms are correlated with vari- ous aspects of breast cancer in Iranian ESR1genotype .Cancer genetics 0 P04.050 P04.052 chromosomal aberrations in Breast cancer patients in UNc5 genes and breast cancer: a mutation screening and LOH tamilnadu Region analysis R. Sangeetha, V. Balachandar, B. LakshmanKumar, K. Suresh, K. Sasikala; E. Bonora1, C. Evangelisti1, I. Kurelac1, M. Vargiolu1, D. Fusco1, A. Bernet2, P. Human Genetics Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Bharathiar University, Mehlen3, G. Romeo1; Coimbatore, India. 1Unit of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2CNRS UMR 5238 Laboratoire Apop- Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and accounts for tose, Cancer et Développement, Centre Léon Bérard,, Lyon, France, 3CNRS between 18-25% of all female malignancies world-wide . In India, the UMR 5238 Laboratoire Apoptose, Cancer et Développement, Centre Léon incidence of breast cancer is increasing, with an estimated 80,000 new Bérard, Lyon, France. cases diagnosed annually . The frequency of chromosome instability Dependence Receptors (DR) display the common feature of induc- in peripheral blood lymphocytes is relevant biomarker for cancer risk ing two completely opposite intracellular signals: in the presence of in humans. So, the present investigation aimed to find out the major the ligand, they transduce a positive survival signal, whilst in its ab- chromosomal alteration in breast cancer patients in Tamilnadu region sence, they induce apoptosis . The three mammalian receptors named by using the conventional karyotyping method . In the present study 63 UNC5A, UNC5B, and UNC5C in human, belong to the family of the experimental subjects were selected on the basis of CA15 .3 marker netrin-1 receptors, act as mediators of netrin-1 chemorepulsive effect which is the most widely used serum biochemical tumor marker in during neural development, but also work as dependence receptors . breast cancer and equal number of controls were selected and con- Expression of human genes is down-regulated in multiple cancers in- firmed by CA53 level. The work was carried out in accordance with the cluding colorectal and breast cancers . In colorectal tumors, this down- ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki . After regulation is associated with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) . In order to signing a consent form, both cases (experimentals and controls) pro- verify the possible LOH in breast cancer, a panel of 57 breast tumors vided a blood sample (5 ml) to establish the 72hrs cell cultures . were analysed for these genes using intragenic microsatellite mark- In the present study deletion and translocation were frequently ob- ers, but no LOH was detected . Since mutations impairing mRNA or served in chromosome 1, 11 and 17 . (46, XX, del (1p-); 46, XX, del protein levels would not have been detected by LOH analysis only, (11q-); 46, XX, del (17q-) . 46, XX, t (1q+;16q- ) ; 46, XX, t (11q+;7p- ) ; 46, a mutation screening of PCR amplified exons is currently ongoing. In XX, t (17q+; 4q- )) . UNC5B a new variant was identified in exon 10, T1909C, which results In the near future, we can look forward to the identification of novel in a silent substitution in the protein but by in silico analysis affects an breast cancer predisposing genes due to rapid advancement of gene exon splicing enhancer (ESE), which could modify mRNA processing . discovery technologies. The Identification and functional characteri- The change is now tested in a panel of 100 controls . Depending on the zation of such genes will have a significant impact on breast cancer results obtained, the variant will be further investigated using a splicing research and early detection . assay with a synthetic minigene. The analysis is still ongoing and final results will be presented . P04.051 characterization of novel large genomic rearrangements in the P04.053 BRCA/ genes of Spanish families with breast/ovarian cancer misbehaviour of Xist RNA in breast cancer cells S. Palanca1, E. Esteban1, I. de Juan1, E. Barragán1, S. Oltra2, I. Chirivella3, Á. S. M. Tabano1, L. Monti1, M. Recalcati2, M. Gariboldi3, F. R. Grati4, P. Finelli2,5, P. Segura4, C. Guillén5, E. Martínez6, P. Bolufer1; Radice3,6,6, M. Miozzo1, S. M. Sirchia1; 1Lab. Biología Molecular. Hospital U. La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Unidad de Gené- 1Genetica Medica, Dip. di Medicina, Chirurgia e Odontoiatria, Università di tica. Hospital U. La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3UCGC Hospital Clínico Universitario, Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratorio di Citogenetica Medica e Genetica Molecolare, Valencia, Spain, 4UCGC Hospital U. La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 5UCGC Hospital Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 3Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare General de Elche, Alicante, Spain, 6UCGC Consorcio Hospital Provincial, Cas- (IFOM), Milan, Italy, 4Citogenetica e Biologia Molecolare, Laboratorio Toma, tellón, Spain. Busto Arsizio, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Medi- Background: Mutations in BRCA1/2 genes affecting a small number che, Università di Milano, Milano, Italy, 6Dip. di Oncologia Sperimentale, Istituto of nucleotides are the responsible for the majority (90%) of hereditary Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy. breast and/or ovarian cancers (HBOC) . However, there is an increas- Recently, a strong open debate has been dragging on about the role of ing evidence of the contribution of large genomic rearrangements the BRCA1 in the XCI (X chromosome inactivation) process and about (LGRs) of BRCA1/2 genes to HBOC . the meaning of the “Disappearing Barr Body” observed in breast and The purpose of this study is to characterize the novel LGRs identified ovarian cancer. A definitive answer about the hypothetical function of in BRCA1/2 genes and determine its prevalence in families studied BRCA1 in the correct localization of XIST RNA on the inactive X chro- in Program of Genetic Counselling on Cancer of the Valencian Com- mosome (Xi) hasn’t been found yet, while it’s known that in breast can- munity (Spain) . cer, especially with basal like phenotype, can be frequently observed Method: We used the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification X chromosome anomalies, mainly Xi loss associated to replication of (MLPA) to screen for LGRs in 255 unrelated index patients with familial the active X chromosome (Xa) . breast and/or ovarian cancer negative for BRCA1/2 mutations . Char- We investigated some aspects to further sound out the supposed link acterization of the LGRs was carried out by performing long-range between BRCA1 and XIST expression/localization . In addition, we test- PCR followed by sequencing . ed the possibility of XIST RNA to associate with a different target than Results: Nine different LGRs were identified in once index patients out Xi, in presence of anomalous XCI status, a common feature of breast of the 225 (4 .3%), seven in BRCA1 and two in BRCA2 . Five BRCA1 carcinomas . The study was performed on tumor cell lines and breast LGRs have been already reported (1A/1B and 2 deletion; 5 to 7 dele- carcinomas by a combined genetics and epigenetics approach . tion; 8 to 13 deletion, exon 20 deletion and amplification of exon 20) We drown the following conclusions: i) high levels of XIST RNA were and also four novel LGRs were found . Characterization of the novel observed as a marker of BRCA1-associate BLC; ii) BRCA1 was in- mutations revealed the presence of deletions that encompass exons 3 volved in regulation of XIST expression on the Xa, but we confirmed to 5 of BRCA1, partial deletion of exon 21 of BRCA1, deletion of exons the absence of a link between BRCA1 and XIST nuclear distribution; 22 to 24 of BRCA2 and deletion of exon 2 of BRCA2 gene . finally, we surprisingly surveyed in breast cancer cells the ability of Conclusions: These findings contribute to broaden the spectrum of XIST RNA to decorate an active X chromosome, demonstrating that LGRs described in the BRCA1/2 genes . Additionally, our data empha- the presence of focal XIST staining in the nucleus does not prove the size the relevance of LGRs in the mutational study of BRCA1/2 genes existence of an inactive X chromosome . of high-risk families . P04.054 Genetic peculiarities of families with inherited bilateral breast cancer N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, A. N. Loginova1, E. V. Poddubskaya2, R. F. Garkavtseva2, A. V. Karpukhin1; 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2CancerCancer genetics 0 Research Centre, Moskow, Russian Federation. P04.057 Bilateral breast cancer (BiBC) is considered as phenotypic sign of in- BRcA1-c.5272-1G>A and BRcA2-c.5374_5377deltAtG are herited breast cancer risk . However it is unknown if there any peculiari- Founder Mutations in the East of Castilla-León (Spain) ties of familial breast cancer (BC) with cases of BiBC . M. Infante1, M. Duran1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, D. J. Sanz1, E. Lastra2, C. Miner1, We investigated BRCA1/2 mutations among 38 patients with BiBC E. Velasco1; who had one or more relatives with BC or ovarian cancer (OC) . The 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain. BRCA1/2 mutations were found among 19 patients (50%) . The BRCA1 The incidence of germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in gene mutations were predominant (16 of 19, 84%) with prevailing high-risk families for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer varies 5382insC (9 of 16, 56%) . Two BRCA1 gene mutations - 3411delCT among different populations; presenting a wide spectrum of unique and 3747insA and three BRCA2 mutations - P3039P, 9498delC, mutations, whereas in other groups specific mutations show a high fre- 886delGT were revealed in Russia for the first time. Among 10 BC/ quency due to a founder effect . The mutations c .5272-1G>A in BRCA1 OC families there were 6 BRCA1 mutations that fully correspond to and c .5374_5377delTATG in BRCA2 are the most prevalent in our re- 60% defined earlier for the same families without BiBC. Among BiBC gion; they have been identified seven and nine times, respectively, families with BC only 36% had BRCA1 mutations . For comparison, in our population suggesting the existence of founder effects in our among 92 BC families unselected on BiBC there were 21% mutations . region . Another words, BRCA1 mutations in BiBC families more frequently Six highly polymorphic markers spanning BRCA1 (D17S800, predispose to BC only than in families without BiBC . Beside this, there D17S1185, D17S855, D17S1323, D17S1325 and D17S579) and four were 10 cases of repeated BiBC in 8 families and all of them were BC in BRCA2 (D13S171, D13S260, D13S1695 and D13S1698) were gen- only families . It may be proposed that in some families with BiBC there otyped in 16 index cases and additional family members . The estima- is genetic influence that modify risk of cancer localization. In part sup- tion of founder mutation age in generations was calculated using the ported by grant RFBR N 07-04-01602 . equation G= log δ/ log (1-θ)1 . All carriers of c .5272-1G>A shared the same alleles at the six mark- P04.055 ers of BRCA1 .We could not estimate the age of the mutation because High frequency of BRcA1 gene mutations among patients with the lack of recombinant markers that are required for this purpose . A pregnancy associated breast cancer conserved haplotype was observed in c .5374_5377delTATG positive A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, A. A. Parokonnaya2, A. A. Lushnykova2, R. families between the two external markers (approximately 1 Mb inter- F. Garkavtseva2, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. V. Karpukhin1; val) . The mutation occurred approximately 36 generations (900 years 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer assuming 25 years per generation) . The corresponding haplotype of Research Centre, Moskow, Russian Federation. each mutation were absent in non-carriers and 75 healthy controls A relationship between a pregnancy and breast cancer risk is a subject supporting the hypothesis of a common ancestry . Conclusively, muta- of studying at last time . The reasons for breast cancer onset during a tions c .5272-1G>A for BRCA1 and c .5374_5377delTATG for BRCA2 pregnancy are not clear at present time . A role of BRCA1/2 mutations are founder in our region . in pregnancy associated breast cancer (PABC) onset is not well es- 1 Risch N . et al, Nat Genet 9:152-159, 1995 . tabilshed . We studied the most frequent in Russia BRCA1 mutations 5382insC, C61G and 185delAG in a sample of 74 patients with PABC P04.058 and in a control sample of 75 breast cancer patients . A control sample tissue microarray analysis of 1q21.3 and 1q23.3 copy number was adjusted on age of diagnosis among PABC patients (an average changes in ovarian tumors with different clinicopathological age 33 year) . There were 12 of 74 PABC patients with BRCA1 muta- parameters tions (16%) . The patients with 5382insC mutation were predominant I. Dimova1, B. Orsetti2, R. Dimitrov3, S. Raicheva4, N. Doganov3, C. Theillet2, D. (11 of 12) . For all but one of 12 PABC patients breast cancer was Toncheva1; diagnosed during second or futher pregnancy . Among patients of con- 1Department of medical genetics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2INSERM U868, Montpellier, trol sample there were 6 with mutations (8%), all 5382insC . The high France, 3University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, BRCA1 mutation frequency among PABC patients could connected 4Laboratory of Gynecopathology, Sofia, Bulgaria. with some peculiarities of this patient group . We found that the age of Many studies reported that aberrations like amplifications, deletions diagnose for BRCA1-associated breast cancer among PABC patients and translocations of 1q21-q23 have been found in ovarian tumors . was in interval 26-35 years while among patients of control group - These findings increase the scientific interest in analyzing this region 33-46 years . Thus the high frequency of BRCA1 mutations and early by means of specific gene probes. The object of our study was to in- breast cancer onset among PABC patients is suggestive on undeter- vestigate the frequency of copy number changes of two specific BAC mined now genetics or phenotypic peculiarities that may increased clones in 1q21 .3 and 1q23 .3 in large number ovarian tumors from breast cancer risk during a pregnancy . different malignancy, histology, stage and grade, arranged in tissue microarrays, in order to analyze their correlation with tumor pheno- P04.056 type . Copy number changes of 1q21 .3 were established in 9 .64% of CLSPN gene in hereditary susceptibility to breast cancer malignant, in 8 .33% of LMP and in 13 .13% of benign ovarian tumors . H. Erkko1,2, K. Pylkäs1,2, S. Karppinen1,2, R. Winqvist1,2; Copy number changes of 1q23 .3 were found in 17 .78% of malignant, 1Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 2Biocenter in 16 .67% of LMP and in 12 .64% of benign ovarian tumors . We have Oulu, Oulu, Finland. found significantly more frequent gain of 1q23.3 in non-epithelial tu- Approximately 5-10 % of breast cancer is thought to be due to an in- mors (50%) compared to epithelial ones (14 .73%) (p<0 .03) . According herited disease predisposition . Mutations in currently known cancer to our results the gain of 1q21 .3 prevailed in non-serous (especially susceptibility genes explain only 20-30% of the familial cases, which mucinous) malignant and LMP ovarian tumors in comparison to serous suggests the contribution of additional genes . Claspin, encoded by the tumors . In non-serous tumors both gains were associated with higher CLSPN gene, is involved in monitoring of replication and sensoring grade . The gain of 1q23 .3 was 2 .5 times more frequent than the gain of DNA damage, during which it cooperates with CHK1, BRCA1 and of 1q21 .3 in ovarian cancers . ATR. As many previously identified susceptibility factors act in similar functional pathways as claspin, CLSPN is a plausible candidate gene P04.059 for heritable breast cancer susceptibility . Here we have screened the complex BRcA1 and BRcA2 sNP combinations are associated entire coding region of the CLSPN gene for mutations in affected in- with breast and ovarian cancer risk modification dex cases from 125 Finnish families with breast and/or ovarian cancer T. Y. Smirnova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, R. F. using conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) and direct Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1; sequencing . Several sequence changes were observed, but none of 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer them appeared to significantly associate with breast cancer suscep- Research Centre, Moskow, Russian Federation. tibility. To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting the mutation There are growing evidence that a number of gene variant combina- screening of the CLSPN gene in familial breast cancer cases . tions have important value for cancer risk . We have studied a signif- icance of all combinations of BRCA1 E1038G and BRCA2 N372H,Cancer genetics 0 203G>A among patients with sporadic breast and ovarian cancer, lyzed by methylation-specific PCR, and seven (GPR150, LOC222171, patients with the same types of cancer with BRCA1 mutations and a PRTFDC1, LOC339210, ITGA8, C9orf64 and HOXD11) of the 33 CGIs control sample . It was shown that genotype E1038E-N372N-203AA were methylated in one or more of the cell lines . Expression of down was associated with ovarian cancer risk for both sporadic and BRCA1- stream genes of those methylated CGIs were analyzed by quantita- associated ovarian cancer (OR=6,8; P=0,04) . At the same time, geno- tive reverse-transcription-PCR and the result showed that those genes types E1038E-N372H-203GA and G1038G-N372N-203GA were as- were not expressed in cell lines without unmethylated DNA . Demeth- sociated with decreased ovarian cancer risk (OR=0,2; 0,1; P=0,04; ylation of methylated cell lines with 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine restored 0,02, respectively) . In the sample of sporadic breast cancer genotype expression of two genes (PRTFDC1 and C9orf64) . In primary ovar- E1038E-203GA was associated with decreased risk independently on ian cancers, CGIs of GPR150 (in 4 of 15 cancers), ITGA8 (2/15), N372H genotypes (OR=0,1; P=0,0001) and G1038G-N372N - inde- PRTFDC1 (1/15), and HOXD11 (1/15) were methylated. Silencing of pendently on 203G>A (OR=0,2; P=0,01) . The sporadic breast cancer PRTFDC1 was revealed that aberrant methylation of GPR150, ITGA8 risk was increased under E1038G-N372H (OR=2,1;P=0,04) . There and HOXD11 could be candidate as tumor markers . was no difference of any genotype frequencies and their combina- tions between BRCA1 mutation carriers with breast cancer and control P04.062 sample. This may means that no risk modifications are required for the study of P53 gene nutations in patients of breast cancer in breast cancer localization under BRCA1 mutations . Thus the genotype Rafsanjan city combination increasing cancer risk is different for ovarian and sporadic M. Mirzaei Abbasabadi, M. Hajizadeh, M. Mirzaee Abbasabadi, M. Mahmudi, breast cancer and those decreasing cancer risk are the same but de- G. Asadi karam, E. Rezazadeh, M. Asiabanan; generated on N372H under breast cancer . The results demonstrate Medical University of Rafsanjan, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran. that different genotype combination on the same SNPs may have Background: P53 gene Mutation is the most common genetic change influence on modificating cancer risk of definite localization. The risk in human neoplasia . In breast Cancer, p53 mutation is associated with genotypes on several SNPs may include both hetorozygotes and ho- more aggressive disease and worse overall survival . The PCR-SSCP mozygotes as on rare so on frequent alleles . It is necessary take into is the common test for mutation analysis of p53 . account under polygene influence analysis. Materials and methods: DNA extraction from 48 paraffin Tissue sam- ples of patients done by standard Phenol chloroform method, exons P04.060 5-8 amplified by PCR and PCR products underwent SSCP gel analysis molecular cytogenetic analysis of malignant ovarian tumours for detection of probable mutations . R. Mihalova1, P. Lnenicka1, N. Jancarkova2, M. Vrbova1, M. Janashia1, M. Krka- Results: Abnormal movement of PCR products band in SSCP gel that vcova1, M. Kohoutova1; stained with silver nitrate reported as mutation . We found three muta- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and tions in exon 5, 2 in exon 6, one in exon 7 and 2 in exon8 . General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2De- Discussion: Detection of P53 gene mutations can be helpful in pre partment of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and diagnosis and prevention of breast cancer and so in treatment . These General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. mutations occur in normal or benign breast tissue but resolutions of Ovarian cancer represents almost 30 % of the malignancies of the fe- this role in the pathogenesis or breast cancer will require long-term male genital tract with the highest mortality of all of the gynaecological follow-up studies . cancers . Unfortunately, majority of patients is diagnosed at advance stage of the disease . The genetic changes involved in pathogen- P04.063 esis of ovarian cancer are still not completely understood . Currently p53, p63 and p73 isoforms in breast cancer there are no specific prognostic markers for prediction of the disease Z. Milicevic1, V. Bajic2, B. Potparevic-Spremo3, L. Zivkovic3; course, for earlier diagnostics or for individual therapeutic strategies . 1“VINCA” Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Laboratory for Molecular Biology and One of possible biological markers of great importance are chromo- Endocrinology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Biomedical Research Galenika, some changes . Chromosome aberrations in ovarian tumour cells are Belgrade, Serbia, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, Institute of Physiology, Department of highly complex with hypodiploid or polyploid constitution . The aim of Biology and Human genetics, Belgrade, Serbia. the study is to determine significant chromosome changes as reliable The spectrum of genetic alterations identified in cancer cells includes predictive markers . mutations in various genes leading to structural and functional dys- We examined 30 ovarian cancer samples by comparative genomic hy- functions in signal transmission as well es over-or under expression bridization . Chromosome imbalances were detected in 90 % of tumour of positive or negative signal generating proteins . Recently, two family samples . The most frequent recurrent changes were gains of 1q, 3q, members of the suppressor gene p53 have been described, p63 and 8q and 20q and losses of 4p, 4q, 18p, 18q, 19q and 22q . The results of p73, which seem to be necessary for specific p53-induced stress-re- molecular cytogenetic analysis were correlated with histological/mor- sponse pathways . phological and clinical findings. Summarized data showed that signifi- Furthermore, p63 and p73 appears to be crucial to determine the cel- cance of chromosome changes in our patients is relatively low . Despite lular sensitivity to anticancer drugs, particularly in tumors lacking func- of these results particular chromosome regions were assumed to be tional p53 . involved in ovarian cancerogenesis . These regions are worthy of fur- For analysis we used invasive breast carcinoma of common types ther investigations considering the presence of candidate genes . with a different differentiation and stages as well as a normal brest Supported by grant MSM 0021620808 . tissue from patients with benign and malignant tumors . Protein p53ex- pression was estimated by Western blot analysis using anti p53 Abs P04.061 DO-7 and CM-1 . Our data show that brest cancer cells express nine Aberrant promoter methylation of GPR0, ITGA and HOXD different isoforms of p53, p63 and p73 . The changes in the interactions in ovarian cancers induced by PRTFDC silencing between p53,p63 and p73 isoforms are likely to be fundamental to our A. Kondo1, L. Cai1,2, M. Abe2, Y. Morita1, H. Yokoyama1, S. Izumi1, T. Ushijima2; understanding in the transition between normal cell cycling and the 1Tokai University, Isehara, Japan, 2National Cancer Center Research Institute, onset of tumor formation . Tokyo, Japan. Therefore, determination of p53 status in clinical studies is much more It is known that methylated CpG island (CGIs) in promoter region complex than hitherto appreciated . It suggests that it requires an inte- could be seen in tumor-suppressor genes and disease markers . In grated and complex analysis of p53 isoform expressions associated this study, we performed a genome-wide screening for altered meth- with p53 mutation analysis and immunohistichemistry . To date, no clini- ylated DNA fragments with methylation-sensitive-representational dif- cal studies have integrated all those p53 parameters to determine p53 ference analysis (MS-RDA) to show aberrant promoter methylation of status . CpG island in human ovarian cancers . We have obtained 185 DNA fragments specifically methylated in an ovarian cancer cell line (ES- 2) . We used a normal human ovarian epithelial cell line, HOSE6-3 as a control . In this control cell line, 33 DNA fragments were derived from putative promoter CGIs . Ten ovarian cancer cell lines were ana-Cancer genetics 0 P04.064 of social welfare and rehabilitation sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Dissection of allelic molecular pathology of the SEMAB gene 5Novin Radation therapy Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. frequently altered in breast cancer Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy and the main cause E. A. Pudova1, E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, L. E. Zavalishina3, G. A. Frank3, D. V. Za- of death amongst women worldwide and in Iran . Links between can- letaev1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2; cer predisposition and cellular radiosensitivity are well established 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sech- and arose from investigations into chromosomal instability syndromes enov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow such as ataxia-Telangiectasia . P.A.Gertsen Oncology Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. It has been shown that sensitivity to ionizing radiation by induction We have assessed promoter methylation, altered expression and al- of chromosome aberration is, on average, higher in lymphocytes of lelic imbalance of the SEMA6B gene in sporadic breast cancer and breast cancer patients compared to healthy controls . It is therefore im- report that at least one of these molecular alterations is found in 75% portant to show that elevated chromosomal radiosensitivity may be a of tumors . Taken separately, allelic imbalance was demonstrated in a marker for breast cancer predisposition . In addition to chromosomal in- half of all tumor samples, reduced expression and abnormal promoter stability syndromes, approximately 40% of patients with breast cancer, methylation in 40% each . At the same time, the features supposed 30% with colorectal cancer and 30% with head and neck cancer ap- to be in close relation to each other, such as allelic imbalance and pear to show evidence of cellular radiosensitivity compared to healthy expression and/or promoter methylation and expression were poorly controls using the chromosomal G2 assay . Approximately 5-14% of correlated . Several samples demonstrated intact gene expression in the normal population has been shown to be radiosensitive and the the presence of methylation and/or allelic imbalance and vice versa, connection between predisposition to cancer and radiosensitivity has questioning functional interactions between these parameters . Similar led to the suggestion that chromosomal radiosensitivity may be used observations were made for several other candidate tumor suppressor as an indicator of cancer proneness in the normal population . genes, including another member of the semaphorin family, SEMA3B . In this study, 32 patients with sporadic breast cancer and 30 normal We suggest that this may be a result of a nonallelic approach, where women as controls were investigated for their Chromosome radiosen- each form of molecular pathology is analyzed in the sample as a sitivity using gama irradiation for the cultured lymphocytes at G2 stage whole, without allelic discrimination . We have developed assays to of the cell cycle. Our results showed significant increase in chromo- assess allelic alterations based on a minisequencing technique in its some breakage in the patients compared to normal controls . There SnaPshot modification (Applied Biosystems, USA). Having elaborated was also heterogeneity in chromosome breakage rate within the nor- a coding intragenic SNP rs2304213 with heterozygosity close to 50% mal controls, which may suggest an increased risk for breast cancer in we have evaluated allelic imbalance and patterns of allelic methyla- some normal women with increased chromosome breakage . tion and gene expression in 22 informative samples of breast cancer versus adjacent control tissues . Data obtained from each individual P04.067 sample will be presented . The study is supported by Friends for an X inactivation analysis in BRcA1 carriers and in patients with Earlier Breast Cancer Test Foundation, USA. hereditary breast cancer E. Beristain, C. Martínez-Bouzas, N. Puente-Unzueta, N. Viguera, M. I. Tejada; P04.065 Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain. mutation screening of BRCA using Non-Radioactive PcR-sscP One of the two X chromosomes in female mammalian cells is inacti- analysis at 17q21 in breast carcinomas from non-familial cases vated in early embryonic life . The majority of females have a 50:50 dis- S. Ghorbanpoor1, A. Bidmeshkipoor1, M. H. Mirmomeni1, S. khazaie2; tribution of the two cell types . A deviation from this distribution (skewed 1Razi university, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Imam Reza Hospital X inactivation) occur in female carriers of some X linked disorders . Fur- Molecular pathology, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran. thermore, recently it has been reported that early onset breast cancer BRCA1 is a well-established breast cancer susceptibility gene . Cor- (BC) patients and BRCA1 carriers have a significant higher frequency relation of breast cancer with BRCA1 mutation was studied in sporadic of skewed X inactivation than controls . breast cancers since this gene is implicated in the double strand DNA The aim of this work was to compare X inactivation in two groups of BC repair and mitotic checkpoint, and loss of its function is speculated to women: BRCA1-carriers and BRCA1 negative cases with familial BC . result in the accumulation of chromosomal instability . In the present We have studied 14 women carrying a BRCA1 pathogenic mutation study, breast tumors of sporadic cancer were investigated for allelic (median 40 .6 years old); 48 women with non-BRCA1/BRCA2 muta- imbalance (AI) at the BRCA1locus . Furthermore, 30 breast carcinomas tion (median 46.1 years) and a high familial history of BC (≥ 3 close from patients with sporadic disease were examined to detect BRCA1- relatives with BC) . We also studied a control population of 56 women mutation(s), including exons 5, 11A, and 11B by using non-radioactive without BC and with no history of X-linked pathologies (median 41 .9 polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism years) . (PCR-SSCP) technique followed by direct sequencing . Designed prim- DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and X inactivation pattern ers were used to amplify three DNA fragments of 235, 300, and 296 was determined by PCR analysis of a polymorphic CAG repeat in the bp for detection of these exons mutations, respectively . After the PCR first exon of the androgen receptor gene (AR). products were denatured, we have used SSCP technique to detect One hundred and three women were heterozygous for the CAG repeat BRCA1 mutations . We investigated mutations in 6 cases (20%); 4 (103/118=96%) . Skewed X inactivation appeared only in 1 woman of cases (13 .3%) in exon 5, no case in exon 11A and 2 cases (6 .7%) in the control population (1/50=2%) and in none of the BC women . exon 11B . Clinicopathological patients information was obtained from Data presented in this study does not support any association between their files and pathologic reports. The relationship between these ex- BRCA1 or breast cancer in inactive X heterochromatinisation, although ons mutations and the clinicopathological variables was analyzed by this interpretation could be limited by the sample size . the Fisher’s exact test . Our results suggest that exon 5 and exon 11B gene mutations contribute to the development of sporadic breast can- P04.068 cer in kermanshah people . in silico analysis of BRcA1 and BRcA2 sequence variants of unknown clinical significance: application to variants found in P04.066 healthy women in croatia investigation of chromosomal radiosensitivity in the peripheral P. Ozretic, M. Levacic Cvok, V. Musani, M. Cretnik, S. Levanat; blood of iranian women with sporadic Breast cancer: A pilot Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. study BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the major hereditary breast and/or ovarian F. Mojtahedi1,2, F. Seirati3, E. Keihani1, M. Karimloo4, S. Akhlaghpour5, A. cancer predisposing genes and their mutations increase the risk of Saremi2, I. Bagherizadeh1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, M. Fallah1, J. Ansari1, F. developing cancer . At present, almost half of all BRCA1 and BRCA2 Behjati1; sequence variants found are unclassified variants (UVs) so their clini- 1Genetic Research center, university of social welfare and rehabilitation scienc- cal significance is unknown or uncertain. That represents problem for es, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Medical Genetics, Sarem Wom- risk assessment in genetic counselling . After revealing BRCA1 and en’s Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Surgery, Mehrad BRCA2 sequence variants in healthy Croatian females, our aim was to Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Statistics, university find fast in silico method for assessing preliminary clinical significanceCancer genetics 0 of UVs newly found in patients . material and methods: We used different publicly available programs and web-based tools to Five patients with ALL from Fundeni hospital, Bucharest were ana- identify UVs that may have deleterious effects with respect to different lyzed . biomolecular functional categories (splicing regulation, transcriptional Bone marrow cells were cultivated in specific medium for 96 hours. The regulation, nonsynonymous amino acid SNP effect . . .) so their clinical slides were prepared according to the classical procedure and stained significance in cancer etiology could be assumed. with Giemsa solution . 100 metaphases/patient were analyzed . Using straightforward physical and comparative considerations, we The cytogenetic analyses follow two directions: have found that several sequence variants with nonsynonymous amino - detection of chromosomal aberrations and identification of t(9;22) acid change could have possible impact on the structure and function - evaluation of a potential link between leukemic phenotype and the of a BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins . Synonymous amino acid changes telomeres structure . (silent mutations) could have impact on splicing regulation by disrupt- Results and conclusion: ing exonic splice enhancers . Intronic sequence variants showed no An obvious genomic instability of the leukemic cells was noticed, ex- potential impact on splicing because nucleotide changes at that posi- pressed by different chromosomal rearrangements, as well as by ge- tions likely make no changes in consensus splice sites . nomic mutation i .e . aneuploidy (table) . In Silico analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 presents fast, easy and cheap Chromosomal rearrangements method for assessing preliminary clinical significance for UVs, espe- Normal Telomere-to-telomere Patients Aneuploidy ring chromo- cially in cases with low frequency and ethnic specific alleles, when metaphases PCD and telomere-to- centro- Fusions (>50chromosomes) somes it is difficult to make population based studies and when expensive mere attractions experimental functional assays must be performed . 1 43 10 1 8 12 0 2 55 15 3 2 7 1 3 29 11 0 1 5 0 P04.069 4 48 13 8 3 3 2 three years of real-time PcR-based gene dosage for 5 35 20 5 7 7 0 BRCA large rearrangements in France : new perspective in combination with HRm curve analysis The FISH analyses showed the t(9;22) was present in two patients. This translocation C. Lefol, E. Rouleau, G. Christophe, F. Copigny, C. Andrieu, I. Bieche, R. Li- was present in 57% of the metaphases of the first patient and in 71% of the meta- dereau; phases of the third one. Centre Rene Huguenin, St Cloud, France. No correlation between the telomere length and the leukemic phenotype could be BRCA1 germline mutations are responsible for susceptibility in breast- detected. The fluorescence signal was encountered in more than 97% of the chromo- ovarian cancers . Some alterations are large rearrangements (15%) . somes, that indicates almost intact telomeric repetition, without large terminal dele- To detect them, our laboratory has proposed a real-time PCR-based tions. gene dosage . Since 2004, samples from all of over France have been The incidence of t(9;22) found in two out of five patients is comparable to other studies analyzed with this method to confirm large rearrangements detected taking in acount also that they didn’t receive any treatment, being at the diagnostic with semi-quantitative multiplex PCR (MLPA or QMPSF) . Recently, our stage. qPCR experience have been transfer to LightCycler 480 combining High-Resolution Melting curve analysis . P04.071 For each genomic DNAs sent, suspected exons were scanned with chromosomes 3 and 7 rearrangements in complex a few others . Copy numbers of each exon were calculated with an chromosomal aberrations in patients with myelodysplastic algorithm based on delta Ct method . As reference of the diploidy, three syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia genes (4q, 8q, 17q) were quantified. J. Brezinova1, Z. Zemanova2, L. Babicka2, S. Izakova1, J. Cermak1, M. Sis- 148 samples have been analysed with ABI Prism 7900 and PowerSybr kova3, K. Michalova1,2; Mix. 49 rearrangements were confirmed (table). 99 samples have no 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, rearrangement . Most of those BRCA1 large rearrangements were an- 2Center of Oncocytogenetics Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory alysed and validated with LightCycler 480 and HRM Master Mix using Diagnostics General Faculty Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles the same qPCR primers . Furthermore, by applying the same algorithm University, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Medical Department General Faculty and PCR conditions, selected HRM primers were also able to detect Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, Prague, Czech those rearrangements . Republic. This large series confirms the abilities of qPCR to detect large rear- Rearrangements of chromosomes 3 and 7 are frequent in myelodys- rangements in a routine screening . HRM curve analysis combined with plastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are quantitative PCR can give in unique assay information for point muta- associated with poor outcome and resistance to treatment . Combina- tions and large rearrangements . Therefore, this technique should be tions of molecular cytogenetic techniques were used for identification reconsidered as a first-line tool for BRCA1 screening . of these rearrangements in bone marrow cells of patients with complex chromosomal aberrations (CCA) . In cohort of 392 patients with AML Result of 148 suspected BRCA1 large rearrangements by real-time PCR-based gene dosage and RAEBt (refractory anemia with excess blast in transformation) we proved CCA in 58 of them . Chromosome 3 was involved in complex Number of Number of con- % aberrations in 26 patients, chromosome 7 in 23 patients, both chro- samples firmation Deletion suspected 101 35 35% mosomes 3 and 7 in nine patients . The most frequent aberrations of Duplication suspected chromosome 3 were non-reciprocal translocation combined with dele- 16 4 25% (5’region to exon 1-2) tion of chromosome 3 (14 patients) . Other abnormalities proved by Duplication suspected FISH: non-reciprocal translocations without deletion (8 patients), recip- 31 10 30% (others exons) rocal translocation (5 patients), partial trisomy (4 patients), inversion (1 patient) and insertion of a part of chromosome 3 into chromosome P04.070 2 (1 patient) . Breakpoints 3p24 .2 and 3q26 were the most frequent . characterization of some acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases Minimal deleted segment 3p25-3pter was ascertained in 12 patients . by cytogenetic technique Similarly, large heterogeneity of the breakpoints and various extent of D. Usurelu1, L. Gavrila1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, L. Dan1, I. Radu1, V. Te- deletion were proved on chromosome 7 with the most frequent break- leanu2, A. Moicean2, A. Dumitrescu2; points 7q31 and 7p12 . Partners in translocations were chromosomes 1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Fundeni Hospital, Bucharest, Ro- 5, 3 and 12 . Using combination of molecular cytogenetic techniques mania. we found a wide variety of aberrations not detectable by conventional Cytogenetical analyses are important for diagnostics, prognostic and cytogenetic analysis . We presume contribution of more genes and par- monitoring of the treatment efficiency in leukemia. ticipation of epigenetic factors in the origin and during the course of Objective: the disease . Cytogenetical characterization of some Romanian patients with acute Supported by grants IGA NR 9227-3, MZO 00023736, MSMT LC535 . lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) .Cancer genetics 0 P04.072 syndrome and AML. While there have been reports on significantly Acute promyelocytic leukemia relapsing as secondary acute better clinical outcome than other -7/7q cases the same rearrange- myelogenous leukemia with t(3;21)(q26;q22): molecular ment was also recognized as very poor prognostic feature . characterization and clinical follow-up in a patient with AME In april 2007 a 23-year old woman was admitted to the hospital . Di- fusion transcript and review of the literature agnosis workup confirmed myelo-monocitic leukemia (AML M4/M5). T. Park1, J. Song1, K. Lee1, Y. Min2, S. Lee1, Y. Park1, J. Kim1, O. Kwon3, R. Cytogenetic examination of bone marrow cells revealed that one nor- Park4, S. Hwang5, E. Lee5, J. Choi1; mal chromosome 7 and 10 were lost and replaced by an abnormal 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, chromosome consisting of the long arm of chromosome 10 and the Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University short arm of chromosome 7 . Additionally, a small marker chromosome College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3Department of Laboratory was observed in all analyzed metaphases . The whole-arm exchange Medicine, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, Republic of Ko- was confirmed by FISH using WCP and CEP probes as well as a locus rea, 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Hospital, specific probe (7q32). Combining the results of standard and molecu- Seoul, Republic of Korea, 5Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pusan National lar cytogenetics the karyotype was interpreted as: 46,XX,der(7;10)(p University School of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea. 10;q10),+mar . The marker chromosome was found to consist of the Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myelog- chromosome 7 centromeric material . The patient is in cytogenetic re- enous leukemia (AML) that is characterized by peculiar clinical and mission now. Her condition will be further followed to clarify the signifi- biologic features such as severe hemorrhagic diathesis, specific chro- cance of this chromosomal change . According to our best knowledge it mosomal aberration with t(15;17)(q22;q12), and distinct morphologic was not described in hematological malignancies before . features with predominant abnormal promyelocytes . In contrast to oth- er subtypes of AML, APL has a particular sensitivity to treatment with P04.075 all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) combined with chemotherapy; converting Gains of chromosome 2p in chronic lymphocytic leukemia this once frequently fatal leukemia to a highly curable disease . How- M. Holzerova1, H. Urbankova1, R. Plachy1, L. Kucerova2, Z. Pikalova1, T. Papa- ever, therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myelogenous jik1, K. Indrak1, M. Jarosova1; leukemia (t-MDS/AML) has been rarely reported as a late complica- 1Department of Hemato-Oncology, University Hospital and Palacky University, tion of chemotherapy in APL . To our knowledge, 30 APL cases have Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pathology, University Hospital and been described as t-MDS/AML in the literature . Among these reports, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. only one case relapsed as an acute leukemia with t(3;21)(q26;q22) . Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leu- Here we describe a 48-year-old female who was diagnosed with APL kemia . The progress in molecular genetic characterization of CLL relapsing as a secondary AML with t(3;21) . In this study, chromosome confirmed the prognostic role of IgV mutational status, expression of H analysis as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), multi-color CD38, as well as chromosomal abnormalities defined by molecular FISH (mFISH), and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction cytogenetic methods . However, besides chromosomal changes with (RT-PCR) for AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME) fusion transcript were per- known prognostic impact, such as deletions of 6q, 11q (ATM), 13q, formed . Although allogenic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation 17p (p53) detected routinely, the other additional abnormalities can (PBSCT) was done, bone marrow biopsy after PBSCT still revealed be found . It is presently not clear whether other aberrations that are leukemic marrow in this patient . not detected by the standard FISH panel have any impact on prog- nosis and disease progression . Therefore, we performed clinical and P04.073 laboratory analysis of 7 CLL patients (males) with detected gains of Array-cGH analysis of turkish adult ALL patients chromosome 2p . The aim of the genetic study was supported by the S. Berker-Karauzum1, D. Yasar1, I. Karadogan1, G. Alanoglu2, G. Luleci1, J. J. fact, that gains of genetic material can lead to oncogenic activation of Dermody3, G. A. Toruner3; protooncogenes located within the gained regions . Since 2p23~p11 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Suleyman Demirel harbors many protooncogenes already known to be involved in human University, Faculty of Medicine, Isparta, Turkey, 3UMDNJ-NJ Medical School, tumorigenesis, we desided to check a few selected genes: ALK, N- Newark, NJ, United States. MYC, REL, BCL11a and their protein levels . In basic cytogenetic analysis 40-50% of acute lymphoblastic leukemia Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) or 1 Mb arrayCGH re- (ALL) patients show a normal karyotype . ALL is a clinically heteroge- vealed gain of 2p23~p11 region . For detailed mapping of gained region neous group, but cryptic copy number alterations could explain some we used iFISH with commercial available and BAC-derived probes . In of the heterogeneity . Array based comparative genomic hybridization all cases IgV mutational pattern was established and immunohisto- H (array-CGH) allows genome-wide high-resolution analysis of copy chemical analysis of selected proteins was performed . number alterations that are not detectable by standard methods includ- Our study will summarize molecular cytogenetic, molecular genetic ing fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or comparative genomic and clinical findings with respect to the 2p abnormalities in 7 CLL pa- hybridization (CGH) . There are reports of array-CGH studies on leu- tients . kemia patients, but to our knowledge no published array-CGH studies This work is supported by grant MSM 6198959205 and NR 9484-3. exist on adult ALL . In order to asses the diagnostic yield of array-CGH on adult ALL, we performed pilot experiments on 14 adult ALL cases P04.076 using catalog Agilent 44K oligonucleotide arrays . Eleven (78%) ALL cytogenetic study of variant acute promyelocytic leukemia patients had cryptic chromosomal aberrations . Deletions including the B. B. Ganguly; loci at 9p22.2 (n=2), 11p14.1 (n=2), 7p22.3 (n=2), and amplifications MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, MGM’s New Bombay Hospital, including the loci at 16p13 .12 (n=2), 19q13 .32 (n=2) are observed in New Bombay, India. at least two different patients . Our preliminary results indicate that ar- Hematologic malignancies are heterogeneous group of clonal hema- ray CGH analysis provide additional information about cryptic genetic topoietic stem cell disorders resulting from wide spectrum of nonran- aberrations during cytogenetic studies of adult ALL patients . dom chromosome abnormalities ranging from balanced translocations to unbalanced karyotypes with numerical and/or structural gains or P04.074 losses and to complex rearrangements involving three or more chro- Der(7;10)(p10;q10) in acute myeloid leukemia mosome abnormalities . In >95% acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), H. Podgornik, A. Prijatelj, P. Cernelc; t(15;17) is the hallmark of pathogenesis while remaining cases have Department of Hematology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. cryptic insertion or more complex rearrangements where RARA is con- We report a case of a female patient with der(7;10)(q10;q10) resulting stantly involved . The fusion of PML-RARA disrupts the normal interac- in loss of long arm of chromosome 7 that has an established prognostic tion of retinoic acid and RARA, and converts RARA into a transcription value in haematological malignancies . In acute myeloblastic leukemia activator . All-trans retinoic acid receptor (ATRA) is able to interact with (AML) most often deletion (7q) and monosomy 7 are observed . Both this mechanism and prevent life-threatening thromboembolic/bleeding changes are classified as poor prognostic criteria. Whole-arm translo- complications . We have investigated 30 APL patients by conventional cations of chromosome 7 are rarely described . Translocation with the G-banding and detected two (7%) cases with t(11;17)(q23;q22), which long arm of chromosome 1 occurs nonrandomly in myelodysplastic leads to fusion of PLZF (promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger) and RARACancer genetics 0 genes . One of them had two additional unbalanced translocations, ported in SS . First of all was Thangavelu M, et al . Blood (1997) with t(12;14)(p;q11) and t(12;16)(p;p) with complex karyotype such as two cases with der(8)t(8;17)(p11;q11) and a psu dic(17;8)(p11 .2;p11 .2) 45,XY,-14,t(11;17)(q23;q21),der(12)t(12;14)(p11;q11),der(16)t(?12;1 was observed by Batista D, et al . Genes, Chromosomes and Cancer 6)(p11;q13) in 96% cells . It has been reported that such variant ca- (2006) . ses are resistant to ATRA and exhibit no therapeutic response, though resemble PML-RARA morphologically. Therefore, these two patients P04.079 are presumed to experience poor prognosis . Investigation of all these Der(1;16)(q10;p10) in Acute Myeloid Leukemia: the first female cases by FISH for PML-RARA would have given normal result to these case described two patients and could have led to progression of the disease con- N. Kokalj Vokac1, A. Zagorac1, A. Erjavec Skerget1, Z. Roskar1, H. Podgornik2, dition . Therefore, it´s understood that conventional cytogenetics still P. Cernelc2; plays an important role in diagnosis, classification, prognostication and 1University Medical Centre Maribor, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 2University Medical monitoring of hematologic malignancies in the era of microarray tech- Centre Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. nology and cannot be replaced by any other molecular technique . Whole-arm translocation of chromosome 1 and 16 is recurrently ob- served in non-hematologic neoplasias such as breast carcinomas and P04.077 Ewings sarcoma but rarely in hematologic neoplasias, mostly in mul- cytogenetic study of chronic myeloid leukemia (cmL) tiple myelomas . To our knowledge, only 7 cases were described in R. Joshi, B. B. Ganguly; MDS/AML, interesting all were males . MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, New Bombay, India. Here we describe the first female patient with AML M4/M5 with To explore the clinical cytogenetic feature & prognosis of chronic der(1;16)(q10;p10) as the sole chromosome rearrangement found . myeloid leukemia patient, evaluation of 8 CML cases (6 men and 2 Cytogenetic examination of bone marrow cells revealed that the nor- women) from the indian population with ages ranging from 25 to 55 mal chromosome 16 was lost and replaced by an abnormal chromo- years were studied in the present dissertation project . Bone marrow some consisting of the long arm of chromosome 1 and the short arm of samples were processed following direct method &/or 24hrs culture chromosome 16, resulting in trisomy of the long arm of chromosome without mitogen for chromosome preparation and karyotype analy- 1 and monosomy of the long arm of chromosome 16 . The karyotype sis of G-banded metaphases . 25 metaphases were studied for each was confirmed by FISH: 46,XX,+1,der.ish (1;16)(q10;p10)(wcp1+,wcp case using karyotyping software (Metasystems, Germany) . All 8 cases 16+,cep16+) . showed Philadelphia chromosome i .e . t(9;22)(q34;q11) in 100% cells . Due to a small number of metaphases available and bad resolution of Two (25%) cases showed extra Philadelphia chromosome in 8% & chromosomes, CGH was also performed. Only the amplification of the 38% cells respectively . One case had missing of Y chromosome in long arm of chromosome 1 and deletion of the long arm of chromo- addition to Philadelphia chromosome . It has been established that the some 16 was confirmed. major secondary chromosomal abberation in adult is double philadel- Unfavorable outcome, including no response to chemotherapy, and phia chromosome & minor one is -Y chromosome . The i(17)q is not short survival were characteristic of our patient . Despite very short sur- very common in adult . Since chromosome 17 was normal in all the vival of our patient, prognostic significance remains to be determined. above cases the prognosis of these patients will be comparetively bet- It is possible that some other unidentified molecular mechanism could ter . However, the prognosis of patient in which abnormal metaphase play a role in bad prognosis or simply the fact that this is the only with +ph chromosome was 38% expected to be poor compared to the female patient described until now . From this point of view, the patho- patient with 8 .6% abnormal metaphases . Due to the additional chro- genesis of der(1;16) still remains unresolved . mosomal abnormality, patient may aquire resistance to Imatinib - the tyrosine kinase inhibitor . Therefore, it is understood that cytogenetic P04.080 study is important in diagnosis & prognostication of CML patient . Detection of gene expression profile for BAALC and WT1 genes by real time Rt-PcR in patients with acute myeloid leukemia P04.078 L. A. Tamas, E. Seclaman, A. Mihala, A. Neghina, C. Samoila, I. M. Ciuca; Another case with der(8)t(8;17)(p11;q11) in sézary’s syndrome University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. A. Valera1,1, A. Carrió1, D. Costa1, A. Arias1, M. Rozman1, M. Aymerich1, D. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous group of diseases Colomer1, P. Abrisqueta2, F. Bosch2, T. Estrach3, E. Campo1; characterized by uncontrolled proliferation of clonal neoplastic hema- 1Unitat d’Hematopatologia. Hospital Clínic de Barcelona., Barcelona, Spain, topoietic precursor cells and impaired production of normal hematopoi- 2Servei d’Hematologia.Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei esis leading to neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia . de Dermatologia.Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. High mRNA expression of BAALC and WT1 have been shown to be Sézary’s syndrome (SS) is a peripheral T-cell neoplasm characterized an adverse risk factor in newly diagnosed AML patients with normal by a pruritic exfoliative or infiltrated erythroderma, lymphadenopaties, cytogenetics . and atypical T lymphocytes in the periphereal blood . Chromosome Independent confirmation is required to validate the initial results so abnormalities, mostly complex karyotypes, are seen in about 50% of that BAALC and WT1 expression may be exploited for risk-adapted patients with SS, and there have only been a few instances of recur- treatment stratification of AML patients with normal cytogenetics. rent rearrangements . We analyzed patients selected from newly diagnosed cases of AML We report a 60 year-old female referred to Hematology Service due to and a control group of healthy individuals . 20 months history of lymphocytosis . The patient showed a cutaneous Total RNA from leukocytes was extracted from blood samples treat- hyperpigmentation and bilateral axillary and inguinal lymphadenopa- ed with RNA-later (QIAGEN) following the manufacturer’s directions ties . The peripheral blood smear presented 40% of Sézary cells . The (RiboPure - blood kit, Ambion) . For semiquatitative RT-PCR we used diagnosis was Mycosis Fungoide with leukemic involvement . One-step RT-PCR kit (QIAGEN), with gene-specific, intron spanning The karyotype in peripheral blood was performed . We used G-band- primers for BAALC,WT1 and GPDH as housekeeping gene. Compara- ed technique in conventional cytogenetics . Molecular cytogenetics tive real-time RT-PCR assays were performed for each sample in trip- (FISH analysis) permitted discovering the rearrangements involved . licate . The whole chromosome paints (WCPs) for chromosomes 1, 5, 9, 10, The results showed a significantly increased level of expression for 11, 15, 17 and 19 were used . Finally the karyotype was: 44-45, XX, BAALC and WT1genes in de novo acute myeloid leukemia patients t(1;5)(p33;q31)[4], der(8)t(8;17)(p11;q11)[4], -9[2], inv(9)(p21;q34)[2], with normal cytogenetics comparative with healthy individuals from the -10[4], del(11)(q21)[4], der(14)t(10;14)(?q?;p11)[4], del(15)(q22)[4], control group . der(15)t(9;15)(q21;q26)[2], -17[4], +mar1[4] [cp4] / 45, X, -X[6] / In conclusion, the analyse of BAALC and WT1 genes expression in 46,XX[10] . AML patients is a molecular marker which can be used for the evalua- Cytogenetic alterations were concordant with other abnormalities de- tion of disease aggressivenes and prognosis for patients with normal scribed before in SS, like: breakpoints at 1p32-36 and 10q23-26, and cytogenetics . other alterations involving chromosomes 8, 9, 11 and 17 . But the most Acknowledgements: The study was supported by a romanian research important event was the presence of der(8)t(8;17)(p11;q11), because grant CEEX 5855/2006 to our knowledge, this is the fourth case with the same alteration re-Cancer genetics 0 P04.081 of Virology, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Discordance between morphological and cytogenetical Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 5Coltea Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. remission in a patient with AmL and t(2;11)(p21;q23) Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) originate in hematopoietic stem W. G. Kroes1, E. den Ouden1, M. Baasten1, J. Kerkhoffs2, R. Willemze1; cell compartment and exhibit a consistent phenotipic diversity . Only a 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Haga Hospital, small fraction of patients harbour cytogenetic abnormalities (+8, +9, the Hague, The Netherlands. 20q-, 13q-, 12p-). The recent identification of JAK2 V617F mutation We report here on a 58 year old male presenting with biphenotypical as a key genetic event in a majority of cases has greatly advanced acute myeloblastic leukemia .Conventional cytogenetic techniques on the understanding of pathogenetic mechanisms in BCR/ABL negative bone marrow at initial diagnosis, before treatment, showed the follow- MPNs . ing karyotype: Our study has been focused on cytogenetic and molecular charac- 46,XY,t(2;11)(p21;q23),del(5)(q21),add(12)(p12)[9]/ terization of BCR/ABL negative MPNs, with emphasis on correlation 46,XY,t(2;11)(p21;q23)[5]/46,XY[1] . between cytogenetic changes and JAK2 mutation status . FISH analysis with a DNA probe for the MLL-gene demonstrated Chromosome analysis, FISH and RT-PCR (Revers-Transcription PCR) that the breakpoint at 11q23 was telomeric to the MLL gene . T(2;11) have been used to investigate the BCR/ABL fusion and MPN-asocciat- (p21;q23) is a rare but recurrent translocation observed in MDS and ed genomic reccurrent abnormalities in 28 patients by date, diagnosed AML. This translocation is specifically associated with a deletion of with MPNs . Chromosome analysis was performed on cultured bone the long arm of chromosome 5 . After induction treatment the patient marrow cells (GTG banding) . To detect cryptic chromosomal changes was in complete morphological remission . However, cytogenetic stu- (13q14, 17p13 .1, 20q12-13 deletions) interphase and metaphase FISH dies revealed the t(2;11) in all metaphases, without the del(5q) and with various LSI probes (Vysis) and Microsatellite PCR (D20S206 and the add(12p) . Evaluation after the second therapy cycle showed again D20S119 Markers) were performed. Allele-specific PCR have been a complete morphological remission but persistence of t(2;11) in all used to detect the JAK2 V617F mutation . analyzed metaphases . To investigate the possibility of a constitutional All 28 patients displayed BCR/ABL negative status . The JAK2 V617F chromosome aberration chromosomal analysis was performed on skin- mutation has been detected in 16 patients . The cytogenetic analysis fibroblasts and peripheral blood. The skin-fibroblasts revealed a nor- revealed chromosomal anomalies in 4 patients (trisomy 8, complex mal karyotype in all 100 analyzed metaphases . PHA stimulated blood cytogenetic changes) . No loses at investigated loci were found (13q14, showed a mosaic karyotype : 46,XY,t(2;11)(p21;q23)[11]/46,XY[21] . 17p13 .1) . All patients were heterozygous for at least one of the two This suggests that the t(2;11) is an acquired aberration that persists in DNA markers . spite of morphological remission . Further investigations will be performed in order to reveal other genetic The patient underwent a bone marrow transplantation and is still in abnormalities, thus, we hope to contribute both in more precise diag- complete morphological remission after 10 months . nosis and novel, patient-tailored therapeutic strategies . To our knowledge this is the first description of an AML case with a Acknowledgements: National Program Research of Excellence, Proj- t(2;11) showing discordant morphological and cytogenetical remis- ect 111/2006 . sion . P04.084 P04.082 microhomologies and interspersed repeat elements at genomic A pediatric case with atypical CML with ETV6/PDGFRB fusion breakpoints in chronic myeloid Leukemia gene E. Mattarucchi1, V. Guerini2, A. Rambaldi2, L. Campiotti3, A. Venco3, F. Lo A. V. Divane1, M. Baka2, D. Bouhoutsou2, A. Pourtsidis2, M. Varvoutsi2, D. Curto1, F. Pasquali1, G. Porta1; Doganis2, K. Koronioti1, H. Kosmidis2; 1Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, Università 1Department of Cytogenetics, Locus Medicus, Diagnostic Centre, Athens, dell’Insubria, Varese, Italy, 2Hematology Unit, Ospedali Riuniti,, Bergamo, Italy, Greece, 2Department of Oncology, Aglaia Kyriakou Children Hospital, Athens, 3Department of Clinical Medicine, Università dell’Insubria, Varese, Italy. Greece. Reciprocal translocation t(9;22) is central to the pathogenesis of chron- Atypical chronic myelogenous leukemia (aCML) is a leukemic disorder ic myeloid leukemia . Some authors have suggested that Alu repeats that exhibits both myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative features at facilitate this process, but supporting analyses have been sparse and the time of diagnosis . The median age of this rare disorder has been often anecdotal . The purpose of this study is to analyze the local struc- reported to be in the seventh or eighth decade of life . Herein we re- ture of t(9;22) translocations, and asses the relevance of interspersed port a rare pediatric case of a 14 months old boy who was presented repeat elements at breakpoints . Collected data have been further com- with leukocytosis and frequent infections since the age of 6 months . pared to the current models of DNA recombination, in particular the Bone marrow showed marked myeloid hyperplasia with elements Single-Strand Annealing (SSA) and the Non-Homologous End Joining of dysplasia, particularly in eosinophil series . Conventional and mo- (NHEJ) processes . We proposed a protocol for the rapid characteriza- lecular cytogenetic analysis of BM were performed . FISH analysis for tion of patient-specific genomic junctions, and we considered a total chromosome abnormalities, commonly observed, in MDS/MPD were of 27 patients diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia . Sequences performed using the appropriate probes, such as LSI BCR/ABL, CEP analysis reveals microhomologies at the junctions of 21 patients of 8, LSI CBFB, LSI D205108 and LSI D7S486/CEP7 (Vysis) . FISH re- 27, while interspersed repeats were of relevance (p<0 .05) in at least sults revealed normal hybridization pattern for all the chromosomes 16 patients of 27. These findings are more frequent than expected analysed . Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed a clone of and give indication that the main mechanisms involved in the t(9;22) 46,XY,t(5;12)(q33;p13) . RT-PCR analysis for the detection of the fu- translocation are the SSA and NHEJ pathways, both playing a role . sion gene ETV6/PDGFRB was positive . In addition, FISH analysis us- More in detail, our report is consistent with microhomologies facilitat- ing the ETV6 (12p13) split probe (Vysis), confirmed the translocation ing the joining of DNA ends in the translocation process, and with both t(5;12)(q33;p13). With the above findings patient was diagnosed as Alu, and a variety of other repeat sequences pairing non-homologous aCML with Philadelphia chromosome negative and BCR/ABL fusion chromosomes during the SSA pathway gene negative . The patient was treated with Gleevec (imatinib) for 8 months, achieved complete heamatological and cytogenetic remission P04.085 (MRD of 0,4% in the latest sample) and underwent MUD bone marrow the four and a half Lim domain protein 2 (FHL2) interacts with transplantation . cALm and is highly expressed in AmL with complex aberrant karyotpes P04.083 Z. Pasalic, P. Greif, M. Mulaw, B. Tizazu, L. Fröhlich-Archangelo, S. Bohlander; BCR/ABL negative myeloproliferative neoplasms- cytogenetic Helmholz Zentrum, Munich, Germany. and molecular study The CALM/AF10 translocation t(10;11)(p13;q14) is found in acute mye- G. Cardos1,2, A. Arghir1, C. Diaconu3, M. Chivu3, L. Dragomir3, A. R. Lupu4, M. loid leukemia (AML), T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and Closca Gheorghiu5, D. Mut-Popescu4, M. E. Hinescu1,4, A. Lungeanu1; malignant lymphoma . The CALM/AF10 fusion gene has been shown 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Human to cause biphenotypic leukemia in a murine bone marrow transplant Biology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 3”Stefan Nicolau” Institute model . The CALM (Clathrin Assembly Lymphoid Myeloid leukemiaCancer genetics  gene) protein is a clathrin assembly protein which plays a role in cla- The aim of this study was describe a reliable cytogenetic technique for thrin-mediated endocytosis and trans Golgi network trafficking. AF10 the detection of chromosomal alterations in CLL . We have tested sev- is a putative transcription factor likely involved in processes related to eral protocols described in the literature and optimized them in order chromatin organization . to obtain metaphases in all samples . To learn about the function of CALM/AF10 fusion protein, we searched We describe the methodology and discuss the results according to the for protein interaction partners of CALM using a yeast-two-hybrid as- different protocols applied . say and identified FHL2 as a putative CALM interacting partner. The CALM-FHL2 interaction was confirmed by GST pull-down and CoIP P04.088 experiments . In co-localization studies a translocation from cytoplasm Residual disease monitoring in chronic myelogenous to the nucleus is seen . leukaemia (CML) using tricolour dual fusion fluoresence in situ Expression analysis (Affymetrix based) in CML and different AML sub- hybridisation (FisH) probe system types showed a significantly higher expression of FHL2 in CML and L. L. P. Siu1, V. W. K. Fung1, J. S. L. Chung1, W. S. Wong1, E. S. K. Ma2, K. F. AML with complex aberrant karyotypes compared to AML with normal Wong1; karyotypes or balanced chromosomal translocations like the t(8;21), 1Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong, inv(16) or t(15;17) . 2Division of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Hong Kong Sanato- Reporter gene assays using a GAL4-DNA binding domain FHL2 fu- rium Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong. sion protein and a GAL4 responsive luciferase reporter were able Objectives: We investigate the application of the BCR-ABL + 9q34 tri- to demonstrate a transcriptional activation function of FHL2 that got colour dual fusion translocation probe system (Vysis) for the monitor- inhibited when adding CALM but not CALM/AF10. Previous findings ing of residual disease in chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) with show that high expression of FHL2 in breast cancer associate with an der(9) deletion through analysis of both interphase and metaphase adverse prognosis . FISH signal patterns . It is thus conceivable that CALM/AF10 may play a role in a pathway Methods: BCR-ABL dual colour dual fusion FISH (D-FISH) was per- that enforces progression of malignancy when not downregulating the formed on the diagnostic samples of 22 CML patients . The tri-colour FHL2 expression . system was tested on cases that showed aberrant signal patterns oth- er than the classical 1G1O2F. Using the aqua band-pass filter, random P04.086 signal overlap would be indicated by the presence of an aqua signal Polymorphisms and haplotypes of the NBs1 gene in childhood (ASS) in the “fusion” signal, while genuine fusion was represented by acute lekemia the absence of the ASS signal . M. Mosor1, I. Ziolkowska1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska1,2, J. Nowak1; Results: Using the D-FISH system, the signal patterns could be cat- 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2University of Medical Science, egorized into 4 groups: group 1 (n = 17) showed the classical 1G1O2F; Poznań, Poland. group 2 (n = 2) showed 2G1O1F indicating ABL deletion; group 3 (n DNA repair gene polymorphisms and mutations may influence can- = 1) showed 1G2O1F indicating BCR deletion; group 4 (n = 2) with cer risk . The product of NBS1 gene, nibrin, is functionally involved in 1G1O1F indicating reciprocal ABL-BCR deletion . The tri-colour dual double strand DNA break repair system . Heterozygous, germline mu- fusion system showed excellent correlation with D-FISH for cases with tations of the NBS1 gene are associated with increased risk of tumors der(9) deletion . In particular, the added aqua ASS probe allowed the including familial/sporadic breast and prostate cancer, larynx cancer discrimination of random signal overlap from genuine BCR/ABL fusion and childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia . So far reports on NBS1 in the interphase cells (group 4) . polymorphisms in lymphoproliferative diseases are scare . The aim Conclusion: Although the D-FISH probe remains valuable in establish- of the present study was to answer the question whether polymor- ing the different patterns of aberrant signals and monitoring patients phisms of NBS1 gene may influence susceptibility to the development with the classic 2-fusion signals in CML, the tri-colour dual fusion of childhood acute leukemia . We genotyped c .102G>A, c .553G>C, translocation probe should be used for patients with der(9) deletion to c .1124+18C>T, c .1197T>C c .2016A>G c .2071-30A>T polymorphisms monitor response to treatment . of the NBS1 gene in 157 cases of childhood acute leukemia and 275 control subjects . . The distribution of allele, genotype and haplotype P04.089 of the polymorphisms were compared between cases and controls clonal evolution and genomic instability in chronic myeloid using PCR-SSCP and Chi-square test . The TT genotype of c .2071- leukemia during imatinib mesylate therapy 30A>T polymorphism was increased in leukemia patients than in A. Arghir1, G. Cardos1, N. Berbec2, O. Ciocan2, S. Chirieac1, A. Lungeanu1; healthy controls ((p=0.04), OR=1.828 (1.005 to 3.325)). No significant 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Carol Davila” Univer- differences in allele and genotypes frequencies at the other five poly- sity of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. morphisms sites were observed in a comparison of leukemia cases Chronic myeloid leukemia is characterized by the Philadelphia and controls . Genotyping data from six polymorphisms loci in NBS1 in chromosome which originates in most cases from the translocation leukemia cases and controls, were used to impute haplotypes . Three t(9;22)(q34;q11), and leads to the formation of BCR/ABL oncogene . main haplotypes made up the majority of cases and controls (GGC- Ph positive clonal evolution, including amplification/duplication of the TAA (41%), ACTCGT (20%), GGCCAA (11%)) . Two of them GGCTAA BCR-ABL gene, has been found to contribute to disease progression and ACTCGT were associated with significantly increased leukemia and imatinib mesylate resistance . risk, p=0 .0038 and p<0 .0001, respectively . Our results suggested that We report the results of a study monitoring the dynamics of chromo- some specific haplotypes of the NBS1 gene may be associated with somal anomalies in Philadelphia positive hematopoiesis during ima- childhood leukemia cases . tinib therapy . Cultured bone marrow cells were used for chromosomal studies . FISH P04.087 studies with BCR/ABL dual fusion probe and locus specific probes chronic lymphocytic leukemia: optimization of cytogenetic for various chromosomal loci were performed . The follow-up interval method for detection of chromosomal alterations ranges from 6 to 60 months . R. Pinto Leite1, M. Souto1, S. Rebelo2, M. Cunha1, M. Guerra1, E. Ribeiro1; Imatinib therapy was monitored in 80 Ph positive CML patients . Seven- 1Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Uni- ty eight patients showed standard translocation t(9;22) and two, a vari- versidade de Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal. ant Philadelphia translocation . Four patients demonstrated additional B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most frequent type of chromosomal abnormalities, at diagnosis . Duplication of the BCR-ABL leukemia in adults in the Western world and is generally considered to gene as free additional der(22) or isochromosome ider(22)t(9;22) was be a disease of the older population . The role of cytogenetics in diag- observed in 4 out of 6 cases with clonal evolution . Three cases showed nosis and follow-up studies of CLL is now widely recognized . Accord- unusual additional changes (translocations, additions) . An unexpected ing to the literature, clonal chromossome aberrations are detected in sequence of events leading to accumulation of multiple aberrations approximately 40-50% of tumors . However, conventional cytogenetic [ider(22)t(9;22);i(17)(q10);+8] was observed in one case . analysis is not currently applied to CLL’s study, due to the low mitotic Clonal cytogenetic aberrations of Ph positive hematopoiesis is consid- activity of the tumor cells in vitro . ered to herald disease progression and to reflect the genomic instabil-Cancer genetics  ity of the malignant clone in CML . We appreciate that all new cases 2 ALL and one CML patients . In three cases, double mutations, and in might bring new insights, with a special emphasis on prognostic impact 8 patients, extra Philadelphia chromosome were detected . ACA was of additional chromosomal changes in imatinib therapy era . present overall in 13 patients . KD mutations were found in 75% (9/12) Financial support: CNCSIS (Project 60GR/2007), CEEX (Project in hematologic, and 43% (9/21) in cytogenetic TKI resistance . In sum- 111/2006) . mary, BCR-ABL KD mutations and clonal evolution are common in Acknowledgments: The authors thank Mrs . Marioara Cristea for tech- imatinib-resistant CML patients . Early detection of emerging mutant nical assistance . clones may guide therapeutic decisions, because the degree of ima- tinib-resistance varies among different mutants . P04.090 complex karyotype and cryptic t(9;22) translocation at the onset P04.092 of chronic myeloid leukemia - case report Mutation profile of BCR-ABL kinase domain in imatinib primary A. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir1, G. Cardos1, S. Chirieac1, M. Ciochinaru2; and secondary resistant chronic myeloid leukemia cases 1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Dr. Carol Davila” Clini- S. Kutsev, M. Velchenko, S. Mordanov; cal Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. Among patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) positive for Phil- Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is hematopoietic stem cell disorder adelphia chromosome, 5-8% show variant translocations in which at characterized by balanced translocation t(9;22) . Fusion gene BCR- least a third chromosome in addition to 9q34 and 22q11 is involved . ABL appeared in the result of t(9;22) gives rise to Abl tyrosine kinase We report an apparently Ph negative CML patient with unusual com- activation with followed leukomogenic effects . Bcr-Abl selective tyro- plex karyotype showing a typical fusion transcript detected by revers sine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate revolutionized CML therapy and transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and BCR/ABL fusion gene localized in a allow achieve complete cytogenetic remission (CCR) in most cases complex rearranged chromosome identified by FISH. of chronic phase of CML . Nevertheless refractoriness (primary resis- Cell cultures from bone marrow and peripheral blood, and GTG band- tance) or relapse of initial response (secondary resistance) are ob- ing were performed for karyotype investigation . Dual fusion BCR/ABL served in over 30% cases of CML . More than 40 different point muta- probe, chromosome painting (WCP 9 and WCP 22 ) and locus specific tions of BCR-ABL decrease sensitivity to imatinib . To study BCR-ABL BAC (1p36 .33 and 17p11 .2) probes for metaphase FISH analysis were mutations profile in imatinib resistant cases of CML we have studied used . RT-PCR for BCR/ABL fusion transcripts detection was applied . BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations in 27 patients (middle age 43 y .o . Bone marrow cytogenetic analysis showed a complex rearrangement from 21 to 60) with chronic phase of Ph+ CML that did not achieve consisting of chromosome 1 deletion, 17p addition, telomere-to-telo- any cytogenetic response (95-100% Ph+ BM cells) after 1 year ima- mere fusion of chromosomes 21 and 22, but no standard Philadelphia tinib therapy 400 mg daily (n=22) or loose cytogenetic response (n=5) . translocation . Constitutional aberrations were ruled out by peripheral Mutation status was studied by direct sequencing of BCR-ABL cDNA blood karyotyping . RT-PCR detected BCR/ABL fusion transcript . FISH samples . BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations were founded in 7 pa- analysis showed two fusion signals for hybrid gene, and confirmed tients (25,9%). The mutational spectrum included five missense mu- the complexity of rearrangements involving chromosomes 1, 9, 17, 21 tations: M244V, L248V, Y253N, M351T, T315I . Five primary resistant and 22 . cases were characterized by L248V mutation (3 cases), T315I (1) and The FISH techniques allowed us the identification of chromosome re- M244V+M351T (1) . Two patients with secondary resistance shown arrangements that could not otherwise be detected by conventional L248M (1) and Y253N (1) mutations . In conclusion, mutation analysis banding procedures . of primary refractoriness or relapse of initial response CML patients is The frequency, formation mechanisms and clinical significance of such very useful tool for changing of CML strategy therapy include imatinib rare type of clonal rearrangements need to be investigated . dose escalation, new generation of BCR-ABL inhibitors, combination Financial support: CNCSIS (Project 60GR/2007), CEEX (Project therapy and BMT . 111/2006) . Acknowledgments: The authors thank Prof . Dr . Jean-Michel Dupont P04.093 and Mrs . Dominique Blancho for kindly providing BAC probes and Mrs . Differential expression pattern of ITPA gene in cmL patients Marioara Cristea for technical assistance . B. Hassannia1, M. Behmanesh1, M. Akbari2,3, Y. Nakabeppu4; 1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Basic sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- P04.091 sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty major causes of imatinib resistance in chronic myelogenous of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of leukemia: BcR-ABL kinase domain mutations and clonal Iran, 33Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, No 98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, evolution Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Division of Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of N. Meggyesi1, A. Bors1, A. Szilvási1, S. Lueff2, Á. Bátai2, E. Ádám2, A. Kozma2, Immunobiology and Neuroscience, Medical Institute of, Fukuoka, Japan. G. Halm2, S. Nahajevszky2, B. Kapás2, Z. Csukly2, N. Lovas2, P. Reményi2, T. Genetic material in nucleus or mitochondria is the most significant Masszi2, A. Tordai1, H. Andrikovics1; intracellular target of damages that cells exposure every day . One 1Hungarian National Blood Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary, 2Dept. of of the most important of these damages is oxidative deamination of Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, St. Istvan and St. Laszlo Hospital, DNA and free nucleotides in the cell pool . Incorporation of deaminated Budapest, Hungary. nucleotides such as inosine triphosphate (ITP, dITP) into DNA or RNA Imatinib mesylate, a targeted BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) can increase the frequency of base substitution mutation . It has been has become the standard drug for the treatment of chronic myelog- suggested that presence and accumulation of these rough nucleotides enous leukemia (CML) . Mutations in the kinase domain (KD) of BCR- can lead to genetic and chromosomal instability which is the perquisite ABL and nonrandom, karyotypic abnormalities (referred to as clonal of different types of diseases or cancer . The evidences demonstrate evolution) contribute to imatinib-resistance . Imatinib-resistance may the role of inosine triphosphate pyrophosphates (ITPase) encoded by be defined as primary or secondary, hematologic or cytogenetic and ITPA gene, in protecting the cells by omitting the rough deaminated it occurs in 10-15% of patients with CML . The aim of our study was to purines nucleotides of the cell pool . Chronic myelogenous leukemia screen for BCR-ABL KD mutations and additional chromosomal abnor- (CML) is a type of cancer which is mainly characterized by the pres- malities (ACA) in 35 Hungarian patients (33 CML and 2 Philadelphia ence of Philadelphia chromosome . There are some reports about exis- chromosome positive ALL) with imatinib-resistance . Point mutations tence of several structural and numerical chromosome abnormalities in in the entire tyrosine kinase domain (aa 230-490) were detected by addition to Philadelphia chromosome in these patients . The objective Sanger-sequencing after two separate, two step semi-nested PCR . of this study is to compare ITPA gene expression in CML patients ver- The presence of T315I, M244V, Y253H, M351T, F359V, L384M muta- sus normal samples to examine the possible dysfunction of ITPA gene tions were confirmed by PCR-RFLP. Clonal alterations were assessed activity as an important predisposing factor for genetic instability . by standard cytogenetic techniques . Overall, twelve different mutations Our results revealed different expression pattern of ITPA gene expres- (aa . exchange M244V, G250E, Y253H, E255V, E279K, D276G, T315I, sion between two groups . M351T, F359I/V, V379E, L384M, E460K) were identified in 21 patients. M244V was the most frequent mutation (4 patients) . T315I occurred inCancer genetics  P04.094 in one case) . These data provide unique insight into the MLL-driven Grafting outcome prediction by optimizing the protocol for leukaemogenesis . molecular monitoring of leukaemia patients Support: MSM21620813 A. M. Constantinescu1, C. M. Constantinescu1, G. Girbea1, D. Iancu1, B. Iancu1, E. Neagu1, A. Tanase2, S. Varady3, L. Barbarii1; P04.096 1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2Bone Transplant Amplification of hTERC and hTERT genes in leukemic cells Unit-Clinic of Fundeni Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Bone Marrow Transplant detected by fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) Unit-Clinicof Fundeni Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. A. Erjavec- Skerget, A. Zagorac, N. Kokalj Vokac; Introduction . Disease relapse represents the major cause of treatment University Clinical Centre, Maribor, Slovenia. failure after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo- The high level of genomic amplification of the human telomerase HSCT) . The aim of our study was to optimise the testing protocol for genes hTERC and hTERT, which maps to chromosome bands 3q26 establishing the chimeric status of patients performing allo-HSCT . We and 5p15, was determined in different human cancer cells . We repre- compared the efficacy of two different multiplex STR-PCR kits, focus- sent the results of the fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis ing on their sensitivity and sensibility . with both locus specific probes on cell cultures from bone marrow of 35 Method . DNA samples, provided by 17 patients and their haploidenti- patients with acute malignant blood disease . Among them 32 patients cal donors were tested at various intervals in order to determine the were with non-lymphoid and 3 with lymphoid type of malignancy . Bone chimeric status . The samples were analysed using two different com- marrow cells were first karyotyped by standard cytogenetic analysis. mercial kits, each of them containing a set of 16 STRs (AmpFlSTR FISH revealed a low grade amplifications of hTERC gene at 4/35 pa- Identifiler, Applied Biosystems; PowerPlex 16 System, Promega). For tients and a low grade of the hTERT amplifications at 5/35 patients. each case, the most informative markers were selected and analysed The comparison of the karyotypes and the FISH results by each pa- in dynamics. Artificial mixtures prepared from recipients and their do- tient reveals low grade amplification of hTERC gene only at one pa- nors samples were analysed to set up reconstruction curves . tient with previously determined complex karyotype. We didn’t confirm Results . Complete chimerism was detected for 15 patients, while 2 any amplification of hTERT gene. Our results, based on comparison of patients exhibited mixed profiles. Both commercial kits gave similar re- the results derived by FISH and karyotyping, show that the hTERC and sults concerning the chimeric status . The reconstruction curves showed the hTERT amplification are not so common in patients with malignant a slightly higher sensitivity for the Identifiler kit, which quantified more blood disease as in other types of cancers . accurately the low concentrations of minor DNA component . Conclusions . Our data indicate that both commercial STR-PCR kits P04.097 were able to establish an accurate chimeric status . A kit selection mRP1 polymorphisms (t2684c, c2007t, c2012t, and c2665t) should be performed in an objective manner, after analyzing its per- are not associated with multidrug resistance in Leukemic formances regarding the typing sensitivity and sensibility for artificial patients mixtures . Thus, precise monitoring of post-transplant hematopoietic F. Mahjoubi, S. Akbari, F. Moshyree; chimeric status becomes of outmost interest for the clinical follow-up NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of leukaemia patients . One of the major problems in treating cancer patients is that cancer cells can evolve in drug resistance . Because this form is resistant to P04.095 multiple anticancer drugs, so called multidrug resistance (MDR), the tracking the natural history of leukaemic clone in mLL-driven mode of resistance must be nonspecific, involving drug-efflux trans- childhood acute leukaemias porters . One of the most extensively studied genes involved in MDR is J. Zuna1, T. Burjanivova1, E. Mejstrikova1, E. Fronkova1, Z. Zemanova2, K. multidrug resistance protein 1(MRP1) . We have investigated the pos- Muzikova1, C. Meyer3, S. W. Horsley4, L. Kearney4, H. Ptoszkova5, D. Mende- sible association between the expression level of MRP1 and occur- lova6, R. Marschalek3, O. Hrusak1, J. Stary1, M. Greaves4, J. Trka1; rence of MDR in 111 patients with acute leukemia (which included 52 1CLIP, Charles University Prague, 2nd Medical School, Prague 5, Czech patients with acute myelogenous leukemia and 59 patients with acute Republic, 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and lymphoblastic leukemia) . mRNA level of MRP1 had been determined Laboratory Diagnostics, General University Hospital and 1st Medical School, by quantitative real time RT-PCR and compared to the type of re- Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Pharmaceutical Biol- sponse to chemotherapy . We found that high expression of MRP1 was ogy/DCAL, JWG University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, 4Institute of associated with poor clinical outcome in both AML and ALL patients . Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom, 5University Hospital Ostra- In our previous studied we had shown that the increase in MRP1 gene va, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 6University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. dosage was not responsible for the upregulation of MRP1 expression We and others have previously documented prenatal origin of paedi- in leukemic patients . atric acute lymphoblastic leukaemias (ALL) by demonstrating identi- Therefore, we aimed to investigate the effect of MRP1 polymorphisms cal clonal changes in monozygotic twins/triplets and/or backtracking on the expression level of it . The T2684C, C2007T, C2012T, and of the (pre)leukaemic clone to neonatal blood spots or cord blood of C2665T polymorphisms were genotyped in all the patients and control patients . We have also detected the cells of preleukaemic clone in the group . There was no effect of a particular genotype on the expression cord blood of healthy newborns never developing leukaemia . Howev- level of the MRP1 gene . This could show the lack of dependency of any er, the evolution of definitive leukaemic clone remains largely unclear. of these genotypes on the chemosensivity in this group of patients . Secondary ALL developing during leukaemia treatment represents a unique chance to follow this process . We analysed two cases of treat- P04.098 ment-related ALL involving notorious oncogenic transcription factor study of the effect of mRP1 gene polymorphisms on its mRNA MLL . In both patients, cells bearing MLL fusion (MLL/FOXO3A, MLL/ expression in patients with acute leukemic MAML2) appeared in bone marrow long before the definitive leukae- S. Rezvany1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, K. Alimoghaddam3; mic clone was identified: 20 and 24 months, respectively. Moreover, in 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Azad University, Tehran, Islamic both cases, FISH and/or qRT-PCR showed this fusion in a substantial Republic of Iran, 33) Hematology, Oncology and BMT Research Center, Shary- proportion (10%-90%) of marrow cells with morphologically intact dif- attee Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ferentiation during the preleukaemic phase . In the MLL/FOXO3A case Principle: One of the major problems in treating cancer patients is that we were able to document its presence in lymphoid as well as myeloid cancer cells can evolve in drug resistance . Because this form is resis- lineage, thus indicating the fusion arose in a multipotent progenitor . tant to multiple anticancer drugs, so called multidrug resistance ( MDR In both cases, definitive lymphoblastic leukaemic clones arose only ) , the mode of resistance must be nonspecific, involving drug-efflux shortly before relapse . Comparison by SNP-array revealed a 10Mb transporters . One of the most extensively studied genes involved in region of amplification on 19q13.32 in one of the leukaemic samples, MDR is multidrug resistance protein 1(MRP1) . absent in the preleukaemic phase . Taken together, we document a We aimed to investigate the possible association expression level of striking sequence of events including covert protracted preleukaemic MRP1 and occurrence of MDR in leukemic patients wished to test the phase characterised by dominant MLL-fusion with intact differentiation hypothesis that MRP1 polymorphisms would be predictive of MDR in and subsequent acquisition of secondary genetic abnormality (proven patients with acute leukemia .Cancer genetics  Method: mRNA level of MRP1 was determined in 111 patients with ings reconfirm that Wnt signaling is deregulated in T-ALL by abnormal acute leukemia including 52 patients with AML and 59 patients with β-catenin expression. We discuss that β-catenin may play a significant ALL by RT-PCR and compared to the type of response to chemother- role in promoting leukemic cell proliferation, adhesion, and survival via apy . increased transcription of Wnt target genes . We found that overexpression of MRP1 is indeed and associated with MDR phenotype in leukemic patients . P04.101 Furthermore, the128G>C , 816G>A , 825T>C,1299G>C and - Deregulation of IRS as a result of juxtaposition to t-cell 260G>C,-275 receptor beta in a pediatric t(X;7)(q22;q34)-positive t-cell acute A>C were genotyped in all the patients and control group . lymphoblastic leukemia K. Karrman1, C. Lassen1, E. Kjeldsen2, T. Fioretos1, B. Johansson1; P04.099 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Cancer Cytogenetic Labora- PHLPP gene is mutated in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia tory, Aarhus, Denmark. patients and might act as a tumor suppressor gene OBJECTIVES: A t(X;7)(q22;q34), an abnormality not previously de- T. A. Tekiner1,2, F. Atalar1, A. Karabay-Korkmaz2, S. Anak3, U. Ozbek1; scribed in hematologic malignancies, has been molecularly character- 1Istanbul University, Institute of Experimental Medical Research (DETAE), Ge- ized in a pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) . PA- netics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Technical University, Molecular TIENTS AND METHODS: The t(X;7), initially detected by G-banding Biology and Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istan- analysis, was further investigated with fluorescence in situ hybridiza- bul School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, tion (FISH), real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western Istanbul, Turkey. blot analysis . RESULTS: FISH disclosed a breakpoint in the T-cell re- The overactivated PI3K/Akt pathway represents potential therapeutic ceptor beta locus (7q34) and a breakpoint between RP11-815E21 and targets for AML . The protein phosphatase PHLPP has been shown re- RP11-105F23 mapping at Xq22 .3 . The two genes located closest to cently to specifically dephosphorylate S473 of Akt which regulates the this region, i .e . insulin receptor substrate 4 (IRS4) and collagen, type balance between cell survival and apoptosis . Human PHLPP contains IV, alpha 5 (COL4A5), were analyzed using real-time PCR . COL4A5 an amino-terminal PH domain, a leucine-rich repeat region (LRR), a was not differentially expressed in the t(X;7)-positive sample compared PP2C-like catalytic core and a PDZ binding motif . So far, there are to five T-ALL controls. However, a marked overexpression of IRS4 was no described mutations in PHLPP gene . In this study, we aimed to identified in the (X;7)-positive case in relation to the controls. Although understand the architecture of PHLPP gene variations in pediatric AML the Western blot analysis was suboptimal due to protein degradation, patients . We report here the molecular screening results of 11 exons a band representing IRS4 was found in the t(X;7)-positive T-ALL; this covering the four domains of PHLPP gene in 38 pediatric AML pa- band was not seen in the control samples . CONCLUSION: We report tients . The screening for the presence of a mutation was performed the first T-cell neoplasm with a translocation resulting in deregulation by dHPLC analysis . Mutation detection was accomplished by direct of IRS4 . In fact, this is so far the only reported neoplasia in which a sequencing . member of the IRS family has been implicated . We found the following sequence variations, exon2 and 3; 59insA(5 .2 %),60C>T(2 .8%), 77C>A(2 .8%),109A>T, 289C>A(7 .8%),352C>A(7 .8 P04.102 %),343insA(2 .8%), exon5, 6 and 7; 599insA(47%), exon14,15,16,17 Clinical significance and prevalence of T315I mutation in Indian and 18; 1980T>C(5 .2%),1992T>C(5 .2%), exon19; 3280C>A(13 .1% cmL patients treated with imatinib mesylate ),3302insA(13,1%),3303T>C(13 .1), 3407insA(5 .2%) and 3611insC R. Mir, S. Sazawal, R. Chobey, S. Bharti, A. Chopra, P. Mishra, B. Bohra, R. (7 .8%) . The expression analysis of the exons covering the four do- Saxena; mains were performed by QRT-PCR . Interestingly, in all patients, we Department of Haematology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Dehli, could not detect any expression in LRR domain . We are currently in- India. vestigating the effect of 599insA (S200R), which might result structural Background: The early detection of T315I mutations may allow timely and functional changes at protein level due to the change of the amino treatment intervention to prevent or overcome resistance . acid charges. This is the first study evaluating sequence variations to- Lacunae: Prevalence of T315I mutation in Indian CML patients . gether with the expression of PHLPP gene . We propose that PHLPP Aims: To detect T315I mutation in CML patients by ASO-PCR . To study gene might act as a tumor suppressor in AML leukomogenesis and this prevalence of T315I mutation in Indian CML patients . can provide an important guidepost for the development of diagnostic Methodology: CML patients were diagnosed by RT-PCR .ASO-PCR tools for acute leukemia . was done for all 160 patients for BCR-ABL mutations especially for T315I . The patients were evaluated for hematologic and molecular re- P04.100 sponses, time to progression, survival and toxicity . Beta catenin gene expression and mutation analysis in t-ALL Results : The study included 160 CML patients . The mutation was de- patients and cell line tected in 30% of patients (30/160) . The median time of Gleevec treat- Y. Erbilgin, M. Aydin Sayitoglu, O. Hatirnaz, U. Ozbek; ment 25 months .The onset of T315I mutation in 30 patients developed Institute of Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul, Turkey. poor prognostic factors in these patients . 25/30 lost hematological & The molecular mechanisms regulating the development and differen- molecular responses .20/25 progressed to advanced stage . T315I mu- tiation of the haematopoietic system are not clearly understood . Re- tations had proven to be fatal & is soul cause of Imatinib resistance in cent studies showed that Wnt signaling proteins play significant roles our patients . Survival and time-to-progression curves were obtained in both normal lymphocyte development and leukemia pathogenesis . from Kaplan-Meier method . Wnt proteins activate a complex signaling cascade, leading stabili- Discussion : India is a developing country, the patients cannot effort zation of β-catenin, which is a key component of the Wnt signaling expensive tests like sequencing for T315I mutation . So we had stan- pathway. β-catenin levels are regulated post-translationally by the ca- dardized ASO-PCR for routine screening of T315I mutations in our nonical Wnt signaling pathway. In this study, we investigate the Wnt/β- patients . catenin pathway activation in T- cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia Conclusion: ASO-PCR proved to be very economical, sensitive and (T-ALL) patients and cell lines . rapid technique for detection of known T315I mutations and is even We analyze β-catenin mRNA expression using quantitative real time sensitive than mutation detection by sequencing . The early detection PCR (QRT-PCR) . We measured protein levels by western blot and by ASO-PCR assay proved to be helpful in clinical management of search for mutations in exon 2-3 of the β-catenin gene in 73 T-ALL therapeutic decisions in CML patients . patients that were applied to our department for molecular diagnostic purposes and 29 T-ALL cell lines . Wnt signals are transduced by ac- tive β-catenin. We showed that T-ALL patients and cell lines have ab- normal nuclear accumulation of β-catenin. We also found a β-catenin gene (exon3) mutation in one T-ALL patient . To the best of our knowl- edge, this is the first study that shows β-catenin gene mutation in T- ALL patients. No mutation was found in any of the cell lines. Our find-Cancer genetics  P04.103 METHODS: Bone marrow specimens(BM)and PB lymphocytes were integrated cGH and microRNA analysis in mantle cell cultured using standard techniques .Thirty GTG banded metaphases Lymphoma reveals miRNA signatures associated with specific were analyzed (ISCN2005) . cytogenetic changes RESULTS: The karyotypes looked normal .For FISH we used the LSI C. Gomez-Abad1, L. Di Lisio1, N. Martinez1, B. Ferreira2, E. Rodriguez1, M. IGH dual color, break apart rearrangement probe, LSI BCR/ABL ES Sanchez-Beato1, J. Cruz Cigudosa2, M. A. Piris1; dual color translocation probe and WCP CEP-8(VYSIS) . 1Lymphomas Group, Molecular Pathology Program, CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2Cy- Two hundred interphase nuclei were counted .Up to25% of the cells togenetics Group. Human Cancer Genetic Program. CNIO, Madrid, Spain. carried the BCR/ABL translocation,and the IGH rearrangement . Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) is characterized by a t(11;14) translo- There was also monosomy of #8 in more than 10% of the cells cation, which leads to Cyclin D1 overexpression . Although CGH and CONCLUSIONS: Although the coexistence of CMPDand CLL is Expression profiling data in MCL has been investigated, until now no rare,we established that these two conditions in the PB,in the BM and equivalent studies have been performed for miRNA . Here we explored in one LN is more frequent than expected .That implies that there is a the relation between miRNA expression profiling and CGH microarray predisposition for the development of monoclonal B-cell population . data from a series of 20 MCL cases and 5 reactive tonsils With FISH technique we demonstrated the coexistence of two diseas- MCL presents a unique miRNA signature revealing overexpression of es .Since we studied simultaneously PB,BM and a LN,we believe that 15 miRNAs and downregulation of 50 miRNAs in at least 50% of the CMPD and CLLsupport the hypothesis of multi step cancerogenesis cases, when compared with the average expression level of the con- trols . Some of these miRNAs have already been described in other P04.106 tumor types, such as miR-143 and miR-145 downregulated in B-cell molecular cytogenetic study of 69 patients with myelodysplastic malignancies . syndromes and complex chromosomal aberrations CGH analysis in this series identifies a series of changes, roughly co- Z. Zemanova1, J. Brezinova2, L. Babicka1, S. Izakova2, M. Siskova3, J. Cer- inciding with thise described . We have investigated whether chromo- mak2, K. Michalova1,2; somal gains and losses could explain the miRNA MCL signature . 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, General University Hospital and First Faculty of A microRNA profile has been identified as associated to the most fre- Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematol- quently chromosomal aberration described in MCL . Thus losses of ogy and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Medical Department, 9p21-pter, 1p, 13q, 11q21; and gains of 15q and 3q were associated General University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, with distinctive miRNA changes . Prague, Czech Republic. Taken together, MCL seems to combine a disease-specific miRNA sig- Complex chromosomal aberrations (CCA) are detected in 10-20% nature that correlates with specific chromosomal changes. patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), and are associated with drug resistance and poor outcome. Precise identifications of chro- P04.104 mosomal regions involved in CCA could help in detection of cryptic, A rare karyotype including t(2;17) in a patient with recurrent, prognostically significant aberrations and in identification of myelodysplastic syndrome-derived acute myeloblastic leukemia candidate genes involved in leukemogenesis . F. Hazan, H. Akin, A. Vahabi, A. Alpman, F. F. Ozkinay, C. Ozkinay; During the last 6 years 590 patients with MDS were examined at diag- Ege University Medical Faculty Medical Genetics Department, İzmir, Turkey. nosis and in 69 of them CCA were ascertained . Chromosomal aberra- Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal disorder characterized by tions were verified by FISH with locus specific probes (Abbott-Vysis, dyshematopoiesis and high susceptibility to acute myeloid leukemia Des Plaines, Illinois, USA), and by mFISH/mBAND with the “XCyte” (AML). Complex chromosomal aberrations are present in ≤30% of pa- probe kits (MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany) . tients with primary myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myeloid The most frequently involved in complex rearrangements was chromo- leukemia (AML) and are associated with a poor prognosis . We report a some 5 (58x) followed by chromosomes 3 (27x), 17 (25x), 12 (23x), 11 45 year-old patient with MDS-AML . The Wright-Giemsa stained periph- (20x) and 7 (20x) . Parts of deleted chromosome 5 were in many cases eral blood smears showed blast cells (WBC: 3180/mm3, Hb: 9 .69g/dl, translocated into other chromosomes . The most recurrent partners of Plt: 21100/mm3) . An abnormal karyotype 44,XX, t(2;17),-16,-18 was chromosome 5 in translocation were chromosomes 17 (6x), 12 (6x), 3 obtained on G-banded metaphases from unstimulated bone marrow (3x) and 7 (3x) . Pure monosomy of chromosome 5 was proved in one aspirate cell culture . Cytogenetic studies of AML showed that isolated case only thus showing that monosomy 5 in this cohort was not an -16 and -18 were significantly more common. To our knowledge, iso- isolated entity . The most frequent breakpoints were 5q31 (25x), 5q13 .3 lated t(2;17) is not described in AML to date. This is the first report of (24x), 5q12 (5x) and 5q14 (5x) . Presence of CCA at diagnosis was a patient presenting with a AML with t(2;17),-16,-18 . We evaluated the connected with poor response to therapy and short survival (mean 5 outcome of the treatment and the prognosis of the patient . As in our months) . patient, this rare karyotype may be associated with poor prognosis . Finding of new chromosomal rearrangements and breakpoints might lead to discovery of genes, involved not only at the origin but also into P04.105 pathways leading to progress of malignancy . Increased incidence of monoclonal B-cell infiltrate in chronic Supported by NR/9227-3, NR/9481-3, MZO 000064165, MSM myeloproliferative disorders. Report of four cases 0021620808 and MSMT LC535. S. N. Kokkinou, K. Tzanidakis, A. Lindou, H. Alafaki, G. Floropoulou, R. Hatzi- kyriakou, G. Drosos; P04.107 Cytogenetic Unit, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Halandri, Greece. trisomy 9: A rare chromosomal abnormality in mDs INTRODUCTION: The coexistence of chronic myeloproliferative D. Pathak1, R. Chaubey2, R. Kumar1, S. Sazawal2, R. Saxena2, R. Dada1; disorder(CMPD)and B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia(CLL)in the 1Lab for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Deptt of Anatomy, All India same patient is rare . Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Deptt of Hematology, All India AIM OF THE STUDY: We report 4 cases of CMPD/CLL simultaneously Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. occurred . Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) is a clonal disorder of haemato- PATIENTS poietic stem cells and result in progressive cytopenia and defects in 1st patient:An Albanian man 57y with polycythemia Vera(PV) . erythroid, myeloid and megakaryocytic maturation . Clonal chromo- 2nd patient:A woman73y with essential thrombocytosis (ET) somal abnormalities have been reported in 30 to 60% cases of MDS . 3rd patient:A man 83y with ET As a result conventional cytogenetics plays a prominent and well 4th patient:A man 78y with ET established role in determining the contemporary diagnosis, progno- In paraffin sections of the bone marrow samples was found 15-18% of sis and grading of this disorder . The chromosomal abnormalities are monoclonal lymphocytic infiltrate CD5+,CD23+,CD10-,CD3-,ZAP-70- predominantly characterized by partial/ total chromosomal loses or ,CD79+simultaneously with the findings of CMPD. chromosomal gains . The chromosomal abnormalities include mainly The patients were untreated and the trephine biopsies derived from the -5/del (5q),-7/del (7q), del (11q), del (12p)/ (12q),-y and +8 . In an at- primary diagnostic procedure .In the Albanian patient a cervical lymph tempt to assess the frequency and type of cytogenetic abnormalities, node(LN)was biopsied and the cell population was of Borigin cytogenetic analyses of 20 cases of MDS was done . ChromosomesCancer genetics  preparations were obtained by GTG banding of blood and bone mar- P04.110 row cells . On presentation 30% of cases revealed 46, XX and 46, XY Familial myelodysplastic syndromes normal karyotypes and 70% of cases revealed abnormal karyotypes A. Carrió1,2, A. Valera1, D. Costa1, I. Madrigal2, C. Gómez1, J. L. Aguilar1, M. del(5q),-7,del(6q),del (11q) .Out of 20 cases 1 case revealed an addi- Aymerich1, D. Colomer1, B. Nomdedéu3, E. Montserrat3,2, E. Campo1,2; tion of chromosome 9, 47,XX+9(90%) and 46,XX(10%) metaphase . 1Hematopatology Unit Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Hospital Trisomy 9 is a rare chromosomal aberration found in MDS, to the best Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hematology Department Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, of our knowledge this is the first published report of trisomy 9 as a sole Spain. chromosomal aberration in MDS . The presence of trisomy 9 in such The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group cases carries a poor prognosis and thus cytogenetic studies help to of clonal disorders of hematopoietic stem cells, whose manifestation correlate the genotype with the phenotype . is cytopenia, hypercellular and dysplastic bone marrow, often with in- creased amount of blasts . The pathogenesis of the majority of MDS P04.108 remains unexplained . It is regarded that genetic predisposition and ex- Complex cytogenetic findings in bone marrow of an elderly posure to toxic environmental agents contribute to genetic mutations patient with chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis in MDS . T. Bulakbasi1, M. K. Yuksel2, Z. Yilmaz1, F. I. Sahin1; We report an adult MDS family with 6 siblings, of which two presented 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), namely refractory cytopenia with kara, Turkey, 2Dr. Abdurrahman Yurtarslan Oncology Training and Research multilineage dysplasia (RCMD), at the ages of 37 and 49, respectively . Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Conventional cytogenetics showed complex karyotypes, at diagnoses, Chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis is a chronic myeloproliferative disor- in both: der characterized by splenomegaly, myeloid metaplasia and reactive 44,XX,del(5)(q13q33),-7,-9,der(15;21)(q10;q10),-21,+mar[9]/ bone marrow fibrosis. Clonal cytogenetic abnormalities are observed 46,XX[10] in the propositus, and 46,XY,-3,del(5)(q13q35),+8,der(12 in 30 to 75% of the patients . Among these, trisomy 1q, 20q-, 13q- and )t(3;12)(q13;p13) [20] in the second one . The propositus developed +8 are the most common aberrations . Here we report a 70-year-old acute leukaemia and underwent an allogenic transplantation of pe- male patient with massive splenomegaly . His leukocyte count was ripheral blood progenitor cells . She relapsed and eventually died of 2300/mm3, hemoglobin 6,5 mg/dl and thrombocyte count 700 000/mm3 sepsis eight months post-transplantation . In order to know the status on admission . Bone marrow biopsy revealed signs of chronic myelo- of the 4 other siblings, we performed morphological and cytogenetics proliferative changes and dysmegakaryopoiesis and no specific diag- bone marrow analyses . Since del(5)(q31q33) was the only chromo- nosis was established. During disease classification studies, he re- somal abnormality common to both complex karyotypes, we decided ceived hydroxyurea treatment, splenic radiotherapy and multiple blood to investigate all the samples by FISH with the specific probe for 5q31. transfusions . The clinical course worsened in the following months and Surprisingly, we found that in the propositus the deleted chromosome the second bone marrow biopsy revealed myelofibrosis. Cytogenetic was an i(5)(p10;p10), and one of the healthy brothers showed 12% of analysis of the bone marrow sample revealed a karyotype reported deletion 5q . as 46,XY,del(9)(q22q34),t(8;17;21)(q22;q21;q22)[23]/46,XY[2], with a We postulate that in this family an inherited mutator effect is present previously undefined three-way translocation and a deletion in chro- and that it causes a karyotype instability, which leads to MDS/AML, mosome 9 . The patient died shortly thereafter . Karyotype analysis of with an unstable 5 chromosome . the bone marrow is an integral part of diagnosis in myeloproliferative disorders, especially as a discriminative tool in ruling out reactive con- P04.111 ditions . HFE C282Y mutation as a genetic modifier influencing disease susceptibility for chronic myeloproliferative disease P04.109 H. Andrikovics1, N. Meggyesi1, A. Szilvasi1, J. Tamaska2, G. Halm2, S. Lueff2, inducible expression of the oncogenic transcription factor EVI S. Nahajevszky2, M. Egyed3, J. Varkonyi4, G. Mikala2, A. Sipos2, L. Kalasz1, T. in human myeloid cells leads to phenotypes characteristic of Masszi2, A. Tordai1; myelodysplastic syndromes (mDs) 1Hungarian National Blood Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary, 2St. Istvan T. Konrad, R. Wieser; and St. Laszlo Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 3Kaposi Mor Hospital, Kaposvar, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Hungary, 4Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. The EVI1 gene, which codes for a zinc finger transcription factor, is The Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) V617F point mutation is a common clonal overexpressed in subsets of patients with acute myeloid leukemia alteration in chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPD) . Genetic (AML), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), and myelodysplastic syn- variations influencing susceptibility of CMPD have not been recog- dromes (MDS) . Its overexpression in AML has been studied intensively nized previously . The aim of our study was (i) to establish V617F mu- because it is associated with particularly aggressive disease . However, tation status in CMPD patients (ii) to confirm associations with distinct recent bone marrow transduction/transplantation studies in mice have clinical characteristics, and (iii) to examine the potential associations shown that EVI1 overexpression by itself causes MDS, while AML aris- of CMPD development with genetic modifiers of iron metabolism (HFE es only in the presence of additional, cooperating genetic events . C282Y, H63D and TFR S142G) . HFE C282Y was genotyped in 328 To gain a better understanding of the biological properties of EVI1, an CMPD-patients and 996 blood donors, HFE H63D and TFR S142G in HA-tagged version of the human EVI1 cDNA was expressed in human CMPD patients and 171 first time blood donors. JAK2 V617F mutation U937 myelomonocytic cells in a tetracycline regulable manner . Induc- was tested in CMPD patients and 122 repeated blood donors . The tion of EVI1 in this system strongly inhibited cellular multiplication, an frequency of JAK2 V617F was 75 .9% (249/328) in the CMPD group . effect that was in part due to cell cycle arrest, and in part to increased At presentation, significantly elevated hemoglobin levels were found rates of apoptosis . Exposure of EVI1 expressing cells to differentia- in V617F-positive patients compared to V617F-negative counterparts tion stimuli caused cells to die rather than to differentiate . The c-myc (p<0 .000) . Vascular complications were more common in V617F-posi- gene, which is implicated in the control of cellular proliferation, was tive patients (p=0 .039, 26 .6% vs . 15 .2%) . Decreased HFE C282Y al- downregulated rapidly after the induction of EVI1, suggesting that it lele frequency (AF+/-95%CI) was found in the CMPD-group (1 .8+/- may be a direct target of this transcription factor, and may play a role 1 .0%) compared to controls (3 .4+/-0 .8%; p=0 .048) . TFR S142G AF in its phenotypic effects . was significantly reduced among V617F-negative CMPD-patients The phenotypes observed after induction of EVI1 correspond well to (34 .8+/-7 .6%) compared to controls (47 .8+/-5 .4%, p= 0 .02) . The age of what would be expected for a gene involved in the pathogenesis of CMPD onset and the rate of different complications were not different MDS, and have also been observed with other MDS-associated on- according to HFE or TFR genotypes . We found that HFE C282Y vari- cogenes . We have therefore established a suitable model system to ant may be associated with a protective role against CMPD especially explore the role of EVI1 in the pathogenesis of this fatal disease . among V617F-positive cases. Since chronic iron deficiency or latent anemia may trigger disease susceptibility for CMPD, HFE C282Y posi- tivity may be a genetic factor influencing this effect.Cancer genetics  P04.112 (22 .2%) had numerical or structural chromosomal abnormalities . We NBS 657del5 mutation in patients with myelodysplastic did not find appropriate metaphases for chromosome analysis in 8 syndromes (mDs) (22 .2%) patients . FISH analyses revealed at least one or more ab- B. Jekic1, L. Lukovic1, B. Popovic2, I. Novakovic1, J. Milasin2, T. Damnjanovic1, normal results in 25 (69 .5%) cases, whereas 11(30 .5%) cases had no N. Maksimovic1, A. Bogdanovic3, V. Bunjevacki1; abnormal findings. 14q32 rearrangement was the most common find- 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Bel- ing in FISH analyses and has been detected in 21 cases (58 .3%) .13q grade, Serbia, 2Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Dentistry, deletion and 17p deletion have been detected in 11 (30 .5%) and 5 University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Hematology, Clinical Cen- (13 .9%) cases, respectively . In evaluating MM patients, FISH studies ter of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. including 14q32 and 17p13 chromosome regions may yield quite sig- Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are the most common group of nificant results during clinical follow up of the disease which has a hematological disorders in persons older than 60-year age . MDS are multistep pathogenesis . characterized by elevated apoptosis in bone marrow and peripheral blood cytopenias . Since more than one third of all MDS patients de- P04.115 velop acute leukemia MDS are considered preleukemic states . Cytogenetic studies among patients with myelodysplastic/ NBS1 gene encodes for the nibrin (p95 protein) . p95 acts in a double- myeloproliferative diseases strand DNA break repair as the part of MRE11/RAD50 double-strand M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi; break (DSB) repair complex . Nibrin is involved in cell cycle checkpoint, Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Medical Cener, meiotic recombinations and telomere maintenance . School of Medicine, Medical Sciences / University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic NBS1 gene mutations are recognized as a main molecular event in Republic of Iran. development of Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) . NBS is chromo- The myelodysplastic/myeloprolliferative diseases (MDS/MPD) are some instability syndrome resulting in microcefaly, growth retardation, clonal myeloid disorders that possess both dyspastic and prolifera- immunodeficiency and predisposition to different types of cancer. NBS tive features . Clinical symptoms are caused by complications result- patients have a particularly high predisposition to lymphoid malignan- ing from cytopenia, dysplastic cells with abnormal function, leukemic cy . infiltration of various organ systems, fever and malaise. Independently from Nijmegen breakage syndrome, alterations of We are reporting the chromosome studies among 34 patients which NBS1 gene sequence (mostly nucleotide substitutions and deletions) referred to us with diagnosis of MDS/MPD by Hematologists/Oncolo- and expression are found in number of malignancies . Deletion of 5bp gists during the last 12 months . Chromosome preparations were ob- in exon 7(657del5) is the most often NBS1 gene mutation found in tained from lymphocyte cultures and analyzed after GTG-banding and Slavic population (so-called Slavic mutation) . HR-banding . In this study we have analyzed NBS1 657del5 mutation in a cohort 30 patients (88 .24%) showed normal karyotype . 4 patients (11 .76%) of 71 MDS patients . Patients DNA were obtained from bone marrow had chromosome abnormalities . microscope slides splices . To detect mutation we have compared PCR Only one 67-year-old man patient who were diagnosed by MDS, products of MDS patients DNA with control DNA containing NBS1 showed abnormal karyotpe of : mos 46, XY, add (20)(q) / 46, XY . 657del5 mutation . Only one patient harbored mutation . According to Three patients with diagnosis of MPD also showed chromosome ab- this study, NBS1 657del5 mutation may not be important event in evo- errations as follows : First patient was a 32-year-old woman and her lution of MDS . karyotype was : mos 46, XX, t (2, 11) (q33, q23) / 46, XX, del 2 q33 +7+9 -11+18 -X / 46,XX . Second one was a 56-year-old man with P04.113 karyotype: A pediatric mDs patient with 5q31 deletion mos 47, XY, +22 / 45, XY, -7 / 46, XY . H. Acar1, U. Calıskan2, T. Cora1, Ö. Balasar1, C. Ucar2; Third case was a 57-year-old man and had a karyotype of: mos 92, 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical School, Selcuk University, Konya, XXYY / 46, XY . Turkey, 2Dept. of Pediatric-Hematology, Meram Medical School, Selcuk Univer- All the patients did not have a Philadelphia chromosome . sity, Konya, Turkey. Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) includes the ineffective proliferation P04.116 or production of cells in bone marrow (BM) leading to peripheral blood cytogenetic study of 25 myelodysplastic syndrome cytopenia and a preleukemic state . The pathogenesis of MDS involve M. D. Souto, R. Pinto Leite, M. Cunha, M. Guerra, E. Ribeiro; a multistep process involving two or more genetic alterations that lead Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. to alteration in cellular function that cause clonal proliferation of an ab- The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group normal stem cell . In the present study, we report on a childhood patient of clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders . Cytogenetic analyses in with MDS . The patient had 5q31 deletion by conventional cytogenetics bone marrow samples of MDS patients have both pathophysiologic and fulorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis with a specific significance and prognostic implications. Chromosomal abnormalities FISH probe at the diagnosis . We present the clinical features, genet- are found in 40 - 70 % of the patients with MDS, and the characteristic ics and immunologic analysis at the diagnosis and also followed-up chromosomal abnormalities are del(5q), -5, del(7q), -7, +8, del(11q), results . del(12p), del(13q), del(17p), del(20q), +21 . We analyzed cytogenetically twenty five samples of MDS patients. P04.114 There were 12 female and 13 male patients with an age-range of 51 FisH studies in multiple myeloma patients to 87 (median 69) . Cytogenetic abnormalities were observed in 40% O. O. Yuregir1, F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, E. Kizilkilic2, S. Karakus2, H. Ozdogu2; of patients . The most common abnormalities were monosomy of chro- 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, mosome 7 and trisomy of chromosome 8 . Complex karyotypes were Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Adult found in 3% of the cases . Hematology, Ankara, Turkey. Despite the small number of cases studied the results obtained cor- Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a heterogeneous disease regarding its roborate those described in the literature and the importance of the clinical and genetic properties . Cytogenetic studies are valuable di- cytogenetic study in the prognosis of MDS . agnostic tools in MM patients both at the time of diagnosis and during clinical follow up. Although conventional karyotyping is the first choice, P04.117 fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) is also important in detecting Role of JAK2 V617F mutation in myeloproliferative disorders abnormalities that cannot be detected by karyotype analysis . Conven- B. Kumar, V. Sharma, S. K Hasan, S. Sazawal, B. Sharma, R. Kumar, R. Sax- tional cytogenetic analysis and FISH results of bone marrow samples ena; of 36 MM patients at the time of diagnosis have been evaluated in All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. the current study . Three probes for chromosome 13q (RB1, D13S319, Chronic Myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) polycythaemia vera(PV), D13S25), one for 14q32 (IgH) and one for 17p13 (p53) have been essential thrombocythaemia(ET), and idiopathic myelofibrosis(IMF) used for hybridization with fixed cells. Conventional cytogenetic results form a range of clonal haematological malignant diseases character- revealed that 20 patients (55 .5%) had normal karyotypes, whereas 8 ized by proliferation of one or more lineages of the myelo-erythroid se-Cancer genetics  ries.The identification of the JAK2-V617F mutation is an exciting new nodularity in 12 (63%) children . The histologic examination of all infect- discovery in the field of MPDs. This acquired mutation is characterized ed patients showed an active and chronic gastritis . The children CagA by G→T nucleotide substitution at1849 position leading to valine to positive presented more intense hyperemia of gastric antrum, impor- phenylalanine substitution at amino acid position 617 (V617F) of the tant lymphoplasmacellular infiltrate and a degenerative and vacuolar JAK2 tyrosine kinase protein which results in constitutive JAK2 acti- lesions of gastric epithelium . The 6 (24%) non infected patients, also vation that promotes proliferation . Objective:- To study the role and negative for CagA serology, had a normal gastric finding. As expected frequency of the JAK2 mutation in myeloproliferative disorder patients . from previous studies, we found that seropositivity for Hp increased Materials &Methods:- 60 MPD patients(30PV,16 IMF,14ET diagnosed with age and the rate of Hp infection was not significantly different in by bone marrow biopsy), 90 AML and 70 age& sex matched controls boys and girls. Similarly, Hp serological status was not significantly were studied .DNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear different between subjects of different ABO blood groups .Despite epi- cells and Allele Specific PCR was performed for V617F mutation. demiological evidence of increased peptic ulcer disease in ABO blood Results:-Majority of PV patients (28/30;93 .4%) had V617F mutation group O subjects, we found no association between Hp infection and whereas the frequency of the mutation was lower in IMF and ET pa- ABO blood groups . tients(7/16; 43 .7% and 7/14;50% respectively) .The mutated patients had significantly higher mean haemoglobin and platelet count com- P04.120 pared to JAK2 wild type patients and controls .(p=00 .1) . Higher hema- Low Expression of ARHi contributes to Glial tumor tocrit and splenomegaly was observed in V617F patients . Only one Development AML patient and none of the 70 controls had VF617 mutation . con- S. Yakut1, R. Tuncer2, M. Berker3, E. Goksu2, I. Gurer4, G. Luleci1, S. B. Karau- clusion:- Thus presence of the mutation confers a proliferative and zum1; survival advantage. Identification of the Val617Phe JAK2 mutation lays 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and the foundation for new approaches to the diagnosis specially PV and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department classification. JAK2 can be new gene for the targeted therapy in my- of Neurosurgery, Antalya, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, eloproliferative disorders . Department of Neurosurgery, Ankara, Turkey, 4Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Antalya, Turkey. P04.118 Although the ARHI gene shows 60% sequence homology to the Ras importance of using JAK mutation in the diagnosis of proto-oncogene, it is the first maternally imprinted tumor suppres- myeloproliferative diseases sor gene identified in the Ras family. ARHI gene is constitutively ex- P. Riedlová1, M. Brejcha1, L. Sokol1,2, J. Gumulec3,1, M. Kučerová1, M. Radina1; pressed from the paternal allele of normal breast, ovarian, heart, liver, 1JG Mendel Cancer Centre, Nový Jičín, Czech Republic, 2The University pancreas, tyroid, brain tissues and its expression is lost or markedly Hospital L Pasteur, Košice, Slovakia, 3The Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech downregulated primarily in breast, ovarian, pancreas and tyroid tumor Republic. tissues . In this study, we investigated the mRNA expression, LOH (loss Chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPDs) are a group of various of heterozygosity) and methylation analysis of ARHI gene in tumor and clonal haematological malignat diseases including chronic myelog- peripheral blood samples of 21 cases with glial tumor, and 7 normal enous leukemia (CML), polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombo- brain tissue samples . Evaluation of the ARHI gene expression levels cythemia (ET) and chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis (CIMF). Except for by RT-PCR revealed reduction in 7 of 21 glial tumor samples (33 .3%) . CML with a genetic abnormality the t(9,22), the molecular mechanisms Analysis of LOH was performed by fragment analysis using 5 labeled underlying the CMPDs have not been identified. Recently, several polymorphic markers specific for 1p31 region. LOH was detected in 2 research groups shown that a significant proportion of patients with of 21 cases (9 .5%) . Methylation status of CpG island II of 5 cases was non-CML CMPDs have a missense somatic mutation in JAK2 gene evaluated using COBRA (combined bisulfite restriction analysis) and that substitues phenylalanine for valine at residue 617 (JAK2 V617F) . RFLP . Results indicated complete lack of hypermethylation in the CpG JAK2 is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase (TK) . Pseudokinase domain of island region II . Our results suggest that silencing of ARHI tumor sup- JAK2 in haematopoietic cells is responsible for the constitutive activa- pressor gene may play a role in the glial brain tumor development . tion of molecular signalling pathway and takes control of cell prolifera- tion in CMPDs . P04.121 DNA from 306 samples was isolated from peripheral blood granu- Analysis of ATM case-control mutation screening data locytes in patients with CMPDs and genotyped for the JAK2 V617F D. T. Babikyan1,2, F. Lesueur2, C. Voegele2, M. Hashibe2, J. Hall3, G. B. By- (G>T) mutation . To identify the mutation we used a real-time poly- rnes4, S. V. Tavtigian2; merase chain reaction assay using fluorescent hybridization probes 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, and melting curve analysis . In a few cases that are JAK2 V617F nega- 2International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 3Institut Curie, tive and have the non-CML CMPDs phenotype we detected novel mu- Orsay, France, 4Centre for MEGA Epidemiology; University of Melbourne, Carl- tations in JAK2 exon 12 by direct sequencing . The detection of the ton, Australia. JAK2 mutations could be useful in the diagnostics of myeloproliferative The susceptibility gene for Ataxia telengiectasia, ATM, recently has disease patients . been established as an intermediate-risk breast cancer (BC) suscepti- bility gene . However, the answer to the question “what sort of sequence P04.119 variation in ATM confers increased risk of BC” has been controversial . Association between antral nodularity, severe gastritis, positive To address this question, we have pooled available ATM mutation serology, age, gender, ABO blood group and Helicobacter pylori screening data and carried out a combined analysis of truncating vari- in children ants, splice junction variants, and rare missense substitutions (carrier T. Sabbi; freq ≥ 1%). The analysis of rare missense substitutions was accom- Pediatric Unit Belcolle Hospital, Viterbo, Italy. plished by constructing a sufficiently informative protein multiple se- Hp causes one of the most widespread infections worldwide . It is well quence alignment of ATM from full-length sequences of seven species known that blood group antigens are related to the development of and using a missense analysis program Align-GVGD with developed peptic ulcer and gastric carcinoma . new classifiers. Systematic case-control analysis of the missense sub- Association between virulence factors of Hp, severe gastritis, age, stitutions indipendantly provided evidence that ATM is a BC suscepti- gender and ABO blood group . bility gene . We found that a combined analysis of truncating mutations, 25 patients underwent to esophagogastroduodenoscopy with antral bi- splice junction mutations, and rare missense substitutions provides opsy for a suspicious upper gastrointestinal disease . In all of them se- stronger evidence that ATM is a BC susceptibility gene than simple rum sample were assayed for IgG antibodies to CagA and ABO blood consideration of truncating plus splice junction variants alone . We also groups were determined . found significant evidence of risk both in truncating plus splice junction 19 children (76%) were Hp positive by histopathology and urease rapid variants and in the in silico predicted highest-risk class of missense test . 15 of these 19 (79%) Hp positive patients were positive for CagA substitutions . Taken together, these results led us to two conclusions: serology . At endoscopic examination of the 19 infected children, hyper- (1) Careful analysis of missense substitutions by measuring risk attrib- emia of the gastric antrum was observed in 7 (37%) patients and antral utable to rare missense substitutions in a known or candidate suscep-Cancer genetics  tibility gene will have real utility in case-control mutation screening . of about 120 genes associating with the recurrence class. Significant (2) The attributable fraction of rare missense substitutions in ATM for differences were observed by HOXA10, GPNMB, TCN1, INA, H19, risk of BC is approximately equivalent to that of truncating and splice AURKC, FABP3 and PLOD2 genes . Besides, we integrated the mi- junction variants . croarray dataset with additional background knowledge, in order to algorithmically mine for differential-expression patterns in terms of the P04.122 Gene Ontology functions and processes as well as known regulatory Alterations in genes encoding sarcoplasmic-endoplasmic pathway memberships . Our results indicate that it may be possible to reticulum ca2+ pumps in association with head and neck identify patients with a high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage squamous cell carcinoma using a molecular profile present already in the superficial tumours. M. Ravnik-Glavac, B. Korosec, M. Volavsek, D. Glavac; Research is supported by MSM 0021620808 and IGA NR 8934-3 . University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Recent studies have suggested that perturbation of intracellular Ca 2+ P04.125 homeostasis or signalling could contribute to cancer development . The Gene expression in superficial transitional cell carcinoma using purpose of this study was to evaluate whether germline variants of the oligonucleotide microarrays ATP2A2 and ATP2A3 genes might act as susceptibility alleles in head J. Mares; and neck squamous cell carcinoma. In both genes, we identified eight Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. different alterations in 11 patients with head and neck squamous cell The prediction of tumour recurrence in patients with superficial bladder carcinoma (11/79; P = 0.0002, odds ratio = 0.054, 95% confidence in- tumours presents several challenges in clinical treatment . For the im- terval = 0 .0069-0 .4236) . We also detected low expression level of both provement of recurrence prognosis in these patients we investigated genes in connection with some of alterations, but could not correlate gene expression and identified differences between superficial bladder low expression level with methylation in the promoter region of either tumours without recurrence during period of two years (10 patients) gene . The results suggest that Ca 2+ pumps of sarcoplasmic-endoplas- and with early recurrence (12 patients), which might explain differenc- mic reticulum are involved in an increased susceptibility to develop es in the biology and clinical outcomes High-density oligonucleotide head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in humans . microarrays (29,019 genes, AB) were used to analyze the transcript profiles of 22 superficial bladder tumours: 19 pTa and 3 pT1, grading P04.123 5 G1 and 17 G2 . Statistical analyses were applied to investigate the Neuroendocrine carcinoma in Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome - do ability of the genes to identify patients without recurrence during pe- FLcN mutations contribute to malignancy? riod of two years and with early recurrence . Initial screening using the M. A. Van Steensel1, S. Weppler1, T. Claessens1, B. G. Wouters2; GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools revealed a putative set 1University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University of Toronto, of about 120 genes associating with the recurrence class. Significant Toronto, ON, Canada. differences were observed by HOXA10, GPNMB, TCN1, INA, H19, Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHD) is a dominantly inherited disorder AURKC, FABP3 and PLOD2 genes . Besides, we integrated the mi- characterized by an increased risk of developing kidney cancer, pneu- croarray dataset with additional background knowledge, in order to mothorax as a consequence of lung cysts and benign hair follicle tu- algorithmically mine for differential-expression patterns in terms of the mors called fibrofolliculomas. It is caused by mutations in the gene Gene Ontology functions and processes as well as known regulatory coding for folliculin, a protein involved in mTOR signaling . As the rela- pathway memberships . Our results indicate that it may be possible to tive risk of developing renal malignancies is around 5, BHD syndrome identify patients with a high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage is generally considered to be a relatively benign condition for which using a molecular profile present already in the superficial tumours. annual follow-up suffices. However, the possibility that the pre-exist- Research is supported by MSM 0021620808 and IGA NR 8934-3 . ing gene defect might act to modify the behavior of other cancers that arise in patients with BHD syndrome has so far not been considered . P04.126 We describe a patient with BHD syndrome who succumbed to an ex- the Association of CYPA, CYPD, GSTM, GSTP and tremely malignant neuro-endocrine tumor of prostatic or bladder origin GSTT Gene Polymorphisms with Bladder cancer within 6 weeks of its discovery . Tumor tissue showed elevated staining E. Altaylı1, S. Gunes1, A. F. Yılmaz2, S. Sarıkaya2, H. C. Irkılata3, C. H. Acikel4, of phosphorylated mTOR and phosphorylated p70S6K, as did foci in S. Goktas3; clinically normal skin and kidney, confirming that folliculin is a negative 1Ondokuz Mayis University, Department of Medical Biology, Samsun, Turkey, regulator of mTOR signaling . We propose that the behavior of this can- 2Ondokuz Mayis University, Department of Urology, Samsun, Turkey, 3Gulhane cer might have been modulated by the germline FLCN mutation and Military Medical Academy, Department of Urology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Gulhane propose that patients with BHD syndrome be more closely monitored Military Medical Academy, Department of Public Health, Ankara, Turkey. than is currently the case . Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and the eighth in women in the western world . The aim of this study was to P04.124 investigate the relationship between bladder tumor and variants of the Gene expression in superficial transitional cell carcinoma using cytochrome p450 (CYP), family 1, subfamily A, polipeptide 2 (CYP1A2) oligonucleotide microarrays C734A, CYP2D6 G1934A, the glutathione S-transferase (GST), family J. Mares1, M. Szakacsova2, F. Zelezny3, J. Klema3, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova4, A. M, subfamily 1 (GSTM1 null), GSTT1 null and GSTP1 I105V which Sartori5, M. Babjuk2; play important roles in xenobiotic metabolism . In this study, we inves- 1Inst. Biol. and Med. Genet. 2nd Med. Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Clin. tigated the distribution of these polymorphisms in 135 bladder cancer of Urol., 1st Med. Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Dept. Cybernet., Czech patients and 128 age-matched healthy individuals as controls . The Tech. University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Inst. of Pathol. Anatomy, 1st Med. polymorphisms were analyzed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Applied Biosystems, Heidelberg, Germany. - restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) assay and multiplex The prediction of tumour recurrence in patients with superficial bladder PCR method . Genotype and allele frequencies were calculated, and tumours presents several challenges in clinical management . For the their associations with bladder cancer risk are calculated, and their improvement of recurrence prognosis in these patients we investigated association with bladder cancer risk or demographic factors, smoking gene expression and identified differences between superficial bladder status, and tumor stage was investigated . The prevalence of GSTT1 tumours without recurrence during period of two years (10 patients) null genotype in cases was 23%, compared with 7% in the control and with early recurrence (12 patients), which might explain differenc- group (OR, 0 .254, %95 CI, 0 .115-0558, p=0 .001) . No association was es in the biology and clinical outcomes High-density oligonucleotide observed between CYP1A2, CYP2D6, GSTM1, and GSTP1 genes microarrays (29,019 genes, AB) were used to analyze the transcript polymorphisms and bladder cancer . There was association between profiles of 22 superficial bladder tumours: 19 pTa and 3 pT1, grading smoking status and bladder cancer (OR, 1 .914, %95 CI, 1 .055-3 .472, 5 G1 and 17 G2 . Statistical analyses were applied to investigate the p=0.033), but there was no statistically significant association between ability of the genes to identify patients without recurrence during pe- demographic factors, tumor stage, tumor grade and bladder cancer . riod of two years and with early recurrence . Initial screening using the These data seem to indicate that GSTT1 gene polymorphism may be GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools revealed a putative set associated with bladder cancer in this Turkish population .Cancer genetics 0 P04.127 P04.129 FGFR3 mutations and 3p, 9p, 9q & p53 deletions in noninvasive Reliable methylation Analysis for Epigenetic Research - Novel bladder cancer Technologies offering a complete and standardized workflow A. Y. Babayan1, O. A. Kuznetsova1, S. V. Bashkatov2, O. B. Karyakin2, D. V. G. Schock, T. Träger, C. Korfhage, R. Peist, N. Rudinger, N. Fang, D. Jansen, Zaletaev1,3, M. V. Nemtsova1,4; D. Löffert; 1Research Institute for Molecular Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation, QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany. 2Medical Radiology Reserch Centre RAMS, Obninsk, Russian Federation, The analysis of changes in DNA methylation is challenging due to the 3Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Mosocw, Russian Federation, lack of standardized methods for providing reproducible data . Here we 4Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. present a complete and standardized workflow for methylation analy- The bladder cancer is one of the most severe oncological diseases . sis . Importance of the development of new diagnostic clinical markers is Bisulfite Conversion: QIAGEN’s EpiTect Bisulfite technology repre- dictated by its high incidence and aggressive tumor growth . Cancer sents a unique system for DNA protection against DNA degradation development is a complex, multistage process involving various ge- which guarantees the highest conversion efficiency of ≥ 99% and high- netic and epigenetic alterations . In our study we have tried to establish est DNA quality . associations between several genetics alterations (loss of heterozy- Whole bisulfitome amplification: Since the quantity of converted gosity (LOH) at 3p, 9p, 9q and p53 loci and S249C activating mutation DNA is often limited, we here present a novel technology for the reli- in FGFR3) and tumor clinical phenotype (tumor differentiation, type of able and representative amplification of the entire bisulfite converted growth and a non-recurrent period) . During the last year and the half genomic DNA _ the bisulfitome _ to overcome limitations in methyla- we have studied 40 matched samples (blood and tissue) from patients tion analysis derived by limited DNA amounts . with primary bladder cancer and 35 samples from patients with re- Dedicated PcR technology for methylation analysis: Methylation current bladder cancer, of which 17 patients demonstrated recurrence Specific PCR (MSP) reactions often require extensive optimization. within one year . All samples were divided into groups by differentiation We present a mutant Taq DNA Polymerase that has been genetically rate: 53 samples classified as G1+G2 and 22 as G3. By growth type engineered to increase primer extension specificity through better dis- 53 samples were unifocal and 39 multifocal . LOH at 3p, 9p, 9q and crimination of 3’ single base mismatches of the primer . p53 loci were detected by microsatellite analysis, and SSCP and direct For highly sensitive TaqMan probe based real-time PCR, we have de- sequencing sought for identification of FGFR3 activating mutations . veloped a novel reagent that yields accurate methylation analysis in Statistical analysis of the results included comparison of the patients’ real-time. A selection of pre-developed MethyLight assays for a first set clinical groups by Fisher’s exact test, calculation of odds ratios and of genes will also be made available . corresponding 95% confidence intervals, with GraphPad InStat v.3.5 Assay control reagents: Assay design and the success of methyla- software. Our results demonstrate that 9p deletions are significantly tion analysis by PCR can be facilitated and assessed by the use of more frequent in tumors with high recurrence rate (within one year) . standardized human control DNAs . FGFR3 mutations are prevalent in G1+G1 group of tumors . No sig- With its newly introduced EpiTect solutions, QIAGEN makes available nificant differences were found between tumors with various growth standardized, pre-analytical and analytical solutions from DNA sample types . collection, stabilization and purification, to bisulfite conversion and real-time or endpoint PCR methylation analysis or sequencing . P04.128 Evidences for cancer cells showing stem features from human P04.130 bladder transitional cell carcinoma Karyotype alterations of CD133(+) stem-like cells of glioblastoma A. Bentivegna1, D. Conconi1, E. Panzeri1, E. Sala2, G. Bovo2, M. Casu2, P. multiforme Viganò2, G. Strada2, L. Dalprà1,2; W. Yang1, D. Yang1, C. C. Lin2, L. Hsieh2, D. Cho3, C. Hung1, T. Li1; 1Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Monza, MI, Italy, 2S. Gerardo Hospi- 1Cell/Gene Therapy Research Lab., China Medical Univ Hospital, Taichung, tal, Monza, MI, Italy. Taiwan, 2Dept of Medical Research China Medical Univ Hospital, Taichung, Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common type of bladder Taiwan, 3Dept of Neurosurgery, China Medical Univ Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. cancer accounting for more than 90-95% and it often recur (75% after Recent studies have demonstrated the existence of cancer stem-like 5 years) . cells with CD133 surface marker in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) . Emerging evidence has suggested that the capability of a tumor to It is believed that these minor CD133(+) tumor cells possess more grow, propagate and recur is dependent on a small subset of cells efficient DNA-repair function than the majority CD133(-) progeny cells within it, termed cancer stem cells (CSCs) . Current failure of cancer and thus can survive the radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy and therapies may be due to their lower effect on CSCs that are resistant rapidly give rise to fatal tumor recurrence . To isolate CD133(+) GBM and retain their full capacity to divide and restore the tumor cell mass . cells, we administered ionizing radiation to short-term tumor cell cul- Although data have been provided to support this theory in human tures from 8 new GBM patients (participants in a clinical trial of im- blood, brain, and breast cancers, the identity of bladder cancer stem munotherapy) . In one particular case, the GBM cells that survived ir- cells has not been determined. Here, we report the initial findings to- radiation contained 50- 60% highly clonogenic and neurosphere-form- wards the isolation and preliminary characterization of a putative CSCs ing CD133(+) cells . We also used FACS to isolate the CD133(+) cells population from human bladder TCCs . These cells, isolated from fresh from un-irradiated original GBM cell population of this patient . Karyo- surgical specimens, were induced to proliferate in vitro in serum-free type analysis showed that the majority CD133(-) cells of initial culture medium containing the mitogenic growth factors EGF and bFGF . The were 46, XY, +7, +der(7;9)(p10;p10),-10, -18, der(19)(q13), with little proliferating cells generated within 48 h detached spheres that showed change in near diploid karyotype within 10 passages in vitro . In con- clonal origin. Cells also resulted positive by immunofluorescence for trast, majority of FACS-isolated un-irradiated CD133(+) cells showed the stem cells’ markers CD133, Oct-4, Nestin and Cytokeratins . We a hypo-tetraploid with variation of chromosome number among them . also conducted a cytogenetic study on fresh chromosome spreads The radiation-survived CD133(+) cells of this patient showed similar and, when possible, on chromosome spreads after different time of hypo-tetraploid patterns with slightly higher variation in chromosome culture and a parallel molecular cytogenetic study by FISH on paraf- number than the un-irradiated CD133(+) cells . Individual cell clones of fin embedded tissue sections and on fresh and after culture nuclei. the two CD133(+) categories were consistently hypotetraploid but still We found important karyotype changes by culture selection, losing the with variation of chromosome number, suggesting chromosomal in- complexity present in fresh tumors and a marked molecular heteroge- stability during cell proliferation . Using these hypotetraploid CD133(+) neity between the tumors . GBM cells, we have obtained preliminary results that certain therapeu- tic agents that down-regulated CD133(+) expression also could shift the hypotetraploid to the near diploid karyotypes of CD133(-) GBM cells .Cancer genetics  P04.131 were investigated in 26 normal and 64 specimens of abnormal cytol- Familial cancer Database (FacD) online ogy using the Methylight technique, the Telo TAGGG hTERT Quan- R. H. Sijmons; tification kit and LightCycler technology as well as Telomeric Repeat University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Amplification Protocol (TRAP). E6/E7 HPV-16 mRNA expression was Cancer is associated with a wide range of hereditary disorders . Recog- also evaluated. No significant correlations were observed between nising these disorders in cancer patients is important for the medical hTERT mRNA expression and hTERT promoter methylation, as well management of both patients and their relatives . The Familial Cancer as between telomerase activity and hTERT promoter methylation in Database (FaCD) - online is a web-based application aimed at health- normal and in premalignant cervical specimens . E6/E7 HPV-16 mRNA care professionals with at least basic knowledge of clinical cancer expression was observed in 72% of HPV-16 infected samples and genetics . It has been developed to support the clinical genetic differ- was correlated with hTERT mRNA expression and telomerase activity ential diagnosis in cancer patients and families . FaCD tries to match (p<0.05). This is the first study investigating the role of hTERT pro- the tumour and non-tumour features observed in a particular patient moter methylation in hTERT mRNA expression and telomerase activ- and family with those of the disorders included in its database and ity in premalignant lesions . The observed lack of correlation suggests provides a clinical synopsis with literature references for each of these that other mechanisms might be involved in the regulation of hTERT disorders . In addition to reported familial clustering of cancer (e.g. fa- expression . The correlation between hTERT mRNA and E6/E7 mRNA milial cases of cervical cancer) and known cancer-associated heredi- expression confirms the role of HPV infection in hTERT regulation. tary disorders (e.g . Lynch syndrome), the database includes patterns of multiple primary tumours and data on the tumours associated with P04.134 common multifactorial disorders (e.g. diabetes) or exogenic risk fac- Identification of new splicing isoforms of the β-chimaerin gene tors (e.g. use of OAC). In total, FaCD contains files on more than 400 by transcript analysis in human cancer tissues and cell lines different disorders . Users can choose from over 900 clinical tumour L. Barrio-Real1,2, M. Caloca2, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; and non-tumour features to compose a search profile. Links are pro- 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, vided to corresponding OMIM entries, PubMed abstracts and websites 2Centro de investigación del cáncer, Salamanca, Spain. of research and support groups . The database can be found at www . Chimaerins are a family of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) that se- facd .info and access is granted free of charge . lectively inactivate the Rac GTPase . The four members of this family (α1- α2- β- and β2- chimaerins) are generated by alternative start of P04.132 transcription of two different genes, the α and β-chimaerin genes. Chi- Quantification of CEA mRNA for micrometastases detection in maerin proteins have a catalytic GAP domain, a C1 domain that binds peripheral blood and bone marrow specimens of gastric cancer DAG and phorbol esters, and a SH2 domain that is only present in α2 patients by Real-time PcR and β2-chimaerin isoforms. L. Dardaei Alghalandis1,2, R. Shahsavani2, S. H. Ghaffari2, E. Aslankoohi3, K. The β-chimaerin gene is located in the 7p15 locus and consists of 13 Alimoghadam2, A. Ghavamzadeh2; exons . In addition to the initial start site in exon 1, it posses an alter- 1Tarbiar Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, native start of transcription in intron 6 that is used to render the β1- 2Hematology,Oncology & BMT resaerch center,Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Is- chimaerin isoform . This alternative transcript has only been reported lamic Republic of Iran, 3Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. in rat testis . Introduction: Gastric adenocarcinoma is the first leading fatal malig- Since recent work demonstrates a role for the β2-chimaerin protein in nancy in Iran . Despite advances in therapeutics approaches for gastric cancer progression, we decided to perform a transcript analysis of the cancer (GC), tumor dissemination to distant organs is still the major β-chimaerin gene in human cancer tissues and cell lines, to search for cause of death . CEA that is a tumor antigen is abundantly expressed tumor-related alterations . by malignant cells . The aim of our research was to use CEA for detec- We report for the first time a differential pattern of expression of β2- tion of micrometastases in peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow and β1-chimaerin in several glioblastomas and tumor cell lines. In ad- (BM) specimens of patients with GC . dition we have identified and characterized additional new isoforms Materials and Methods: we used CEA as a tumor marker and GAPDH generated by alternative splicing: 8 isoforms of β2-chimaerin and 9 of as an internal control to detect and quantify disseminated tumor cells β1-chimaerin. Some of these isoforms maintain some functional do- in PB and BM specimens of affected individuals . Total RNA was ex- mains, but most of them would render non-functional proteins which tracted from AGS cell line and CEA and GAPDH fragments were gen- could behave as dominant negative mutants . erated by reverse transcription. The amplified fragments were cloned Functional studies of these new isoforms will help us to understand into T/A vector . Double cloning of these fragments has been done into the mechanism of action of these proteins and their role in tumor de- T/A vector . Serial dilutions of this plasmid are used as standard curve, velopment . each containing a known amount of input copy number . Total RNA was extracted from PB and BM specimens of about 30 patients . cDNA of P04.135 these specimens were synthesized by reverse transcription . chimerism monitoring: bone marrow vs. peripheral blood Results:We set up quantitative Real-Time PCR for CEA and GAPDH . A. D. Krstic1, O. Stojkovic2, M. Guc-Scekic1, D. Vujic1, D. Jevtic1, T. Varljen2; The assay determined the copy number of disseminated tumor cells in 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute Vukan Cupic, Belgrade, Serbia and the PB and BM specimens of patients . Montenegro, 2Institute of Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Conclusion: The quantitative real-time PCR for the CEA can be a use- Serbia and Montenegro. ful technique for detection of micrometastases in the PB and BM speci- The goal of post-transplantation monitoring in hematopoietic stem cell mens of GC patients transplantation (HSCT) is to predict disease relapse, graft rejection and graft-versus-host disease . The main principal in chimerism detec- P04.133 tion is to determine genetic markers which differ between donor and DNA methylation οf human telomerase reverse transcriptase recipient and monitor them after transplantation with highest accuracy (htERt) gene in premalignant cervical lesions and sensitivity . P. Oikonomou1, A. Tsezou1,2; First it is important to determine weather engrafment took place and 1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Institute of Biomedical Research and second weather the recipient cells, if present, are normal or malignant . Technology, Larissa, Greece. Sensitivity of chimerism monitoring using STR-PCR analysis is 1-5%, Human Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase (hTERT) mRNA expression and on the other hand the sensitivity of RT-PCR for minimal residual seems to play an important role in cervical carcinogenesis . Analysis of disease (MRD) monitoring is at least 1000 times higher . the hTERT promoter region revealed the presence of a CpG island and We present three cases with detected genetic aberrations before HSCT: a high overall GC content, suggesting a possible role for methylation one patient had AML with complex karyotype 48,XX, t(11;17)(q23;q21), in the regulation of hTERT gene expression . In the present study we +6,+mar and two patients had ALL with 46,XX, t(9;22)(q21;q12) and bcr- evaluated the role of hTERT promoter methylation in hTERT regulation abl (p190) rearrangement detected on molecular level . These patients in premalignant cervical specimens . The methylation status of hTERT were followed by cytogenetics and molecular genetics using BCR-ABL promoter gene, hTERT mRNA quantification and telomerase activity probes for MRD and STR markers for chimerism monitoring .Cancer genetics  Our experience show that it is useful to follow up MRD in the patients ful technique for detectionof micrometastases in colorectal cancer . bone marrow cells in cases where genetic aberrations were detected before HSCT, in order to be ready for appropriate intervention . In this P04.138 work we discuss different chimerism status registered in the bone mar- screening of cYP1B1 alleles shows a less frequency of row and peripheral blood at the same time point, in cases with compli- hyperactive variants Leu432Val and Asn453ser in mexican cations after HSCT . Population L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta1, O. M. Messina-Baas1, C. Chima2, S. Kofman-Alfaro1, P04.136 R. Rivera-Vega1, S. A. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; cisplatin inhibits in vivo mouse telomerase activity in melanoma 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Hospital 20 de Noviembre, squamous cells ISSSTE, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Fac Medicina, B. G. Bumbacila1, C. Dragaescu2, R. O. Dumache3, C. A. Dehelean4, D. Io- UNAM, Mexico D.F., Mexico. nescu4, A. D. Kaycsa3; Human cytochrome P4501B1 is an important enzyme in the activation 1West University, Faculty of Chemistry-Biology-Geography, Chemistry De- of diverse procarcinogens . CYP1B1 gene is polymorphic and hyper- partment, Timisoara, Romania, 2Public Health Institute, Timisoara, Romania, active variants can lead to a higher susceptibility to estrogen-related 3”Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, cancers . Several single nucleotide polymorphisms have previously Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, Romania, 4”Victor Babes” University of been reported in the human CYP1B1 gene . Previous studies have Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Toxicology Department, Timiso- revealed a relation between Ala119Ser allele and breast cancer and ara, Romania. between Leu432Val and prostate cancer, two polymorphisms that re- Cis-diamminodichloridoplatinum is a platinum (II) complex with che- sult in a higher catalytic activity of the enzyme . Mexican population motherapeutic use in treating neck and head cancers, small cell lung shows a lower incidence of this type of cancers in comparison with cancer, ovarian and testicular cancers . It is accepted that its mecha- other western countries . In the present study we analyzed the frequen- nism of action relies on the fact that it binds to one DNA chain, by two cy of five CYP1B1 polymorphic sites to initially explore the possible guanosine residues, modifying DNA’s double-chain structure and ca- relation between the lower incidence of estrogen-related cancer and pacity to repair . The cell dies from apoptosis . Telomerase is a reverse the presence of these alleles in Mexican population . The genetic dis- transcriptase that adds TTAGGG repeating sequences to the 3’ end of tribution of CYP1B1 variants was evaluated in 100 Mexican healthy DNA strands in the telomere regions, which are found at the ends of subjects through genomic DNA sequencing analysis . The frequency the eukaryotic chromosomes . This way, it protects the genetic informa- of homozygous hyperactive variant Ala119Ser (23%) was higher than tion in the DNA molecule by wasting with each replication cycle . Telom- those reported in other populations . The frequencies of polymorphic erase carries its own RNA molecule, used as a template for elongating variants 4326C>G (Leu432Val) and 4390A>G (Asn453Ser) (3% and telomeres . Cancer cells are expressing telomerase activity, while the 0%, respectively) were significantly lower than those observed in other most of the somatic normal cells do not . populations except for Japanese population . The homozygous variant We induced skin cancer in mice, by injecting them with dexamethasone 4390A>G was not identified in our population. our data demonstrates and irradiating them with an UVB lamp . The mice were divided in two that the CYP1B1 alleles encoding hyperactive variants, And the silent groups . One group was not treated . The other group was treated with polymorphism 1347C>T, are significantly less frequent in Mexican cisplatin . Telomere lengths were analyzed in squamous cells from the population than those observed in western countries . Further studies carcinomic tissue of these mice by using the PCR / STELA technique . should focus on the potential interaction of the occurrence of these We found that the cisplatin treatment gradually reduces the telomere polymorphisms and the incidence of estrogen-related cancers in Mexi- lengths in mice treated with this compound vs mice untreated, by de- can population . creasing telomerase’s activity. We conclude that our findings support the idea that platinum compounds may have other ways of action in P04.139 the cell nucleus, beside the classical one accepted . molecular characterization of patient-derived melanoma cell lines employed in therapeutic vaccine preparation P04.137 Z. Ogbah1, F. Simonetta1, J. Puig-Butillé1, C. Badenas1,2, J. Malvehy1,2, D. Quantification of CK20 mRNA for micrometastases detection Benitez3, R. Vilella3, S. Puig1,2; in peripheral blood and bone marrow specimens of colorectal 1Melanoma Unit, Department of Dermatology and Genetics Service, Hospital cancer patients by Real-time PcR Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre of Biomedical Re- E. Aslankoohi1,2, S. H. Ghaffari3, L. Dardaei Alghalandis4,3, K. Alimoghadam3, search on Rare diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Melanoma A. Ghavamzadeh3; Unit, Department of Immunology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, 1Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Hematology, Oncology & Spain. BMT Research center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Hematology, Oncol- We studied eleven human cutaneous melanoma cells lines with the ogy & BMT research center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tarbiat Modares aim to detect the presence of genetic aberrations currently considered university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. to have a role in the pathogenesis of melanoma . By multiplex liga- Introduction: Colorectal carcinoma is the third cause of cancer related tion dependent probe amplification assay (MLPA), mapping the region deaths in the world . Despite advances in therapeutic approaches for 9p21, we identified homozygous deletion of CDKN2B region in seven colorectal cancer , tumor cells dissemination to distant organs is still cell lines and homozygous deletion in CDKN2A region in eight cell the major cause of death . lines . Sequencing analysis of the three cell lines that presented either Cytokeratins , are abundantly expressed by epithelial cells .The pres- loss of heterozygosity or no deletion for all loci tested in the 9p21 re- ence of epithelial cells in peripheral blood (PB) or bone marrow (BM) gion showed deleterious mutations in two of them . NRAS and BRAF indicates the malignant nature of them . The aim of our research was to sequencing revealed a mutation in NRAS gene in one cell line and use CK20 for detection of micrometastases in PB and BM specimens V600E change in BRAF in six cell lines . Four of the BRAF mutated of patients with colorectal cancer . cell lines presented one or more changes in MC1R . NRAS and BRAF Materials and Methods:We used CK20 as a marker and GAPDH as an mutations were mutually exclusive . No mutation affects CDK4 gene . internal control . Total RNA was extracted from Caco2 cell line . CK20 We also have studied gains in several oncogenes by MLPA . NRAS and GAPDH cDNA were synthesized . Double cloning of these frag- (1p13) was amplified in the cell line carried NRAS mutation; CDK6 ments has been done into T/A vector . Serial dilutions of this plasmid (7q21) was amplified in other seven cell lines. Amplifications of the will be used as standard curve .Total RNA was extracted from PB and chromosomal region 12p13 (CCND2) and 20q13 (STK15) were the BM specimens of 30 patients, and cDNA were synthesized . we are more frequently detected (45% and 45% of cases, respectively) . The quantifying CK20 mRNA levels and CK20/GAPDH mRNA ratios using region 11q13 (CCND1) was amplified in two cell lines. Finally, punc- a TaqMan real-time PCR system in the specimens . tual amplifications of some oncogenes were identified (p.e. BIRC5). Results: We set up quantitative PCR for CK20 and GAPDH using Real- We detect two profiles: CDKN2A alterations with and without NRAS/ Time PCR . The assay determined the copy number of disseminated BRAF/MC1R changes . Both patterns were associated to oncogenic tumor cells in the specimens of patients . amplifications. In conclusion, our results constitute a comprehensive Conclusion: The quantitative real-time PCR for the CK20 can be a use- molecular characterization of melanoma cell lines, offering importantCancer genetics  information for melanoma research . P04.142 Evaluation of mtDNA common deletion (Δ4977) in patients P04.140 affected by esophageal scc A semi-automated unbiased differential methylation screening S. Morovvati1, S. Sharif2, M. Jeihounian3, S. Ghaffari4, Z. Ahmadi1; assay for applications in cancer epigenetic research 1Research Center of Molecular Biology, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences Univer- V. V. Shkarupo1,2, A. S. Tanas3, E. B. Kuznetsova1,4, L. E. Zavalishina5, G. A. sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Faculty of Sciences, Tabriz University, Frank5, D. V. Zaletaev1,4, V. V. Strelnikov1,4; Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pathology Department, Baqiyatallah Hospital, 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Rus- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Medical Genetic Department, Tehran Univer- sian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Sitronics Telecom sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Solutions, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4I.M.Sechenov Moscow Medical Acad- Background: Mitochondrial defects have long been suspected to play emy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Moscow P.A.Gertsen Oncology Research an important role in the development and progression of cancer . One Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. of the most common mutations of mtDNA is a 4977 bp deletion that is Screening for differential methylation in tumor and control samples called common deletion or Δ4977. The studies show that there is an is one of the powerful approaches towards the identification of novel association between this deletion and some cancer, aging and envi- cancer related genes . Still there is no universal technique to screen ronmental factor such as alcohol and smoking . The aim of this study for differential methylation, although the spectrum of methylation de- was to determine the frequency of Δ4977 in mtDNA of tumor tissue in tection methods is vast . We have developed a synthetic highly effec- patients affected by esophageal squamous cell carcinoma . tive, unambiguous, unbiased, semi-automated screening technique to Methods: The presence of Δ4977 was investigated in mtDNA of 41 serve as a possible basis for cancer epigenome research . Our dif- tumor tissues obtained from patients affected by esophageal squa- ferential methylation screening approach is based on a fluorescent mous cell carcinoma, 10 adjacent normal tissues obtained from same methylation sensitive PCR with primers complementary to the adap- patients and 10 blood sample of healthy individuals, using nested PCR tors ligated to the DNA digestion fragments. These AIMS (amplification standard protocol . of intermethylated sites) products are analyzed on automatic genetic Result: Δ4977 were detected in 33 out of 41 (80.5%) of tumor tissue, 9 analyzers with single-nucleotide resolution using GeneScan software . out of 10 (90%) of adjacent normal tissues of same patients and none Specific software for automatic identification of differentially methyl- of the blood sample of healthy persons . ated fragments have been developed as well as the software capable Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that Δ4977 is prevalent in the of identifying the AIMS fragments in silico by comparison with avail- esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and there is an association be- able genome databases . Additional computer service is available to tween this deletion and esophageal SCC (p< 0 .01) . This deletion may assist in experimentation design respective to specific applications. play an important role in the development and progression of esopha- With technical variations this approach may be elaborated to identify geal . novel targets of DNA methylation/demethylation as well as to roughly characterize epigenomic status as a whole . We suggest that the assay P04.143 is universal and can be applied for screening differential methylation sDHD and sDHB: the clinical presentation,Phenotype and care in any disease where epigenetic component may be suspected . The Pathway study is supported by Friends for an Earlier Breast Cancer Test Foun- C. A. Giblin, F. Lalloo; dation, USA. Regional Genetic Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, Manchester, United Kingdom. P04.141 Familial Paraganglioma are rare tumours of the head and neck; they the investigation of tumor suppressor gene (P53) LOcUs-17 are often bilateral and are known to be more aggressive than spon- P13 in late stage Endometriosis patients by fluorescent in Situ taneous forms . The parasympathetic paraganglia lie along the whole Hybridisation (Fish) technique of the parasympathetic nerves, paraganglioma are usually found at F. A. Teksen1, &. Keleş2, H. Şatıroğlu3; the intersection of large vessels . It has been shown that early detec- 1Faculty of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey, 2Düzen Laboratory, Ankara, Tur- tion of paragangliomas (PGs) has reduced morbidity following surgical key, 3Ankara University Faculty Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology Depart- intervention . ment and Biotechnology Institute, Ankara, Turkey. Clinical genetics have worked closely with endocrinologists in the 3 In the study, the incidence of genetic alterations in p53 gene locus in teaching hospitals in Manchester over the past 5 years with families late stage endometriosis cases were investigated in comparison with with hereditary endocrine conditions including MEN type 1 and 2 and the endometrium and peripheral blood samples of the same patients also Familial Paraganglioma syndrome (FPS) . Due to the increased and the same tissues of normal healty women . recognition of the syndrome and the advent of molecular testing the The study group was composed of six endometriosis samples (n:6) . referral for assessment of paraganglioma / pheochromocytoma has Control group included; normal endometrium samples (n:6, control I) increased exponentially . and peripheral blood lymphocytes (n:6, control II) of the same patients To date 19 families with proven FPS have attended the Manchester with normal endometrium samples (n:5, control III) and peripheral Regional Genetics service . blood lymphocytes (n:5, control IV) of the healty women . We will describe the clinical presentation of families with SDHB and Frequency of monosomic, disomic and trisomic cells in controls and SDHD mutations, in particular the difference in the phenotype, the im- endometriotic tissue specimens were determined by using Multicolor pact on the families and the care pathways for individuals both affected Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique and statisitically and at risk . analysed by Khi squared test . In endometriosis samples the frequency of monosomy and trisomy P04.144 were 16 .4 % and 2 .1 % respectively for chromosome 17 p13 (p53) Recent studies into the FA/BRCA pathway locus . In endometrium samples (n:6) the frequency of trisomy was 3 .2 K. Neveling1, R. Kalb1, O. Levran2, S. D. Batish2, S. Reid3, A. E. Sims4, T. T. % . In peripheral blood lymphocytes (n:6) the frequency of trisomy was Huang4, N. Rahman3, A. D. Auerbach2, H. Hanenberg5, D. Schindler1; 0 .3 % for the same locus . 1Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Laboratory for Human Finally, chromosome 17p13 (p53) locus genetic alterations were found Genetics and Hematology, New York, NY, United States, 3Institute of Cancer to be significantly greater (p<0.0001) in the endometriosis specimens Research, Surrey, United Kingdom, 4Department of Biochemistry, New York, than in normal endometrial cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes of NY, United States, 5Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Dues- the same patients and healty control group . seldorf, Germany. These findings support a multistep pathway involving somatic genetic Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare recessive disease with patients suf- alterations in the development and/or progression of endometriosis fering from various congenital malformations, progressive bone mar- and give evidence for the need of more detailed, further studies on row failure and high cancer susceptibility . Underlying FA are defects the subject . in any one of currently 13 known genes . Their products interact in the FA/BRCA pathway to mediate ICL repair involving NER, transle- sion synthesis and homologous recombination . This signalling path-Cancer genetics  way consists of three major components: the nuclear core complex cer cases . There were no mutations in CDH1 gene . Thus, a frequency composed of at least eight FA proteins (group 1), which activates the of MLH1/MSH2 mutations associated with familial gastric cancer is “group 2” proteins FANCD2 and FANCI (ID complex) . The ID complex higher in comparison with the CDH1 gene mutations (P=0,026) . is then targeted to chromatin and co-localizes with “effector” proteins such as BRCA2 or RAD51 (group 3) . Recent progress in understand- P04.147 ing the FA/BRCA network was achieved by the discoveries of the three telomere function in giant cell tumors of bone FA genes FANCI, FANCJ and FANCN . Besides FANCD2, FANCI is S. Gebre-Medhin1, Y. Jin1, T. Jonson1, K. Broberg2, N. Mandahl1, F. Mertens1; the second monoubiquitinated member of the FA/BRCA pathway . We 1Department of clinical genetics, University hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Depart- show the biallelic mutations of four FA-I patients . The 5`-3`helicase ment of occupational medicine, University hospital, Lund, Sweden. BRIP1 and the BRCA2-binding protein PALB2 both act downstream BACKGROUND: Giant cell tumor of bone (GCT) is a locally aggressive of the monoubiquitination step and belong to the “group 3” proteins . tumor accounting for 1/20 of all bone tumors . Morphologically, GCTs We identified biallelic truncating BRIP1 mutations in eleven FA pa- show osteoclast-like giant cells mixed with mononuclear putative neo- tients . In an additional seven FA patients we found biallelic PALB2 plastic cells . Cytogenetically, GCTs often show telomeric associations mutations, designating PALB2 as FANCN . Interestingly, investigations (tas) paralleled by an otherwise normal karyotype . It remains to be of FANCJ and FANCN have shown that all known group 3 proteins established whether tas in GCT represent deregulation of cis-regula- (BRCA2/FANCD1, BRIP1/FANCJ, PALB2/FANCN) are breast cancer tory or trans-regulatory mechanisms at the telomere, or a combination susceptibility genes . This recent emergence of new FA genes not only thereof, or are caused by other yet unknown mechanisms . facilitated further understanding of a major DNA repair pathway, but METHODS: DNA was extracted from fresh frozen biopsies of 20 GCTs also makes connections to tumorigenesis and cellular aging (Neveling for telomere length analysis . From the same 20 cases, RNA was ex- et al ., Z Gerontol Geriatr 2007) . tracted for quantitative RT-PCR analysis concerning the expression levels of four genes (TERT, TRF1, TRF2 and POT1) involved in telo- P04.145 mere function . FISH analysis was performed to evaluate the frequency Role of Helicobacter Pylori in gastric adenocarcinoma : special of telomere-negative chromosome ends . emphasis on gender, androgen receptor and angiogenic factors RESULTS: No correlation between presence of clonal chromosome S. Arbabi Bidgoli1, M. Djamali Zavarhei2, M. Soleimani1, S. Sajadi1; aberrations and telomere length in tumor cells could be detected . At 1Faculty of Pharmacy,Isalmic Azad University(IAU), Tehran, Islamic Republic of FISH analysis there was a correlation between frequency of tas and Iran, 2Department of Pathology,College of Medicine,Tehran University of Medi- number of telomere-negative chromosome ends . Expression of TERT, cal Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. TRF1, TRF2 and POT1 was found in all tumors . Analysis regarding the H. pylori increase the risk of gastric cancer which has higher incidence correlation between expression levels of individual genes and cytoge- in men globally . Due to animal studies male gastric tissues respond netic and clinical features is ongoing . more rapidly to H . pylori but the underlying roles of sex hormones and CONCLUSION: In view of our preliminary data, it is unlikely that the angiogenic factors remained unclear in both genders . We studied the high frequency of tas could be explained by altered expression levels roles of H pylori on tissue levels of Androgen Receptor (AR), uPA, of any of the investigated genes . However, it can not be ruled out that MMP9 and TP as three major angiogenic and prognostic markers in altered function at the protein level of TERT, TRF1, TRF2 or POT1 is gastric cancer . Malignant and non malignant tissues of 72 gastric ad- involved in tas formation . enocarcinoma cases who underwent surgery from 2004-2007 were analyzed by immunohistochemical methods . Higher prevalence of H P04.148 pylori in males, lack of AR expression in normal cells of females and Overexpression of wild-type p53 suppresses Cathepsin B lower expression of AR in tumoral cells of females (p=0 .03) were the (CSTB) in glioblastoma cells first significant differences between two genders. H pylori infection was M. Heidari, M. Safari, O. Seyedi; evaluated as a relative risk factor of AR expression in males (OR=5) Tehran University/Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and females (OR=3) that means most of AR (+) tumors had history of The tumor suppressor protein p53 plays critical role in modulating cellu- H .pylori infection in their normal cells . Although females showed higher lar functions such as cell cycle arrest and apoptosis . Due to its function uPA expression (p=0 .007) but H pylori negative tumors showed higher in growth inhibition as well as contribution of its mutated form in >50% risk of tumoral uPA (OR=1 .13), MMP9 (OR=1 .24) and TP expression of human tumors particularly a significant proportion of glioma cases, (OR=1 .12) in males . By recording the strong role of AR and h pylori p53 is considered a fundamental tumour suppressor gene . In order to infection on the expression of tumoral uPA and other angiogenic fac- investigate potential p53 target gene(s), we employed overexpression tors in women (OR=11 ) we concluded that H pylori plays inconsistent of wild-type p53 via recombinant adenovirus (Ad-GFP-P53) which en- roles in two genders by inducing different unknown genes but AR plays codes green fluorescent protein and p53 separately, and cDNA AFLP similar roles in both genders by increasing the tissue levels of angio- approaches in U87 glioblastoma cells . In response to overexpression genic factors . of wild-type p53, cDNA AFLP results revealed the suppression of ca- thepsin B (CSTB) gene which encodes a protease but not in infected P04.146 cells with Ad-GFP which does not express p53 and mock control . High frequency of mLH1 and msH2 mutations among familial Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis confirmed the activation of CTSB gastric cancer patients gene in cells containing Ad-GFP and mock control however; its tran- A. S. Tsukanov1, A. N. Loginova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, T. A. Muzaffarova1, L. N. scriptional activity was suppressed in infected cells with Ad-GFP-P53 . Lubchenko2, M. P. Nikulin2, A. V. Karpukhin1; In addition, computational analysis detected several potential p53 DNA 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer target sequences within introns of CTSB genes . Taken together our Research Centre, Moskow, Russian Federation. results suggested that CTSB gene might be directly regulated by p53 Mutations of CDH1 gene are associated with familial diffuse gastric protein as a transcription regulatory protein in glioblastoma . cancer . MLH1 and MSH2 mutations are associated generally with he- reditary non-polyposis colon cancer syndrome that may include gastric P04.149 cancer . So MLH1 and MSH2 mutations predispose to gastric cancer . mGmt and p15 promotor methylation - prognostic parameters However a frequency of MLH1 and MSH2 mutations among patients for TMZ chemotherapy response? with familial gastric cancer unselected on cancer type or familial his- S. Wemmert1, R. Ketter1, M. Bettscheider1, S. Alt2, K. Kammers3, J. Rahnenfüh- tory is unknown . rer3, W. Steudel1, S. Urbschat1; We investigated the sample of 30 patients with familial gastric cancer 1Department of Neurosurgery, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany, 2Insti- on mutations of CDH1, MLH1 and MSH2 genes . The structure of our tute of Immunology, National Public Health Laboratory, Luxembourg, Luxem- sample was near to a distribution of different familial gastric cancer bourg, 3Department of Statistics, Technical University Dortmund, Dortmund, types in the population and includes 8 families with diffuse gastric Germany. cancer . There were 5 germline MLH1 and MSH2 mutations among 30 Glioblastomas are the most frequent and malignant brain tumors in patients (16,6%) . Mutations have been found in families with gastric adults . Surgical cure is virtually impossible and despite of radiation and cancer only as well as in the families with both gastric and colon can- chemotherapy the clinical course is very poor . Epigenetic silencing ofCancer genetics  MGMT has been associated with a better response to TMZ-chemo- the metabolism of a wide range of carcinogenic chemicals . In humans, therapy . We were also able to show that TMZ increases the median cytosol GSTs are divided into several classes, and polymorphisms survival time of patients with tumors harbouring deletions on 9p within of these enzymes are associated with variations in enzyme activity the region for p15 and p16 . which in turn may affect the concentration of activated carcinogenic The aim of our current study was to investigate the methylation status chemicals in the body . We have investigated the association between of p15, p16, 14ARF and MGMT and correlate these results with the clini- the polymorphism in one of the cytosolic GSTs gene (GSTM1) and cal data . susceptibility to oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and basal cell DNA was isolated from fresh frozen GBM biopsies (n=27) and modi- carcinoma (BCC) of the skin . For that purpose 45 SCC, 42 BCC and fied by sodium bisulfite. Promotor methylation of p15, p16, p14ARF 40 control specimens have been subjected to PCR analysis of the and MGMT was analyzed by MS-PCR . Only patients with a KPS >70, GSTM1 gene . The frequency of GSTM null homozygous genotype radiation and TMZ-chemotherapy after radical tumor resection were was as follows: 48% in BCCs, 44% in SCCs and 20% in controls . The included . deletion of the GSTM1 gene was more frequent in SCC, than is con- We observed promotor hypermethylation of MGMT in 56%, and of trols (p=0 .017) and the same was true for BCCs (p=0 .016) . p15 in 37% of the tumors, whereas hypermethylation of p16 and p14arf Although cytosolic glutathione S-transferase (GST) enzymes occupy were rare . a key position in biological detoxification processes, GSTM1-1 gene Interestingly, hypermethylation of p15 emerged as a significant predic- is deleted in a high percentage of the healthy human population, with tor of a shorter overall survival (16,9 vs . 23,8 months, P=0,025; Log- major ethnic differences. We found a significant difference in genotype rank test), whereas MGMT hypermethylation had no effect on median frequencies between the two tumour groups and healthy controls . overall survival (22,5 vs . 22,1 months, P=0,49; Log-rank test) . In the presence of other clinically relevant factors (age, KPS, sex, MGMT), P04.152 p15 hypermethylation remains the only significant predictor (P=0,021; molecular Assessment of chimersim after Allogeneic Cox regression) . Hematopoietic cell transplantation: clinical utility in monitoring Although these results need to be confirmed in larger series, our ret- cell lineage engraftment rospective study suggests that p15 hypermethylation can act as an R. Domiati-Saad; additional prognostic factor for survival in glioblastomas . Baylor Univeristy Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is a treatment op- P04.150 tion for a variety of hematopoietic malignancies as well as nonmaligant Genetic basis in Gorlin syndrome diseases . Monitoring of chimerism by molecular techniques has been N. Alonso1,2, S. Ciria1,2, J. Mendioroz3, M. L. Martinez-Frías3, P. Unamuno4, R. widely utilized in the routine clinical setting . Chimerism analysis is usu- González-Sarmiento1,2; ally performed on DNA extracted from unfractionated blood or bone 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina. Universidad de marrow samples. Analysis of lineage-specific leukocytes might be use- Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Sala- ful in predicting the clinical outcome and might play a critical role in manca, Spain, 3CIAC. Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Servicio de the management of HCT patient. We have used an Analyte Specific Dermatología. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. Reagent on a Beckman capillary electrophoresis platform to assess Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the dynamics of chimerism within the individual leukocytes subsets multiple developmental abnormalities and predisposition to suffer tu- in 83 hematopoietic cell transplant patients after myeloablative and mours . SHH receptor gene Patched1 has been directly related to Gor- nonmyeloablative regimens . Magnetic anti-CD3, anti-CD15 and anti- lin syndrome . It represses Smoothened, which tranduces SHH signal CD19 beads were used to capture T cells, myeloid cells and B cells, to activate transcription factor GLI family . respectively, from peripheral blood and bone marrow samples prior to We have analyzed PTCH1 gene in 64 unrelated patients with Gorlin isolation of DNA . Twelve different polymorphic short tandem repeats syndrome, using PCR, heteroduplex and automatic sequencing . We (STR) loci were amplified in a single multiplex reaction. Chimerism found 25 different mutations, 10 of them are reported for the first time: analysis performed on specific cellular lineages was most useful in IVS2(-2)delAGTTGGAGGACGAGTA; IVS5(-56) T>G; IVS6(+1)G>A; early detection of relapse than unfractionated whole blood analysis IVS11(+20)delGAG; g .417insA; g .726delCA; g .1421insG; p .W851X; due the increased sensitivity in the enriched cell subpopulations . De- p .P1050P and g .2517delC . We also searched for PTCH in 38 patients termination of the level of donor T cells appears to be critical for suc- by MLPA. We found 9 patients with amplifications and 3 cases with cessful engraftment and could predict graft rejection . deletions . Moreover, in cases without abnormalities in the PTCH1 lo- cus, we have analyzed new candidate genes in the SHH pathway: P04.153 We found 3 mutations (p .H262H; p .R509W; p .R531C) in GLI1 gene . Hepatoblastoma: in vivo and in vitro models for the analysis of The 2 missense mutations have been secreened in 200 healthy con- Wnt/β-catenin and IGFs pathways trols . R509W was found in one healtht subject, while R531C was not . M. Salvatore1, A. Antoccia2, G. Azzalin3, R. Devito4, A. Di Masi2, C. La Rocca5, GLI2 analysis showed new intronic and silent mutations . We found 3 S. Lorenzetti5, G. Macino3, A. Magrelli3, A. Mantovani5, F. Maranghi5, C. Tanza- new missense mutations in CDON gene (p .I75V; p .E162K; p .A686V) rella2, S. Tait5, R. Tassinari5, F. Tosto1, M. Viganotti1, D. Taruscio1; and 2 new missense changes in BOC gene (p .E915H and p .Q959K) . 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Dept. of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rome, All of them have been screened in 50 healthy controls resulting as Italy, 2University “Roma Tre”, Rome, Italy, 3University “Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, polymorphisms . Suppressor of Fused, EGFR and KCTD11 genes do 4Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Dept. of not present pathogenic mutations in patients with Gorlin syndrome .In Food Safety and Veterinary Public Health, Rome, Italy. conclusion, 20 .3% of patients with Gorlin syndrome present mutations Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most important paediatric liver cancer (1% in PTCH1 gene . We also conclude R531C mutation in GLI1 seems to in children aged 6mo-3yr) . HB is a multi-factorial condition including be pathogenic and responsible for Gorlin syndrome . both genetic and environmental factors . Environmental factors may contribute to HB pathogenesis; exposure P04.151 to phthalates (i .e, diethyl-2-hexyl-phthalate-DEHP), present in PVC- Glutathione s-transferase (Gstm1) polymorphism in serbian based devices, are suggested as a risk factor in the highly susceptible head and neck tumour patients subpopulation of premature and low-birth weight newborns . DEHP in- J. M. Milasin, B. Ilic, D. Jelovac, M. Pesic, A. Boro, V. Konstatinovic, M. Vuka- teracts with nuclear receptors, thus interfering with a number of signal- dinovic; ling pathways . School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia. To investigate the role of phthalate exposure, animal and cell line stud- Susceptibility to head and neck tumours in a particular individual may ies are in progress to characterize the effects of DEHP, in comparison depend in part on the metabolic balance between Phase 1 enzymes, with benzofuran, a HB inducer in aged mice . Furthermore, histological such as cytochromes P450 (CYPs), and Phase II enzymes, such as and immuno-histochemical valuation will be performed on frozen and glutathione S-transferases (GSTs). Impaired detoxification of carcino- paraffin-embedded human tissues from HB patients. To elucidate mo- gens found in tobacco smoke appears to increase the risk for tobacco lecular mechanism(s) of HB pathogenesis we will focus on i) the role of associated cancers . Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are involved in Wnt/β-catenin and IGF pathways, and ii) its possible early diagnosticCancer genetics  and/or prognostic markers, human cell lines and tissues from mice and not the mutated protein, could be responsible for tumour devel- treated with DEHP and BF . opment in LFS . However, in some tumours both types of transcripts β-catenin and APC gene mutational analysis, modulation of gene (or only mutated transcripts) were present. This could reflect either expression analysis, genomic post-trascriptional regulation analysis differences in NMD between different tissues, or global inactivation of through microRNA and protein expression patterns are in progress . NMD in tumours . In quest to distinguish between these possibilities We assessed i) the in vitro cytotoxicity of DEHP and BF in the HB cell we tested expression of several genes (U2AF35, RPL3, TM1, PTB2, line HuH6, ii) the in vitro differential expression of two microRNAs, iii) PTB1, ABCC4) with PTC-containing alternative transcripts, which the differential protein expression in some gene products of the Wnt/β- should undergo NMD under physiological conditions . However, these catenin signalling pathway . analyses were inconclusive, mainly because the patterns of removal Project funded in the frame of ISS-NIH collaboration “Tackling rare dis- of some transcripts described in the literature could not be replicated . eases yet lacking diagnosis and/or prognosis: a pilot integrating data Supported by grants MSM0021620813 and MZO00064203 . collection and experimental studies” (2006) P04.156 P04.154 molecular basis of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome: an update from Influence of the focal adhesion protein leupaxin on invasion and the French LFs families metastasis in tRAmP prostate carcinomas G. Bougeard1, R. Sesboüé1, S. Baert-Desurmont1, S. Vasseur1, C. Martin1, L. S. Beckemeyer1, S. Schweyer2, P. Burfeind1, S. Kaulfuß1; Brugières2, A. Chompret3, B. Bressac-de Paillerets4, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet5, C. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 2Department of Pathology, Bonaïti-Pellié6, T. Frébourg1, &. The French LFS working group7; Göttingen, Germany. 1Inserm U614 and Department of Genetics University hospital, Rouen, France, In a recent study we showed that leupaxin expression could be de- 2Department of Pediatric Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, tected in 21% of human prostate carcinomas (PCa) . Down-regulation 3Department of Medicine, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Depart- of leupaxin expression using RNAi resulted in apoptosis of more than ment of Genetics, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5Department of 50% of androgen-dependent LNCaP PCa cells and in a significant re- Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 6Inserm U535, Villejuif, France, 7-, -, duction of invasiveness and migratory ability of androgen-independent France. PC-3 and DU145 PCa cells . Extensive analysis of TP53, based on complete sequencing of the 11 To analyse the role of leuapxin in progression and invasion of PCa exons and QMPSF analysis to detect genomic rearrangements, in in vivo we bred transgenic mice expressing prostate-specific leupaxin 474 French families suggestive of LFS, as defined by the Chompret with TRAMP mice to generate double transgenic heterozygous mice . criteria, led us to identify in 82 families (17%) a germline alteration The transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mod- of TP53 . Most of the alterations corresponded to missense mutations el develops, as a consequence of transgene SV40 T/t antigen expres- (67%) and we identified in 4 families (5%) genomic deletions. These sion, progressive prostate cancer that is invasive and capable of meta- results represent a definitive argument demonstrating that LFS results static spread . Histopathological analysis showed that at the age of 22 from TP53 haplo-deficiency. Nevertheless, this does not explain the weeks 91% of double heterozygous mice display a poorly differenti- remarkable TP53 germline mutation spectrum characterized by the ated tumor . In addition, 65% of these mice developed metastasis to the predominance of missense mutations . The different tumour spectrum lymph nodes . In single heterozygous TRAMP mice only 50% showed observed between TP53 wt/mt and wt/- mice led us to compare the a well differentiated tumor while none of them developed metastasis . mean ages of tumour onset between patients harbouring either TP53 Furthermore, our recent studies could demonstrate that the expres- missense mutations or other types of alterations. We found a signifi- sion of the cell-cell-adhesion molecule catenin delta 1 (p120CTN) cant difference, missense mutations being associated with a 9-year negatively correlated with the expression of leupaxin . No expression earlier tumour onset, confirming that missense mutations not only in- of p120CTN could be detected in progressive and invasive prostate activate p53 but also have an additional oncogenic effect . The obser- tumors of double transgenic TRAMP/leupaxin mice . In conclusion, the vation of a later age of tumour onset associated with null mutations led results of our studies indicate that leupaxin expression enhances the us to perform TP53 analysis in patients suggestive of LFS, but with a progression of PCa towards a more aggressive and metastatic tumor first tumour being diagnosed after 40 years of age and we had the sur- and that the loss of p120ctn expression due to leupaxin overexpres- prise to identify germline TP53 mutations in such families . Germline al- sion represents one possible cause of the invasive behavior . terations of TP53 that lead exclusively to loss of function are therefore associated with a later age of tumour onset and the presence of such P04.155 mutations should be considered in atypical LFS families with tumours Does nonsense-mediated RNA decay support tP53 diagnosed after 40 years . haploinsufficiency as the cause of tumour development in Li- Fraumeni syndrome? P04.157 K. Prochazkova1, M. Mrhalova2, A. Augustinakova2, D. Sumerauer3, A. Pu- Genetic analysis of tumor cell-free DNA in patients with lung chmajerova1, R. Kodet2, Z. Sedlacek1; cancer 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Second E. Hirmerová1, A. Panczak1, V. Kebrdlová1, A. Hořínek1,2, A. Slováková3, A. Medical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2De- Bortlová3, M. Marel3, J. Homolka3, J. Štekrová1, M. Kohoutová1; partment of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Charles University - Second 1Inst Biol Med Genetics, 1st Med Fac, Charles Univ, Prague, Czech Republic, Medical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3De- 23rd Dept Medicine, 1st Med Fac, Charles Univ, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st partment of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Charles University - Sec- Dept TBC Resp Dis, 1st Med Fac, Charles Univ, Prague, Czech Republic. ond Medical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in plasma was found in healthy in- Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is characterised by predisposition to a dividuals, but its concentration can increase in patient with cancer . In broad spectrum of cancers . The syndrome is associated with germline these, total plasmatic cfDNA is the mixture of DNA from normal and TP53 mutations, usually missense . The aberrant protein produced from tumor cells . Genetic analysis of tumor cfDNA in plasma could be a the mutated TP53 allele is expected to cause tumour development . non-invasive tool for early diagnostics and other study of pulmonary tu- However, a possibility remains that haploinsufficiency of the normal mors . The concentration of total cfDNA was measured by quantitative TP53 allele could also be responsible for the phenotype . We analysed real-time PCR . We analysed total cfDNA by using time-release PCR two LFS families with nonsense germline TP53 mutations . Nonsense- with primers for short tandem repeats (STR) located at tumor supres- mediated RNA decay (NMD) eliminates transcripts with premature ter- sor genes TP53, APC, and FHIT: diTP53, D5S346, D5S318, D5S299, mination codons (PTC) . In LFS families with nonsense mutations NMD D5S82, D3S1300, D3S1560 . We have studied loss of heterozygosity could thus influence phenotype, because the removal of mutated tran- (LOH) or microsatellite instability by using capillary electrophoresis . scripts would lead to the absence of the aberrant protein . TP53 alleles DNA from periferal nucleated blood cells from the same patient served were analysed in normal tissues (lymphocytes, adrenal gland) and in as a control . We have analysed cfDNA of patients with lung cancer (n = tumours of both families on DNA and RNA levels . In normal tissues 33), with other pulmonary non-tumor diseases (17), and control group the transcripts of mutated alleles were eliminated, similar to some of of healthy individuals (29) . We have proved simultaneous presence of the tumours. This may support the notion that TP53 haploinsufficiency, LOH in multiple STR loci in majority of lung cancer patients in contrastCancer genetics  to both control groups; therefore, the presence of multiple LOH in a P04.160 sample of cfDNA could predicate lung cancer . LOH of D5S299 had Germline mutations of CDKN2A in multiple and familial the highest sensitivity, and D5S346 (both in the vicinity of APC gene) melanoma Brazilian kindreds had the highest specifity of all used primers. In the lung cancer group, A. L. R. Avila1,2, J. P. D. Neto3, G. Landmann2, D. M. Carraro1; there were two patients where one of two alleles of D5S82 or D5S318, 1Laboratory of Genomic and Molecular Biology of Treatment and Investigation respectivelly, completely disappeared; this was not seen in any indi- Center of Hospital A.C.Camargo, Sao Paolo, Brazil, 2Department of Pathology vidual in both control groups . of Hospital A.C. Camargo, Sao Paolo, Brazil, 3Department of Cuteneous Oncol- Supported by MSMT CR MSM0021620808 ogy of Hospital A.C. Camargo, Sao Paolo, Brazil. Background: Melanoma is hereditary in approximately 10% of cases . P04.158 Familial melanoma is described as a family in which either 2 first-de- M6P/IGF 2R is mutated in human endometrial adenocarcinomas gree relatives are diagnosed with melanoma, or families with 3 mela- and lung cancer noma patients (irrespective of degree of relationship) . CDKN2A is the J. Pavelic; first identified and the most important melanoma susceptibility gene. Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. The mutation spectrum in the Brazilian population is unknown . The M6P/IGF 2 receptor has been shown to be mutated in a number Aim: Report our experience in screening of mutations of CDKN2A gene of human cancers and to suppress cancer cell growth, indicating it as in Brazilian kindreds with clinical diagnosis of Familial Melanoma . This a tumor suppressor . The aim of this study was to determine if the M6P/ study is part of the Melanoma Genetics Consortium, (GenoMEL) in IGF 2R is a target for mutation in human endometrial and lung can- Latin America . cers, tumors where perturbation of level of IGF’s peptides seems to be Methods: Patients with multiple or familial clustering of Melanoma were implicated in neoplastic growth by autocrine/paracrine mechanisms . genetically tested. Families were identified applying the GenoMEL di- The tumors were analyzed for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) . In those agnosis criteria . Point mutations in CDKN2A gene were screened by with LOH at one M6P/IGF 2R locus, the remaining allele was screened denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) followed for mutation in ligand binding region by direct sequencing of PCR prod- by direct sequencing . ucts . Among 10 informative adenocarcinoma samples 4 had LOH at Results: Genomic DNA of 12 patients with clinical diagnosis of famil- M6P/IGF 2R locus . Of them, two samples harbored the mutation in ial melanoma was obtained from peripheral blood samples . CDKN2A the remaining allele as well . Of 46 endometrial adenocarcinomas 16 gene was divided into 9 fragments covering the 4 exons with substan- had LOH at one IGF 2R locus . The remaining allele in 8 of these sam- tial parts of intron regions . Blood sample was collected from one adult ples contained also the mutation in the IGF 2 binding domain . As IGF healthy control that not presented mutation in CDKN2A gene and it is 2R mediate activation of the growth inhibitor TGF-b and clearance of used as a reference for DHPLC experiment . growth promoter IGF 2, whose down and up regulation are involved in malignant transformation, it is reasonable to believe that dysfunction of P04.161 IGF 2R by mutation, could also contribute to tumor development . MCR polymorphisms, phenotype and UVB radiation sensitivity in melanoma risk patients P04.159 P. Aguilera1, C. Carrera1, G. Salerni1, F. Cuellar1, Z. Ogbah2, J. A. Puig-Butille2, candidate gene screening for melanoma susceptibility M. Lecha3, J. Malvehy1, S. Puig1; C. Badenas1,2, J. Puig Butille2, M. Harland3, Z. Ogbah4, R. Cervera2, J. Malve- 1Melanoma Unit, Barcelona, Spain, 2Melanoma Unit, Genetic Service, Bar- hy5,2, M. Milà1,2, T. Bishop3, S. Puig5,2; celona, Spain, 3Photobiology and Phototherapy Unit, Dermatology Service, 1Biochemical and Molecular Genetics Service. Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Spain, 2Centro Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Background: UV radiation (UVR) plays an important role in melano- ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genetic Epidemiology Division, St. James’s Univer- cytic tumours development . History of intense intermittent sun-expo- sity Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Fundacio Clinic per a la Recerca Bio- sure, phenotypic characteristics encoding melanocortin-1 receptor medica, Barcelona, Spain, 5Dermatology Department, Melanoma Unit. Hospital gene (MC1R) and the presence of multiple nevi are risk markers to Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. develop malignant melanoma . Familiar melanoma represents 10% of Melanoma is a multifactorial and polygenic disease . The main risk all melanomas and it is supposed that genetic burden in these patients factors are number of nevi, familial predisposition and skin phototype plays a more important role than environmental factors . related to ultraviolet radiation exposition . Ten percent of cases are Objective: to study in different melanoma-risk patient settings the as- detected in a familial setting, being then inherited as an autosomal sociation between phenotypic characteristics, number of nevi, UVR dominant trait . Two high susceptibility genes have been implicated: sensitivity and polymorphisms in MC1R . CDKN2A/p14ARF and CDK4 . Mutations are detected in 20-60% of Methods: two groups of high risk melanoma patients were studied families . Nevertheless, sporadic melanoma accounts for 90% of cas- (N=32): es . The molecular basis of melanoma predisposition in such patients Group 1: Dysplastic nevus syndrome (DNS) patients (N=23) . has not been well characterized . Group 2: Melanoma patients belonging to familial melanoma (N=9) . Aim: i) to determine the real implication of CDKN2A and CDK4 in spo- UVB sensitivity, phenotypic and genotypic characterization were per- radic melanoma and to evaluate the clinical differences between muta- formed . tion carriers and non-carriers . ii) Genotyping of 265 SNPs (located in Results: patients from DNS had a higher UV-B photosensitivity (re- 38 genes) to look for low susceptibility genes implicated in melanoma duced UV-B minimal erythemal dose) compared with patients from and nevus predisposition . familiar melanoma group (mean 88mJ/cm2± 26 vs 122 mJ/cm2 ± 26; 696 melanoma patients have been screened for CDKN2A and CDK4 p<0,005) . In both groups a high percentage of MC1R polymorphisms mutations . SNP genotyping has been carried out in 260 melanoma were detected (at least 1 polymorphism in 75% of patients in group 1 patients using the GenomeLab SNPstream Genotyping System . vs 78% in group 2) . However, a different percentage of red hair type Sixteen sporadic Melanoma patients are CDKN2A mutation carriers polymorphisms (RHP) was observed in the 2 groups (20% in group 1 (2 .3%) . Mutations are more frequent in multiple melanoma (MPM) than vs 66% in group 2, p<0,01) . in single primary patients (SPM) (12 .2% vs 1%, p=0 .000) . Age at on- Conclusions: Patients affected by DNS presented high UV-B sensitiv- set is lower in mutation carriers than non-carriers (36 .63 vs 50 .63 y .o, ity, similar to North European populations or patients with photo-der- p=0,001) . A148T variant has been detected in 14 .6% of patients with matoses . Similar percentage of MC1R polymorphisms were detected MPM and in 7 .2 of SPM (p=0 .02), suggesting that A148T could act as in our both samples, however, RHPs were strongly associated with a low susceptibility allele to melanoma predisposition . Results of SNP familial melanoma, an unexpected result in our Mediterranean area . genotyping are being analized and data will be discussed . Acknowledgements: FISS: 03-0019, 05-0302 .Cancer genetics  P04.162 of plasma homocysteine level . HER-2/neu Amplification in Paraffin Embedded Tissue Sections Aim: The goal of this study was to analyses the association between of meningioma Patients MTR A2756G polymorphism and colorectal cancer in Romanian pa- O. Ozer1, F. I. Sahin1, F. Aydemir2, O. Ozen3, Z. Yilmaz1, N. Altinors2; tients . 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Means & methods: Blood samples were obtained, after informed con- Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Neuro- sent, from individuals with colorectal cancer (M:F=53:40), and healthy surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of persons (M:F=55:45) . Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral Pathology, Ankara, Turkey. blood leucocytes using commercial kits and the MTR A2756G poly- Meningiomas arise from the meningoendothelial cells and are one of morphism was assessed by PCR RFLP . the most common tumors of the central nervous system . About 90% X2 test has been used for statistical analysis (p<0 .05 was considered of meningiomas are benign. They are histologically classified as be- significant). nign (Grade1), atypical (Grade2) and anaplastic (Grade3) according to Results: This polymorphism respect Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium World Health Organization (WHO) 2007 classification of brain tumors, in both case and control groups (χ2=0,195, p=0,658; χ2=0,541, which also correlates with disease prognosis . Numerical and struc- p=0,461) . tural chromosome abnormalities have been reported in meningiomas . The procentual distribution of A2756G AA:AG:GG in patients and con- HER-2/neu gene is located on 17q11 .2-q12 chromosome region and trols was 63,4:33,4:3,2 and 67: 31:2 respectively . In our study, the fre- encodes an epidermal growth factor receptor . HER-2/neu gene ampli- quency of genotype GG was appropriate that in other European series fication and/or over expression have been detected in some human (approximately 3 percent) . cancers and studied most widely in breast carcinomas . Previous stud- For MTR polymorphism, distribution of genotype frequencies and al- ies have shown the importance of HER-2/neu gene amplification on lele frequencies don’t differed significantly between cancer patients the prognosis of meningioma cases . In this study, we aimed to detect and control (X2 =0,269, p= 0,603; respectively X2=0,364, p=0,54) . HER-2/neu gene copy number in archive materials of 55 meningioma Conclusions: In this study, we find no association between MTR patients by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) . The patients includ- A2756G polymorphism and colorectal cancer Romanian patients . ed in the study have been operated in the neurosurgery department of Thus, this potential link must be evaluated between in much powerful our hospital between 1999 and 2002. Tissue samples were classified studies . histologically according to WHO 2007 guidelines . We found HER-2/ neu gene amplification in 7 (12,73%) patients. Another 2 patients had P04.165 only one signal for the HER2-neu region. We confirmed this finding Paraganglioma in a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia by a second hybridization with chromosome 17p13 .1 (p53) probe . Ac- type 1: Preservation of the MEN gene heterozygosity and cording to our results, HER-2/neu amplification could be regarded as detection of the somatic point mutation in the wild-type allele an additional genetic factor playing role in meningioma pathogenesis A. Sakurai1, A. Murakami2, K. Sano1, S. Uchino2, Y. Fukushima1; together with known chromosomal abnormalities . 1Shinshu Univerisity School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 2Noguchi Thyroid Clinic, Beppu, Japan. P04.163 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal domi- methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene (mtHFR) 677c>t nantly inherited disorder characterized by hyperplastic and neoplas- polymorphism in serbian oral squamous cell carcinoma and tic disorders in endocrine organs such as parathyroid, anterior pitu- basal cell carcinoma patients itary and endocrine pancreas . Development of pheochromocytoma in R. Milicevic1, B. Ilic2, D. Jelovac2, J. Milosevic3, T. Damnjanovic4, M. Vukadi- patients with MEN1 is very rare and there have been only a handful novic2, V. Konstantinovic2, J. Milasin2; of case reports . Paraganglioma in MEN1 has not been reported in 1Pediatric Clinic, Nis, Serbia, 2School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 3School of English literature . Involvement of MEN1 gene in pheochromocytoma/ Denistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 4School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia. paraganglioma has not been examined and molecular mechanism of Enzyme methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) regulates in- development of such tumors remains elusive . Here we report a pa- tracellular folate metabolism through conversion of 5,10-methylenetet- tient with MEN1 who developed retroperitoneal paraganglioma . The rahydrofolate to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, which in turn play an impor- patient, a 63-year-old Japanese woman, was referred to us because tant role in cancerogenesis because of its involvement in DNA methyla- of retroperitoneal tumor . She had been diagnosed as having MEN1 tion and nucleotide synthesis . A common genetic polymorphism in the (primary hyperparathyroidism and pituitary tumor) and genetic testing MTHFR gene - C677T is associated with thermolability and decreased had revealed a heterozygous mutation in exon 10 of the MEN1 gene enzyme activity . Reduced MTHFR activity may decrease the methyla- (c1546-1547insC) . The tumor was surgically resected and that, patho- tion of homocysteine to methionine, resulting in DNA hypomethylation . logically diagnosed as paraganglioma, was applied to genetic analysis . The contribution of MTHFR polymorphisms to the susceptibility to vari- In addition to the germline mutation in exon 10, a somatic frameshift ous types of cancer is controversial . We investigated a possible as- mutation (c1217delA) was identified in exon 9 of the MEN1 gene in sociation of MTHFR polymorphisms 677C>T DNA prepared from the tumor; this mutation was not seen in DNA pre- and increased risk for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCCs) and pared from peripheral mononuclear cells. Allele specific amplification basal cell carcinoma (BCCs) . and subsequent sequence analysis revealed that these two mutations PCR- RFLP analysis of the MTHFR gene was performed on DNA ob- exist on the different allele, indicating both alleles are functionally lost tained from 40 SCC and 35 BCC patients and 400 healthy individu- in tumor cells. This was further confirmed by immunostaining study. als . The following genotype frequencies were found: 25% (CC), 67 .5% This is the first report which demonstrates causal relationship between (CT) and 7 .5% (TT) in squamous cell carcinomas; 34 .3% (CC), 57 .2% inactivation of the MEN1 gene and development of paraganglioma . (CT) and 8 .5% (TT) in basal cell carcinoma patients . Genotypes in controls were: 40% (CC), 46 (CT)% and 14% (TT) . A statistically sig- P04.166 nificant difference (p<0.05) was found in the genotype frequencies be- High frequency of the heterozygous p.i171V mutation of the tween the two tumour groups and the control . NBs1 gene in larynx cancer and multiple primary tumors I. M. Ziółkowska1, M. Maria Mosor1, M. Wierzbicka2, M. Rydzanicz1, M. Pernak- P04.164 Schwarz1, J. Nowak1; mtR AG polymorphism confer a risk for colorectal cancer 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznań, Poland, 2K. Marcinkowski University of in Romanian patients? Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland. M. L. TOMA, D. Cimponeriu, P. Apostol, M. Stavarachi, M. Cojocaru, L. Belu- The higher incidence of multiple primary tumors (MPT) is a significant sica, I. Radu, D. Usurelu, L. Gavrila; problem in head and neck tumor treatment . Recent studies suggest Institute of genetics Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. that carriers of heterozygous mutations in the NBS1 gene have an Introduction: Epidemiologic and mechanistic evidences suggest that increased risk of malignant tumor development . The aim of our re- folate is involved in colorectal neoplasia . MTR, an essential enzyme search was to assess the frequency of NBS1 mutations in patients in folate metabolism, catalyzes the remethylation of homocysteine to with larynx cancer only (LC) and with MPT . The MPT group consisted methionine . The A2756G polymorphism was implicated in modification of patients with one cancer localized in the larynx (primary or second)Cancer genetics  and another at another site . DNA from 175 patients with LC and 104 not show prognostic value in PB and BM at these treatment points . patients with MPT was analyzed using the single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) method and direct sequencing . We found P04.169 9 carriers of the p .I171V mutation among these 279 cancer patients Long-term persistence of clonal TCR and/or BCR gene and only 1 carrier among 500 population controls (0 .2%) . Four car- rearrangements in patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome riers of the p .I171V mutation were detected among 175 LC patients K. H. Chrzanowska1, H. Gregorek1, K. Dzierżanowska-Fangrat1, M. Nowak1, A. (2 .3%) and 5 among 104 patients with MPT (4 .8%) . The frequencies W. Langerak2; of the p.I171V mutation carriers in LC and MPT patients were signifi- 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Erasmus MC, cantly higher than in controls (OR=11 .7, CI 1 .3-105 .2, p=0 .0175 and University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. OR=25 .2, CI 2 .9-218 .2, p=0 .0007; respectively) . In 1 individual with Background: Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), caused by muta- LC, a novel molecular variant c.1222A>G (p.K408E) was identified. tions in the NBN gene, is an autosomal recessive chromosomal insta- No carriers of p .R215W or 657del5 NBS1 mutations were found in the bility syndrome associated with high cancer risk . The NBN protein is a present study. These findings imply that heterozygous carriers of the component of the MRE11/RAD50/NBN complex involved in process- p .I171V mutation are prone to the development of larynx cancer and ing DNA double-strand breaks . It is therefore particularly important to may, in addition, display an increased risk of second tumors at other study abnormal recombination events in NBS patients, given the inher- sites . ited predisposition to develop lymphomas and leukemias . Objectives: The aim of this study was a longitudinal analysis of T-cell P04.167 receptor (TCR) and immunoglobulin/B-cell receptor (BCR) gene re- cpG island methylator phenotype in primary neuroblastomas is arrangements in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) in NBS associated with poor survival patients, and their correlation with eventual lymphoma development . E. Grau, S. Oltra, F. Martínez, C. Orellana, A. Canete, M. Hernandez, V. Castel; Patients and methods: A total of 50 NBS patients (all carrying the Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. 657del5 mutation on both alleles of the NBN gene) were periodical- Hypermethylation of CpG islands (CGIs) is an epigenetic phenomenon ly monitored for clonality of TCR and BCR gene rearrangements in that contributes to carcinogenesis . We have determined the methyla- PBMC by multiplex PCR-heteroduplex analysis . The same method tion pattern of several genes involved in distinct biological pathways was also used for molecular analysis of lymphoma tissues . Identity of in neuroblastoma (NB), one of the most common pediatric solid tu- clonal blood and/or tissue rearrangements was determined by direct mors. 82 primary NB tumors were studied by methylation specific PCR sequencing . (MSP) for twenty genes . Three of them were excluded (MGMT, SYK Results: Seventeen NBS patients showed long-lasting clonal TCR and GSTP) because showed no evidence of promoter hypermethyl- and/or BCR rearrangements in PBMC, and identical clones persisted ation. CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) status was defined as up to 4 years . Seven of these patients developed lymphomas, and hypermethylation of more than 50% from the 17 genes analyzed . in some of them clonal blood rearrangements preceded diagnosis of We found that some genes as TMS1, CASP8, THBS1, CCND2, lymphoma with identical clonality by 2 years . RASSF1A, BLU, EMP3 or DR4 are more frequently methylated in NB Conclusions: NBS patients often show clonal TCR and/or BCR gene cases with a poor prognosis. CIMP status was significantly associ- rearrangements in PBMC. However, the clinical significance of this ated with disease stage (P=0,0002), risk group (P=0,00004), age at phenomenon requires further investigation . diagnosis ((P=0,0007), N-myc amplification (P=0,005) and 1p deletion This study was supported by grant No 2 P05A 118 29 from the Polish (P=0,003) . By a Kaplan-Meier analysis, the 27 CIMP+ cases showed Ministry of Science and Higher Education . significantly poorer disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0,0084) and overall survival (OS) (P=0,0062) than the 55 CIMP- cases . However, Cox re- P04.170 gression analysis failed to demonstrate that CIMP was an independent Analysis of the 3’-UtR region of cOX-2 gene in Nmsc patients factor to the remaining variables, except for the clinical stage . after transplantation We conclude that CIMP status could strongly influence on OS in NB tu- R. Brentonego1, M. Gomez Lira1, G. Tessari2, S. Mazzola1, L. Naldi3, G. Re- mors, being a better prognosis factor than the other high-risk variables muzzi4, L. Boschiero5, A. Forni6, C. Rigiu7, S. Piaserico8, G. Girolomoni2, A. except for the disease stage . Thus the presence of CIMP may lead to Turco1; a poor prognosis by induction of CGIs methylation . 1Departments of Mother and Child, Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, P04.168 Section of Dermatology and Venereal Diseases, University of Verona, Verona, DcX expression in bone marrow after induction correlates whit Italy, 3Centro Studi Gruppo Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Dermatologia, reduced survival in high-risk neuroblastoma patients Bergamo, Italy, 4Department of Nephrology, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, S. Oltra, E. Grau, C. Orellana, F. Martinez, C. Fernandez, A. Cañete, V. Castel; Bergamo, Italy, 5Kidney Transplantation Center, University of Verona, Verona, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. Italy, 6Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Verona, Verona, Verona, Italy, Background: Detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) in bone 7Department of Nephrology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 8Department of marrow (BM) and peripheral blood (PB) is crutial for follow-up in high- Dermatology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. risk neuroblastoma patients and might impact on survival . Near up to 40% of transplant recipients experience non-melanoma Methods: Relative quantification of DCX and TH was studied by quan- skin cancer (NMSC) . Various risk factors, including immunosuppres- titative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) sive treatment, infection with papiloma virus, and exposure to UV ra- using Assays on Demand from Applied Biosystems (Oltra et al ., 2005, diation contribute to the enhanced cutaneous carcinogenesis in this Diagn Mol Pathol . 14: 53-57) . We studied DCX and TH expression in patients . UV radiation can promote carcinogenesis by its ability to in- 87 high risk neuroblastoma patients (78 stage 4 and 9 stage 3) treated duce formation of prostaglandins, which may then function as tumor according cooperative national protocols in Spain . promoters, or may enhance initiation because of their ability to act as Results: The frequency of DCX and TH detection at diagnosis in BM oxidants . Cyclooxigenase-2 (COX-2) is the key enzyme in the produc- was 75,3% and 76,7% . After induction chemotherapy the frequency of tion of prostaglandins . High levels of COX-2 has been reported in vari- both markers decreased to 37,8% and 28,9% . In PB samples the fre- ous epithelial cancer, including those of the skin . Expression of COX-2 quency of DCX and TH was 58,3% and 50%, respectively, at diagnosis are in part regulated by the 3’UTR which modulates the stability of and 12,5% and 15,6% after induction . the transcript . One polymorphism (8473T>C) in the 3’ UTR region has Only the DCX expression in BM after induction chemotherapy showed been reported in association with breast and lung cancer risks . a statistically significant predictive value. Five years overall survival This study was designed to investigate if polymorphism 8473T>C or (OS) and event-free survival (EFS) were significantly reduced in pa- other polymorphisms in the 3’UTR region can contribute to NMSC after tients with DCX expression in BM after induction (p<0,002) . transplantation . Genotyping of polymorphism 8473T>C in 150 patients Conclusions: DCX expression in BM after induction chemotherapy and 180 controls demonstrated no significant differences, also stratify- showed a statistically significant impact on OS and EFS in high risk ing by kind of tumor (p value>0 .2) . Moreover no appreciable difference neuroblastoma patients . In contrast, DCX expression in BM or PB at were noted in functional analysis to test influence of C or T variant. diagnosis did not show a disease prognostic value . TH expression did Screening for new polymorphisms was performed in 30 NMSC and 30Cancer genetics 0 controls, by heteroduplex analysis . We analyzed sequences contain- evidence for Y-derived sequences . GB in dysgenetic gonads and its ing binding sites for stabilization elements and putative sequences of counterpart, carcinoma in situ (CIS) in well-differentiated testicular tis- microRNAs binding sites . One polymorphism was found (rs4648290) sue, may be the earliest stages in the development of malignant germ which is located in a microRNA binding site . Genotyping of this variant cell tumors (GCTs) . Although the mechanisms that trigger neoplastic is ongoing and functional effects will be analized . progression are still unknown, several pathways have been proposed . Abnormal OCT3/4 expression is the most robust risk factor for malig- P04.171 nant transformation . This transcription factor regulates the pluripotency copy Number Alterations of HER and EGFR Genes in Non- of embryonic stem cells and is necessary for the survival and migra- small cell Lung cancer (NscLc) tion of primordial germ cells and has been associated with the germ M. Ozdemir1, P. Uludag1, A. Uludag1, B. Durak1, N. Buyukpinarbasili2, E. Te- cell neoplastic process. OCT3/4 and β-catenin might both be involved peli1, S. Artan1; in the same oncogenic pathway, both genes are master regulators of 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical cell differentiation and overexpression of either gene may result in Genetics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Istanbul Yedikule Chest Disease Hospital, Depart- cancer development. The mechanism by which β-catenin participates ment of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey. in GB transformation is not completely clear . In an effort to elucidate PURPOSE: Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and HER2 are the participation of β-catenin and E-cadherin, as well as OCT3/4, in the members of EGFR family . They are transmembrane proteins with the GB oncogenic pathways, we analyzed those molecules in seven tyrosine kinase activity. EGFR and HER2 amplification and/or overex- patients with mixed gonadal dysgenesis and GB . Proposing that the pression have been reported in several types of cancer . The study was proliferation of immature germ cells in GB may be due to an interac- performed to correlate copy number variations of HER2 and EGFR tion between OCT3/4 and accumulated β-catenin in the nuclei of the genes with histopathological features of NSCLC samples . MATERI- immature germ cells . ALS-METHODS: Copy number status of the genes was assesed us- ing FISH in 100 archivial materials . RESULTS: 75 % of the samples P04.174 successfully analysed by FISH. HER2 amplification was only detected An inherited mitochondrial DNA disruptive mutation in high grade tumors whereas EGFR amplification was significantly preferentially selected in oncocytic tumor cells seen in high grade (16/75) tumors but also less frequently detected G. Gasparre1, L. F. Pennisi1, L. Iommarini2, A. M. Porcelli3, M. Lang1, G. Ferri4, in low-grade samples. Both of the gene amplifications were detected I. Kurelac1, A. Ghelli3, E. Bonora1, C. Ceccarelli5, M. Rugolo3, N. Salfi5, G. Ro- in histologically proved squamous cell and adenocarcinoma tumors in meo1, V. Carelli2; about equal frequencies. Amplification of EGFR also correlated with 1Unità Operativa Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze smoking. CONCLUSION: The amplification of EGFR and HER2 in Neurologiche - University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Biologia NCLSC patients may play important role in the pathogenesis of lung Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Dip. Sc. carcinoma . Chirurgiche Specialistiche ed Anestesiologiche-Policlinico Sant’Orsola Malpi- ghi, Bologna, Italy, 5U.O.Anatomia e Istologia Patologica-Policlinico Sant’Orsola P04.172 Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. Studying Amplification Status of HER2/NEU and EGFR Oncocytic tumors are characterized by cells with aberrant mitochondri- Oncogenes in Non-small cell Lung cancers by Real-time PcR al hyperplasia . Somatic mutations in mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) technique affecting respiratory chain complex I subunits have been previously M. H. Muslumanoglu1, D. Uzun1, O. Cilingir1, M. Ozdemir1, N. Buyukpinar- reported in this type of neoplasia. We report the first case of inherited basili2, E. Tepeli1, S. Artan1; frameshift complex I mutation in the ND5 gene associated with a spe- 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical cific tumor phenotype. Genetics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Istanbul Yedikule Chest Disease Hospital, Depart- The mtDNA was sequenced in microdissected areas from an onco- ment of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey. cytic nasopharynx tumor and in different non-neoplastic tissues from AIM: Family members of Epidermal growth factor receptor, EGFR and the patient and two of his siblings in order to confirm inheritance of Her2/neu oncogenes, code transmembran proteins which exhibit ty- the mutation . Immunohistochemical analysis for complex I subunits rosine kinase activity . The family members play major roles in signal was performed on tumor tissue to study protein expression and re- transducing pathways. Amplification /overexpression of these protoon- sults confirmed by western blot. Quantification of the mutation load cogenes have been identified in various cancer types including NSCLC. in mitochondria and of the total mtDNA copy number in the tissues The study was performed to correlate copy number variations of HER2 analyzed for the patient and his siblings was performed . The oncocy- and EGFR genes with histopathological features of NSCLC samples, toma harbors a frameshift homoplasmic (all mtDNA copies mutated) smoking status and family histories of the cases . MATERIALS-METH- ND5 mutation which correlated with lack of expression of another mi- ODS: DNAs were extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tochondrially coded complex I subunit (ND6) . Conversely, oncocytic sections obtained from 100 patients with NSCLC and amplification lev- cells expressing ND6 show heteroplasmy for the ND5 mutation and a els of HER2 and EGFR were assesed by real-time PCR . RESULTS: de novo homoplasmic pathogenic ND1 mutation . Such cells also pres- The HER2/neu and EGFR gene amplifications were measured quan- ent a lower degree of mitochondrial hyperplasia as shown by mtDNA titatively in 18% and 26% of tumors, respectively . HER2 and EGFR copy number . The ND5 mutation is heteroplasmic in all normal tissues amplifications were significantly detected in high grade tumors and of the patient and his siblings indicating a shift to homoplasmy only in HER2 gene amplification was only seen in tumors of smoking cases. the tumor . Amplification of EGFR also correlated with smoking. CONCLUSION: Since shift to homoplasmy of ND1and ND5 mutations occurs exclu- The amplification of EGFR and HER2 in NCLSC patients may play sively in tumor cells, we conclude that complex I mutations may have important role in the pathogenesis of lung carcinoma . Real-time PCR a selective advantage and accompany oncocytic transformation . is easy to operate and deserves widespread application for detection of HER2 and EGFR gene copy number variations . P04.175 Functional gene polymorphisms of 16 factors that influence risk P04.173 for oral cancer: A multivariate regression analysis of their effect Participation of OCT3/4 and β-Catenin during dysgenetic C. Yapijakis1, Z. Serefoglou1, D. Avgoustidis1, A. Vylliotis1, E. Critselis1, S. gonadal malignant transformation Spyridonidou1, E. Nkenke2, F. W. Neukam2, E. Patsouris1, E. Patsouris1, E. G. Queipo, I. Palma, S. Kofman-Alfaro; Vairaktaris1; Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina Universidad Nacional 1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Erlangen Autónoma de México SDEIPTID05-1, Mexico City, Mexico. Medical School, Erlangen, Germany. Gonadoblastoma (GB) is an in situ germ cell tumor, 30% of patients Introduction: Functional DNA polymorphisms in genes of factors re- GB develops in dysgerminoma/seminoma . GB almost exclusively af- lated to angiogenesis, inflammation and thrombosis have been asso- fects a subset of patients with Disorders of sex development (DSD), ciated with increased predisposition for oral squamous cell carcinoma in which tumor development is associated with the presence of an (OSCC) by genetic association studies performed by our group and extra Y-chromosome (either normal or abnormal), or with molecular others . This study examined the possible combinatory effect of 16Cancer genetics  such gene polymorphisms in predicting the occurrence of OSCC in ever no study has been reported so far in which the clonal evolution Europeans . of tumor cells has been systematically analyzed at the intratumoral Methods: 330 Greeks and Germans were studied, consisting of 162 cell level . OSCC cases and 168 healthy controls of comparable age, gender, and Materials and methods . Chromosomal abnormalities for 46 chromo- ethnicity . A series of multivariate logistic regression models, adjusted somal regions distributed across the most frequently altered chromo- for age and gender, was constructed in order to assess the contribu- somes were studied in 29 PDAC patients using multicolor interphase tion of homozygous or heterozygous variant polymorphic genotypes FISH techniques . upon overall, early and advanced stages of OSCC development . The Results . All cases displayed numerical/structural abnormalities for at studied polymorphisms included IL1b(+3953C/T), IL-4(-590C/T), IL- least one of the 24 chromosomes analyzed . Chromosome 17 was the 6(-174G/C), IL-8(-251A/T), IL-10(-1082A/G), TNF-α(-308G/A) and most frequently altered (27/29 cases), followed by chromosomes 18 TNF-β(+252G/A), MMP-1(-1607 1G/2G), MMP-3(-1171 5A/6A), MMP- (23/29), 8 and 9 (24/29), and chromosome Y (17/21); in contrast, chro- 9(-1562C/T), TIMP-2(-418C/G), VEGF(+936C/T), GPI-α(+807C/T), mosome 22 was the less frequently altered . Of note, monosomy 9/9p- PAI-1(4G/5G), ACE(intron 16D/I) and TAFI(+325C/T) . was positively associated with 17p and 18q deletions . Overall, only Results: The contribution of TNF-α and IL-6 polymorphisms was con- 3 (7%) of the 29 cases analyzed had a single tumor cell clone while sistent and robust in almost all models constructed . Furthermore, when most cases (93%) displayed two or more clones . The most frequent the mode of inheritance of each variant allele was taken into account in ancestral tumor cell clones were characterized by deletion of 9p, 17p, a multivariate logistic regression model, five polymorphisms emerged 18q and Y nulisomy . as primary predictors for all OSCC stages: TIMP-2(OR=26 .33; Conclusions . Our results show that, as in other tumors, progression 95%CI=12.39-55.95), TNF-α(OR=15.27; 95%CI=7.30-31.96), IL- of PDAC is a multi-step process in which neoplastic cells develop ge- 6(OR=8 .33; 95%CI=3 .95-17 .58), IL-8(OR=3 .54; 95%CI=1 .69-7 .43) nome-wide instability evidenced at the intratumoral cell level leading and IL-10(OR=2 .65; 95%CI=1 .28-5 .46) . to the emergence of multiple clonal populations with different chromo- Conclusions: The highly significant contribution of 5 out of 16 stud- some abnormalities within the same tumor . This study also provides ied factors in the occurrence of OSCC was revealed . Based on these evidence about different patterns of intratumoral clonal evolution which findings and previous reports, possible interactions of the implicated had not been previously reported . factors leading to OSCC development, as well as an algorithm of risk estimation will be discussed . P04.178 Genetic variation and haplotype structures of the gene encoding P04.176 human thymidylate synthase, a pharmacogenetic marker in P53 and bcl-2 in the pathogenesis of oral squamous cell fluoropyrimidine-treated cancer patients carcinoma M. Baiget, L. Paré, E. del Rio, P. Gallano, E. Tizzano, J. Salazar; B. Popovic1, I. Novakovic2, B. Jekic2, D. Jelovac1, B. Ilic1, V. Konstantinovic1, J. Genetics. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Milasin1; Thymidylate synthase (TS) activity is an important determinant of re- 1School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 2School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia. sponse to chemotherapy with fluoropyrimidine prodrugs and its expres- The imbalance between the rate of cell proliferation and apoptosis in sion is largely determined by polymorphic features in the 5’ UTR region tumour tissue is due to numerous genetic and epigenetic factors . Two of the TS gene that can modify the number of the functional USF pro- of the most important cancer genes, contributing to pathogenesis of tein binding sites . DNA was extracted from peripheral blood from 587 oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) are p53 and bcl-2 . Mutated caucasian cancer patients . Genotyping was performed by PCR ampli- p53 gene is associated with the inability of the cell to repair DNA le- fication of the repeat region followed by automated sequencing sions or to induce apoptosis . Consequently, increased expression of Results: the antiapoptotic marker bcl-2 in tumour cells is expected . Based on # Functional Colorectal can- Breast can- this regulation pathway, in the present study we analyzed the asso- USF Genotypes* cer cer ciation between the presence of mutated p53 gene and expression binding sites N (%) N (%) of bcl-2 protein . Mutational analysis of exons 5-8 of p53 was done 2RGC/2RCC 0 (0 .0) 1 (0 .6) 1 by SSCP followed by sequencing . Expression of bcl-2 was analyzed 2RCC/3RGCC 3 (0 .7)) 0 (0 .0) 2RGC/2RGC 75 (17 .8) 40 (24,1) by immunohistochemistry . According to results of mutational and im- 3RGCC/3RGCC 44 (10 .6) 13 (7,8) munohistochemical analyses, performed on 28 specimens of OSCCs, 2RGC/3RGCC 103 (24 .5) 45 (27,1) 60% of samples showed simultaneously the presence of mutated p53 2RCC/3RGGC 2 (0 .5) 0 (0 .0) gene and expressed bcl-2 oncoprotein . Independently of p53 status, 2 2RGC/ 4 (1 .0) 1 (0 .6) the expression of bcl-2 was detected in 68% cases . Both analyzed 3RGCC+ins6pb markers showed an increased rate of mutation/expression in tumors 3RGCC/ 3 (0,7) 2 (1 .2) of higher clinical stages . 3RGCC+ins6bp The positive association between changes in p53 and bcl-2, point 3RGGC/3RGCC 75 (17 .8) 25 (15 .1) 2RGC/3RGGC 73 (17 .3) 27 (16 .3) at deep deregulation of apoptosis which is in agreement with the in- 2RGc+ins4bp/ creased proliferative potential of OSCCs . 3 1 (0 .2) 0 (0 .0) 3RGGC Routine analysis of these markers in tumour samples obtained after 3RGGC/ surgery might be valuable in the assessment of tumour aggressive- 3RGCC+ins6bp 3 (0 .7) 0 (0 .0) ness . 3RGGC/3RGGC 32 (7 .6) 12 (7 .2) 2RGG/3RGGC 1 (0 .2) 0 (0 .0) 4 P04.177 2RGC/4RGGGC 1 (0 .2) 0 (0 .0) intratumoral patterns of clonal evolution in Ductal Pancreatic 3RGGC/4RGGCC 1 (0 .2) 0 (0 .0) Adenocarcinoma by multicolour interphase fluorescence in situ Total N: 421 Total N: 166 hibridization (iFisH). In bold: novel allele. *According to Lincz et al. Int. J. Cancer 2007; 120:1930-34. M. L. Gutiérrez1, L. Muñoz-Bellvis2, J. M. Sayagues1, O. Bengoechea3, M. M. We define the genotypes of the 5’UTR region of the TS gene in a large cohort of cau- Abad3, A. Orfao1; casian cancer patients and we determine the number of functional USF binding sites 1Servicio General de Citometría, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Uni- that can be used as a pharmacogenetic marker in patients treated with fluoropyrimi- versidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad de Cirugía Hepática, dines. The recently described 2RCC allele was also found in 6 patients, in all cases in Biliar y Pancreática, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, heterozygous form. We identify a novel allele containing a 4bp insertion (cgcc) in the 3Departmento de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, inverted repeat sequence located 2bp prior to the ATG start codon. Salamanca, Spain. Grant support: Fondo de Iinvestigaciones Sanitarias (FIS 05-1218). CIBERER, Bar- Introduction . Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a fatal dis- celona Spain. ease with an almost uniform 5-year mortality rates . Understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in tumor development and progres- sion are a prerequisite to improve early diagnosis and therapy . How-Cancer genetics  P04.179 2Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. molecular genetic analysis of apparently sporadic Recent compelling evidence demonstrates chromosome 8q24 as pheochromocytomas and paraganglioma in czech patients a prostate cancer (PC) susceptibility locus . Multiple variants within Z. Musil1, J. Vesela1, A. Krepelova1,2, A. Panczak1, J. Widimsky3, T. Zelinka3, A. three adjacent regions at 8q24 have been identified to impact the risk Puchmajerova2, M. Simandlova2, Z. Frysak4, J. Vaclavik4, M. Kohoutova1; of PC . Most commonly assessed variants are rs1447295 (region1), 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, rs16901979 (region2) and rs6983267 (region3) . Although regions 1 Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Fac- and 3 are close together, they are separated by a recombination hot- ulty of Medicine and Teaching Hospital at Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 33rd spot among individuals of European ancestry . Hence, all three neigh- Medical Department - Clinical Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, boring regions seem to contribute independently to the PC risk, and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 43rd Clinical Department, the combined effects of SNPs across regions follow a multiplicative Faculty of Medicine and Faculty Hospital, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech model . In order to examine the association between the PC risk and all Republic. three regions of 8q24 we designed a case-control study of randomly Pheochromocytoma is a tumor arising in adrenal or extra-adrenal sites selected PC patients and controls without history of any malignant dis- and occurs as a sporadic form or, less frequently, in familial setting as ease . Herein, we present the results of the association of PC risk and a part of inherited syndromes . Paraganglioma of the head and neck rs10505470 variant which is known to be in strong LD with rs6983267 occurs mostly sporadically and also in syndromic or non-syndromic in region 3 . The rs10505470 genotypes were determined using cus- familial settings . To date, four susceptibility genes for pheochromocy- tom designed TaqMan SNP genotyping assay on a Real-time PCR toma have been reported that included RET proto-oncogene, VHL tu- analyzer (MxPro 3005P) . We did not observe a difference in overall al- mor suppressor gene, and recently identified genes SDHB and SDHD lelic frequencies and genotype distribution {(A allele 0 .518 for patients; for succinate dehydrogenase subunit B and D, respectively . Mutations 0 .516 for controls); (AA 28 .24%, AG 47 .06%, GG 24 .71% for patients; in these genes can predispose an individual to pheochromocytoma AA 27 .60%, AG 47 .92%, GG 24 .48% for controls)} . Furthermore there and/or paraganglioma . All these genes were analyzed to investigate was no significant difference after stratification of patients in subgroups possible genetic cause of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in according to age and Gleason score. Our findings led us to conclude population of Czech patients . Among 147 patients two novel germline that rs10505470 variant is not implicated with PC risk, time of onset or (missense) mutations were found in the VHL gene . Further, one novel PC aggressiveness in Macedonian population . coding single nucleotide polymorphism and one inversion, both in SDHB gene, were detected . In one case of isolated pediatric onset of P04.182 neuroblastoma and paraganglioma we detected a novel splice site mu- Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase, a novel specific biomarker for tation in SDHB gene . In addition, in one examined patient with para- prostate cancer ganglioma we detected mutation of the start codon in SDHD gene . R. O. Dumache1, B. G. Bumbacila1, A. Anghel1, F. Miclea2, M. Puiu3; Supported by the grant project MSMT CR MSM0021620808 1’Victor Babes’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2’Victor Babes’ University of P04.180 Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Urology Department, Timisoara, carriers of germline c.1710+1355G>c substitution in the PML Romania, 3’Victor Babes’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of gene are at an increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, Timisoara, Romania. P. Plevova1,2, S. Walczyskova1, I. Jeziskova1, A. Krepelova3, K. Langova4, E. Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase, abbreviated in data bases as AM- Silhanova1; ACR or P504S, is a 382 amino acid protein that plays a critical role in 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, peroxisomal and mitochondrial beta oxidation of branched chain fatty 2Medical Faculty, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 33. Institute of acid and bile acid intermediates, dihydroxycholestanoic acid and trihy- Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, droxycholestanoic acid, molecules. Specifically, it catalyses the con- 4Institute of Biophysics, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. version of (R) α - methyl branched chain fatty acyl CoAs to their (S) Introduction: PML (promyelocytic leukemia) is a tumor suppressor gene . stereoisomers, because only stereoisomers with the 2-methyl group We studied occurrence of c .1710+1355G>C (p .A570+232>P570+232) in the (S) position can be metabolized by peroxisomal oxidases, the substitution in alternatively spliced exon 7b of the PML gene in cancer first enzymes in the ß oxidation pathway . It is well known that the main patients . sources of branched chain fatty acids are the dairy products and red Patients and methods: Sporadic and hereditary breast, colon and meet pork and beef, the consumption of which has been associated stomach cancer and multiple colon polyposis patients were included with an increased risk for prostate cancer in men, in multiple studies . into the study . The control group included 100 non-cancer patients . We evaluated the AMACR gene expression in 32 patients aged 55 to The c .1710+1355G>C substitution was analyzed in genomic DNA us- 80, with total PSA values in a range of 2 to 40 ng/ml . 26 patients were ing restriction analysis . Its occurrence in each cancer versus control diagnosed positive for prostate intraepithelial carcinoma and they had groups was correlated using chí-square test. PSA values greater than 11 ng/ml . In these 26 men, we found by us- Results: c .1710+1355G>C was found in 7 of 64 (11%) non-BRCA1/2 ing PCR and micro array techniques on needle biopsies that they had breast cancer (p=0,683), none of 24 BRCA1/2-associated breast an over expressed gene for AMACR, too . The other 6 patients with cancer (p=0,276), 15 of 57 (26%) non-HNPCC colon cancer or mul- total PSA values smaller than 11 ng/ml, had normal expression of the tiple polyposis (p=0,003), none of 6 HNPCC-associated colon cancer AMACR gene . (p=0,988, chí-square test with Yates correction), 2 of 3 stomach cancer According to our results, we propose the use of AMACR as an im- patients (p=0,025, chí-square test with Yates correction) and 9 of 100 portant marker of prostate cancer in Urology Clinics beside PSA and (9%) controls . morphopathological diagnostic . Conclusion: Our results suggest that germline carriers of the c .1710+1355G>C substitution in alternatively spliced exon 7b of the P04.183 PML gene might be at an increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer or cAG repeat number in androgen receptor gene and prostate polyposis . cancer Acknowledgements: The project was supported by IGA MZ CR S. Trivodalieva1, N. Matevska2, A. Dimovski2, G. D. Efremov1, D. Plaseska- NR/9092-3/2006 . Karanfilska1; 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic P04.181 Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of the 8q24 rs10505470 variant is not associated with prostate Macedonia, 2Faculty of Farmacy, Farmacogenetic laboratory, Skopje, The for- cancer risk in patients from the Republic of macedonia mer Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. N. Matevska1, D. Petrovski2, S. Dzikova2, S. Banev2, V. Georgiev2, A. Sikole2, Prostate cancer (PC) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths A. J. Dimovski1; among men . The effects of androgens on prostatic tissue are medi- 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, ated by the androgen receptor (AR) through the androgen receptor- androgen complex . The 5’ end of exon 1 of the AR gene includes a polymorphic CAG triplet repeat that varies in number between 10 toCancer genetics  36 in the normal population . The lenght of the CAG repeats is inversly (PCR) . PCR products were examined by electrophoresis, sequencing . related to the transactivation function of the AR gene . There is contro- Statistical analysis of results was carried out using t-test and chi2 meth- versy over an association between short CAG repeat numbers in the ods . The mean number of CAG repeat in prostate cancer patients was AR gene and prostate cancer . The aim of this study was to evaluate significantly smaller than BPH groups (19.9 vs. 21.9 P<0.0001)). The the possible effect of short CAG repeats in the AR on prostate cancer frequencies of GSTT1 and GSTM1 positive genotypes were higher risk in Macedonian males . We studied 66 PC patients, 46 patients with in patients (65 .5%, 54 .9%) than BPH group (59 .1, 52 .3) . Our results benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 104 male patients with colon can- showed that CAG repeat polymorphism in AR gene is significantly as- cer (CC) and 152 males from the general population . The CAG repeat sociated with higher prostate cancer risk, suggesting that it may act number was determined by fluorescent PCR amplification of exon 1 as a risk modifier to cancer patients in Iranian population.GSTT1 and of AR gene followed by capillary electrophoresis on ABI PRISM 310 GSTM1 positive genotypes also may be contributed to prostate cancer Genetic Analyzer . The mean CAG repeat lenght among PC patients susceptibility in Iranian patients . was significantly lower (21.4+2 .6) in comparison to the BPH patients (22 .7+2 .2; p=0 .007), CC patients (22 .6+3 .1; p=0 .008) and males from P04.186 general population (22 .3+2.8; p=0.029). We found a significantly high- TMPRSS2/ERG4 fusion gene is a novel hormone refractory er percentage of short CAG repeats (<21) in PC patients (56 .1%) than marker of prostate cancer in BPH patients (21 .7%; p = 0 .0002) . Our results suggest that short T. V. Kekeeva1, Y. Y. Andreeva2, G. A. Frank2, D. V. Zaletaev1,3, M. V. Nemtso- CAG repeats are associated with an increased prostate cancer risk in va1,3; Macedonian men . 1Moscow medical academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Genetic P04.184 Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. the Galician splicing mutation p.R71G in the BRCA gene is Recurrent gene fusions involving oncogenic ETS transcription factors not found at an increased frequency in Galician prostate cancer (including ERG, ETV1, and ETV4) have been identified in a large frac- patients tion of prostate cancers . The most common fusions contain the 5’ un- L. Fachal1, A. Carballo2, A. Blanco1, P. Peleteiro2, O. Lortes1, M. Magdalena1, translated region of TMPRSS2 fused to ERG . TMPRSS2-ERG gene C. Ruíz-Ponte1, A. Gómez2, Á. Carracedo1, A. Vega1; fusion leading to the androgenic induction of the ERG proto-oncogene 1Fundación Pública Gallega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Grupo de Me- expression is a highly prevalent oncogenic alteration in prostate tu- dicina Xenómica-USC, CIBER-ER, Santiago de Compostela, A Coruña, Spain, mor cells . To assess the role of TMPRSS2-ERG alteration in pros- 2Servicio Radioterapia, Hospital Clínico de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago tate cancer onset and/or progression, we have evaluated the status de Compostela, A Coruña, Spain. of fusion transcripts in 72 whole-mount prostatectomy specimens of The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium and other family-based ascer- patients with pT1-T4 prostate cancer stage . We tested for the pres- tainment have suggested that male carriers of BRCA mutations are at ence of TMPRSS2:ERG, TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4 gene increased risk of prostate cancer . However, several series looking at fusion product, using RT-PCR and direct sequencing . Overall, 36 of 72 the frequency of BRCA mutations in unselected patients with prostate (50%) patients exhibited TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcripts in prostate cancer have not confirmed this finding. In the Galician population, one cancer samples . There are no TMPRSS2:ETV1 and TMPRSS2:ETV4 splicing founder mutation p .R71G in the BRCA1 gene is present in fusion transcripts in adenocarcinoma specimens . TMPRSS2-ERG more than 50% of the breast/ovarian cancer families with mutations . expression was correlated with prostate cancer stage . We observed To assess the contribution of p .R71G to prostate cancer morbidity we significantly difference between hormone ablation therapy patients conducted a case-control study in prostate cancer patients . Blood group and group without hormone therapy (p=0 .02) . Patients without specimens from 257 unselected Galician men with prostate cancer TMPRSS2-ERG expression are shown no response to hormone treat- were screened for the presence of the common Galician founder mu- ment . tation in BRCA1. As a control group 250 Galician male volunteers with- TMPRSS2-ERG is the most common genetic aberration so far de- out prostate cancer were genotyped . We found that mutation p .R71G scribed in human malignancies . Furthermore, its clinical application as was completely absent in our cohort . Therefore, our result suggests a hormone resistant biomarker is promising perspective for prostate that the contribution of BRCA1 germline mutations in prostate cancer cancer therapy scheming . morbidity is probably negligible . P04.187 P04.185 mitochondrial implication in Prostate cancer: mitochondrial study of Gstm1 , Gstt1 polymorphisms and cAG microsatellite gene expression repeat length of the androgen receptor gene in iranian prostate M. López de Heredia1,2, J. Abril1, R. Clèries3, L. González1,2, M. Nadal1, M. cancer patients Gómez-Zaera1, V. Nunes1,4,2; Z. Ousati - Ashtiani1, M. Modarressi1, H. Ayati2, B. Sabah Goulian3, M. Aarabi4, 1Centro de Genética Médica y Molecular, IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, S. M. Hasheminasab1; Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras 1-Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Sciences/University of Tehran, (CIBERER) U-730, ISCIII, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Servicio de Epi- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Urology, Medical Sciences/ demiología, ICO, Hospital Duran i Reynals, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Bistoon, Ultrasound 4Unidad de Genética. Departamento de Ciencias Fisiológicas II, UB-IDIBELL, Clinic,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Reproductive Genet- L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. ics and Biotechnology, Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, Avesina Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most common cancers among Research Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. male population in the world, being responsible for 6% of all deaths by Androgens which act through androgen receptors (ARs) are required cancer in males . In spite of its relevance and the progressive increase for growth and normal prostate function . ARs are important for devel- in the number of cases detected, the mechanisms that account for its opment and progression of prostate cancer . AR gene contains CAG genesis and development are unknown . Genomic studies have sug- repeats and it has been hypothesized that, shorter alleles of the CAG gested that genes from mitochondrial respiratory chain, Krebs cycle repeat are associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer . Ethnic and the glutathion reductase anti-oxidant system may be involved in variation in CAG repeat length may contribute to variable prostate can- PCa . In order to broadening our knowledge on the mitochondrial role cer risks in different populations .Genetic polymorphism of metabolic in PCa carcinogenesis and progression, we have analyzed in paired enzymes such as Glutathione S-transferases is involved in metabolism samples (normal-tumor) from PCa patients, the presence of mutations of numerous potential prostate carcinogens . The frequencies of homo- in mitochondrial genome (by direct sequencing); mtDNA amount (by zygous carriers of GSTT1, GSTM1 deletions vary significantly within quantitative PCR); and mRNA expression of genes with mitochondrial ethnic groups and may be contributed to prostate cancer risk . To eval- functions encoded either by mitochondrial genome (MT-ND2, MT-ND4, uate whether these polymorphisms are associated with an increased MT-ND6, MT-CYB, 12S, 16S, MT-CO2, MT-ATP6) or by nuclear ge- risk in Iranian prostate cancer patients, DNA from 110 pathologically- nome (COX11, glutathion reductase/GSR, citrate sintase/CS, aconi- confirmed prostate cancer patients, 96 age-matched men with BPH tase/ACO2) . individuals were extracted and amplified by polymerase chain reaction We have observed that in spite of the presence of mutations in mtDNA,Cancer genetics  there are no changes in the amount of mtDNA . We have also observed These results seem to exclude an important role of the PTCH1 gene in a significance decrease in the expression of mitochondria-encoded NMSC susceptibility after organ transplantation . Further studies on a genes MT-12S, MT-CO2 and MT-ATP6 . larger sample are warranted to confirm these findings. Supported by MEC (SAF 2005-00166), and Generalitat de Catalunya (2006 SGR 00018) P04.190 molecular genetic and clinical survey of swiss PtEN hamartoma P04.188 tumor syndrome patients Identification of novel molecular targets for arresting prostate M. Plasilova1, N. Boesch1, C. Egenter1, B. Röthlisberger2, H. Mueller1, K. Heini- cancer cell proliferation. mann1; S. F. Gaudi1, F. Carlini1, D. De Orsi1, S. Paradisi1, G. Bozzuto1, L. Toccacieli1, G. 1Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics UKBB, Center Formisano1, A. Weisz2, R. Arcieri1, S. Vella1; of Biomedicine, University Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 2Center of 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 2Seconda Università degli Studi di Laboratory Medicine, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland. Napoli, Naple, Italy. PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is a condition caused by Retroelements (RE) represent a significant portion of the human ge- germline mutations in the PTEN (phosphatase with tensin homology) nome (45 %) and play a key role in the regulation of gene expression tumor suppressor gene which encodes a phosphatase with lipid and in mammals . RE can act as insertional mutagens altering the coding protein specificity, a negative regulator of the phosphoinositol 3-kinase integrity of genes and, particularly the gene coding for reverse tran- (PI3K) pathway . PHTS includes Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan- scriptase (RT) is tipically expressed at high level in transformed cells Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), Proteus syndrome (PS), and Pro- and tumor . teus-like syndrome, the first two being the most prevalent conditions. A large body of published data supports the conclusion that retrotrans- Here we present the results of a molecular genetic and clinical survey posons are biologically active elements and indicates that retrotrans- on 12 Swiss PHTS patients (10 CS, 2 BRRS) and their relatives re- position is an ongoing process in mammalian genomes and can trigger ferred during the past 4 years . All patients were subjected to DNA se- the onset of several pathologies including cancer . Active LINE-1 tran- quencing of the coding (incl .exon/intron boundaries) and the promoter scripts have been detected in murine embryonal carcinoma cells and region, and to gene dosage analysis . In the coding region of PTEN, in human testicular cancers, while only basal levels of RT activity have heterozygous germline mutations were identified in five CS patients been revealed in terminally differentiated cells and tissues . and one BRRS patient . The majority of the PTEN mutations were Studies developed in our research groups over the last years have found to be either nonsense point mutations or frameshift deletions . shown that the commercially available RT inhibitor, Abacavir, widely In addition, one heterozygous splice site mutation and one missense used in AIDS therapy, is able to modulate cell growth and differentia- mutation were observed. Based on these findings, the mutational tion in prostate cancer cell line (PC3) . spectrum and clinical manifestations in both, PTEN mutation carriers ABC, respectively at 10 and 100 μg/ml, is able to reduce proliferation, and those without detectable genetic alterations will be presented . In migration and invasion. We studied genome wide expression profile on particular, the clinical overlap between CS and BRRS PTEN mutation PC3 cells treated with ABC and we identified genes involved in RNA carriers will be discussed . regulation and expression. Further immuno-fluorescence experiments revealed a critical involvement of nucleolus as target of ABC action . P04.191 Finally, we discuss new approaches to treatment, including recently Evaluation of exon 2 and exon 6 mutaions of PtEN gene in discovered molecular targets that might provide more effective treat- patients with gastric cancer ment strategies with the potential for less toxicity . A. Kalaycı1, T. Cora2, H. Toy3, H. Acar4, E. Kurar5; 1Dept. of Arkeology, S.Univ, Science Fakulty, Konya, Turkey, 2Dept. of Medical P04.189 Genetics, Selcuk Univ. Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Dept. of Pathology, PtcH1 gene polymorphisms and risk of non melanoma skin S.Ü. Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, S.University, cancer after organ transplantation Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 5Dept. of Zootekni, S.Univ, Veterinary Fakulty, A. Begnini1, G. Tessari2, M. Gomez Lira1, L. Naldi2, G. Remuzzi2, L. Boschiero2, Konya, Turkey. A. Forni2, C. Rugiu2, S. Piaserico2, G. Girolomoni2, A. Turco1; Gastric cancer (GC) is still one of the most frequent causes of cancer- 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Department of Mother and Child and Biol- related deaths in all overworld . Molecular mechanism of GC has not ogy–Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Section of Dermatology, been well described . In recent years, the pathogenesis of GC related Department of Biomedical and Surgical Science, University of Verona, Verona, to the basis of the molecular and genetic changes have been investi- Italy. gated in the different populations. These changes can be classified as Organ transplant recipients (OTR) are at higher risk of non melano- activation of oncogenes, the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes, ma skin cancer (NMSC), particularly basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and the reduction of cellular adhesion, the reactivation of telomerase and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) . Risk factors for NMSC in OTR in- the presence of microsatellite instability . A novel tumor supressor clude skin type, ultraviolet light exposure, immunosuppression, human gene, PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromo- Papilloma virus infections, and genetic susceptibility . some ten), has recently been described and mapped to chromosome PTCH1 is a negative regulator of the Hedgehog pathway, that provide band 10q23 .3 region . In the present study, we evaluated the frequency mitogenic signals to basal cells in skin . PTCH1 gene mutations are re- of exon 2 and exon 6 mutaions of PTEN gene in the normal (n=47) and sponsible for nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS or Gor- tumor tissues (n=47) of the patients with GC, by using SSCP and se- lin syndrome), and also occur in sporadic forms of BCC . Associations quencing techniques . The frequency of mutations in exon 2 and exon have been demonstrated between PTCH1 polymorphisms and BCC 6 of the PTEN gene in tumor and normal tissue DNAs were compared susceptibility in non transplanted recipients . and the results were compared with the other results published for the This study was designed to investigate if known polymorphisms of other population in the literature . PTCH1 gene contribute, individually or as haplotypes, to NMSC risk after transplantation, and to identify novel genetic polymorphism in the P04.192 proximal 5’ regulatory region of the gene . High throughput, nanofluidic real-time PCR analysis of gene We analyzed the frequencies of three PTCH1 gene SNPs (rs2297086, expression in tumor samples rs2066836, rs357564) in 273 Northern Italian OTR patients (120 cases E. Ortenberg, S. Liu-Cordero, J. Hurley, T. Morrison, J. Cho, M. Kopczynski, C. and 153 controls) . Brennan, K. D. Munnelly; Single locus and haplotype frequency analysis showed no significant BioTrove, Inc., Woburn, MA, United States. associations . Understanding biological complexity arising from patterns of gene ex- Screening for polymorphisms was performed by heteroduplex analysis pression and gene function requires accurate and precise measure- in 30 cases and 30 matched controls . ment of RNA levels across large numbers of genes simultaneously . Two polymorphisms, -198A>G and -195G>C, were identified in the We demonstrate a novel highly parallel, nanofluidic system capable of 5’ flanking region. Both variants were in linkage disequilibrium and performing 3072 real-time polymerase chain reactions (rt-PCR), based showed a frequency of 0 .5% (2/400) in 200 tested individuals . on Sybr Green detection, in a miniaturized through-hole array format .Cancer genetics  The system has shown accuracy, precision and dynamic range in the primary tumor was associated with metastases in the regional lymph thirty-three nanoliter reaction volumes identical to the same reactions nodes and/or distant metastases (P = 0 .036, OR = 1 .49, 95% CI: 1 .01- performed in 100-fold larger volumes typical for rt-PCR in 384-well mi- 2 .33) . Results of this investigation could be used for selection of prog- croplates . A 64-fold increase in analytical throughput relative to 384- nostic molecular markers of clear cell renal cancer . well microplates simplified quantification of message RNA, resulting in unprecedented throughput and sensitivity suitable for detection of P04.195 low abundance nucleic acids as well as low consumable costs . We Under-representation of the REt sequence variants G691s and show the utility of this system for studying two different areas of cancer s904s in patients with a common c618R REt proto-oncogene biology . First, the expression of over 500 kinase genes was screened mutation in three types of tumor tissues and the biological significance of regu- V. Neocleous1, V. Anastasiadou2,1, M. Pantzaris1, N. Skordis2, L. A. Phylactou1; lated genes in regulating the cell cycle was confirmed. Second, we 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Makarios III studied its utility for screening for DNA methylation as a biomarker for Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. tumor detection . Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurs in a sporadic or as an au- tosomal dominant heretidary form . Inherited forms of MTC are related P04.193 to mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. Identification of polymorphic setting up of a questionnaire by the genetic counselor to variants that increase susceptibility and variations in pathological phe- optimize the collection of data during the first consultation of notypes is a frequent question that is addressed in medical genetics . In cancer genetics various studies which resulted to conflicting results a number of poly- A. Combes1, K. Baudry-Samb1, P. Pujol1, J. Duffour2, I. Coupier1,2; morphisms within the RET proto-oncogene were proposed to act as 1CHU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 2CRLC Val d’Aurelle, Montpel- low penetrance predisposing alleles . In the present study, in order to lier, France. test for the contributory role of the polymorphisms G691S and S904S, Persons presenting a hereditary predisposition for cancer are ad- in the development of MEN2A, we looked for an association of these dressed to a consultation of cancer genetics because of their personal RET haplotypes in hereditary MEN2A cases and in controls from indi- and family history of cancers . During consultation a family pedigree is viduals of Greek Cypriot origin . drawn, genetic counselor collects information to evaluate hereditary Screening for the polymorphic variants G691S/S904S was performed predisposition. All this information is difficult to obtain if the patients in 226 Greek Cypriots who served as controls and in 6 unrelated Greek are not informed of the questions which will be asked to them during Cypriot patients diagnosed with MEN2A with the C618R mutation . In consultation . controls, the allelic frequencies of G691S/S904S polymorphisms were The aim of this study is to optimize the collection of information using a found in the heterozygous state in 102/226 (45 %) individuals, and in questionnaire targeting essential data during this first consultation. the homozygous state in 11/226 (~5 %) . In all cases, these polymor- This questionnaire was addressed to all patients making an appoint- phisms were in co-segregation . This allelic frequency for the polymor- ment for a first consultation. It gathers personal and medical informa- phisms G691S/S904S of the RET gene in the Greek Cypriot popula- tion, in both parental branches over three generations . Questionnaires tion is the highest reported so far among normal individuals . More- were assessed according to two criteria : their return and filling up over, only 1/6 (16 .66 %) patients with MEN2A had the G691S/S904S rates . polymorphisms in the heterozygous state . This under-representation The return rate is 82 % (110/134). The mean filling up rate is 74 % and of the G691S/S904S polymorphic variants in MEN2A patients, might for more than 86 % of questionnaires, the amount of information is very suggest a possible synergistic and protective effect exercised by these satisfactory (questionnaires supplemented in 60, 80 and 100 %) . polymorphisms . The questionnaire has a double interest, for the patients and for the medical team . The patients collected a lot of information on their family P04.196 before their consultation . For the medical team, data necessary for the Variants in the retinoblastoma gene: neutral polymorphism or realization of the family pedigree are gathered in a more precise and pathogenic change? quicker manner . C. J. Dommering1, A. H. van der Hout2, S. M. Imhof3, A. C. Moll3, M. Burton2, Y. Considering the good return and filling up rates of this questionnaire, J. Vos2, H. J. Meijers-Heijboer1; we decided to insert it into the daily practice of our consultations . 1Department of clinical genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of genetics, University Medical Centre Gronin- P04.194 gen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department of ophthalmology, VU Univer- Analysis of the molecular-genetic alterations in the genes VHL, sity Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. RAssF1, and FHit in clear cell renal carcinomas Retinoblastoma is a malignant neoplasm of the developing retina, oc- D. S. Mikhaylenko1,2, A. M. Popov3, R. V. Kurynin4, D. V. Zaletayev1,2; curring mostly in early childhood . The birth prevalence is between 1 in 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- 15 .000 and 1 in 20 .000 . Hereditary (40% of cases) as well as non-he- tion, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine of Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, reditary (60% of cases) retinoblastoma (RB) result from inactivation of Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Radiological Research Center RAMS, both alleles of the tumor-supressor gene RB1, located on chromosome Obninsk, Russian Federation, 4Clinic of Urology of Sechenov Moscow Medical 13q14 . In hereditary RB, the mutated gene is transmitted in an autoso- Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. mal dominant way, usually with almost complete penetrance . We have Clear cell renal carcinoma accounts approximately 75% patients with performed DNA-mutation scanning (sequencing of exon 1, 15 and the kidney cancer and characterized by alterations of the genes VHL, RB1-promoter, DGGE analysis of the other exons and MLPA analy- RASSF1, FHIT . We have conducted the molecular-genetic study of sis for large deletions and duplications) in 411 RB-patients and found mutations, loss of heterozygosity, methylation of the VHL gene as well causative RB1-mutations in 173/197 (88%) bilateral/familial patients as allelic deletions of the genes RASSF1 and FHIT in 123 clear cell re- and 18/214 (8 .4%) in unilateral non-familial cases . Most mutations nal carcinomas for the development of renal cancer prognostic criteria . are nonsense changes or small insertions or deletions causing frame- VHL mutations were detected by SSCP and subsequent sequencing; shifts . However, for some changes it is not immediately clear if they are methylation was tested by methylsensitive polymerase chain reaction . pathogenic mutations or just neutral variants . These include missense Loss of heterozygosity was analyzed using STR-markers D3S1317 changes, synonymous changes, small in-frame deletions and intronic and D3S1038 (VHL), D3S1568 and D3S966 (RASSF1), D3S1234 variants at other sites than the invariable splice donor and acceptor and D3S1300 (FHIT) . VHL somatic mutations were observed in 31 .7% sequences . These variants cause serious problems in genetic coun- samples, 84.6% of them were identified for the first time. We have de- selling of RB patients and their family . We will discuss several variants tected VHL allelic deletions in 27 .9% informative cases, and aberrant with unknown significance in the RB1-gene, 15 missense changes, 11 methylation - in 14 .6% heterogeneous tumor samples . VHL inactivat- intronic variants, 2 synonymous changes en 1 in frame deletion, and ing events were presented in 53 .8% patients with stage I, and could illustrate ways to substantiate their pathogenicity . be responding for early gene inactivation . RASSF1 and FHIT allelic deletions were observed in 27 .5% and 35 .6% informative cases, cor- respondingly . Loss of heterozygosity of two or three analyzed genes inCancer genetics  P04.197 P04.200 mutation in siRNA target sequence can impair RNAi mediated A case of synovial sarcoma of the pericardium diagnosed by inhibition of EA gene expression in HEK 293 FisH on FNA material H. Vosgha, M. Behmanesh, M. Sadeghizadeh; I. Trigo1, A. Hernandez2, M. Vargas1, M. Diaz2, J. Rios2, H. Galera-Ruiz2, R. Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Gonzalez-Campora2; RNA interference (RNAi) has emerged as an effective method for si- 1Unidad de Genética., Sevilla, Spain, 2Dpt of Pathology, Sevilla, Spain. lencing gene expression in eukaryotic cells . It has tremendous poten- Case report tial as both a research tool and a therapeutic strategy . The key player We present a case of 40 year-old woman, without any previous inter- in RNAi is small RNA (~ 22nt) termed siRNA . So in this report we used esting medical history, who presented disnea, cough and fever over the E1A specific siRNA coding plasmid under U6 snRNA promoter to several weeks . Thoracic MR revealed a left posterolateral paracardial suppress E1A gene expression . Then these constructs were transfect- mass of possible pericardium origin . The cytologic study on material ed into the HEK 293 cancerous and successfully transfected cells colo- obtained by transesophagic FNA was performed and the tumour was nies were selected based on Neomycin antibiotic resistance . Changes surgically removed . Morphologic diagnosis was a malignant spindle in E1A gene expression were analysis using RT-PCR technique . Final cell tumour consistent with synovial sarcoma (immunohistochemis- findings showed no obvious difference in E1A gene expression level try profile: EMA, bcl-2,CD-99 and CK 19 positive. S-100, CD-34 and in suppression and control groups upon transfection with constructed caldesmon negative) . SYT gene rearrangement was confirmed by plasmids . In order to deduce the rationale behind no suppression of FISH techniques, verifying the localization at SSX2 gene . the E1A gene expression, we analyzed the PCR amplified sequence The synovial sarcoma is an uncommon mesenquimal tumour with of the siRNA target region of the E1A gene using sequencing tech- variable epithelial differentiation and represents 5% of cardiac sarco- nique. The findings illustrated certain mutations in this region. It has mas and less than 0 .1 of all cardiac tumours . It is characterized by been established previously that in RNAi process, occurrence of any t (X;18)(p11;q11), which is present in its four histological types . The mutation in mRNA sequence of target gene at the siRNA binding site microscopic diagnosis is very difficult and the immunochemical tech- might cause impaired interference in gene expression . Therefore even niques are helpful but not conclusive . Consequently other ancillary a single mutation in mRNA sequence cause inhibition of interference . techniques, such as FISH analysis, are primordial to precise the defini- tive diagnosis of this entity characterized by the SYT gene rearrange- P04.198 ment to SSX2 gene . In the literature review only 18 cases of heart Novel somatic mutations in the s100A2 gene in non-small cell synovial sarcoma have been described and only one of them (biphasic lung carcinoma (NscLc) type) was diagnosed by FNA material without FISH contribution . To our M. Strazisar, D. Glavac, T. Rott; knowledge no other FISH studies on cytopathologic material of syno- Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia. vial sarcoma of the pericardium have been reported in the literature . Contrary to the recent hypothesis that S100A2 is a tumour suppressor, no somatic mutations have yet been identified. We therefore screened P04.201 90 non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) samples, initially for muta- Detection of human telomerase gene (TERC) amplification in tions in S100A2 and then also for mutations in P53 and K-RAS genes . cervical neoplasia: A reterospective study of 79 patients with Alterations were detected in 46 .7 % of squamous lung cancer (SCC) normal smears or mild or moderate dyskaryosis samples, but we detected only one novel tumour specific mutation, R. E. Crookes1, M. Dyson1, J. H. F. Smith2, E. Maltby1; Q23X in squamous carcinoma . We detected four polymorphisms, two 1NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Royal Hallamshire Hospi- of them published for the first time (144+109 C/G and 297+75A/G) and tal, Sheffield, United Kingdom. two already published: S62N, in coding region and related to squa- The inclusion of a genetic marker of disease progression for cervical mous cell carcinoma, and 297+17T/C . In one tumour with the S62N carcinoma along side the histological assessment of Pap smear slides polymorphism, P53 and K-RAS genes were also mutated, while two could dramatically reduce the number of diagnostic colposcopic proce- tumours with the Q23X mutation have a P53 but no K-RAS mutation . dures currently performed and increase the sensitivity and specificity Expression profiles of hTERT and COX-2 revealed no significant cor- of cervical screening programmes . relation with tumours having also the S100A2 alterations . To the best Recent CGH studies (Heselmeyer-Haddad et al ., 2003) indicated the of our knowledge, this is the first report describing alterations in the involvement of extra copies of 3q and hence the human telomerase S100A2 gene proving the relation between polymorphic changes in gene (TERC) at 3q26, in invasive cervical carcinoma . Their retrospec- predominantly squamous lung cancer (SCC) . tive study of 59 cervical smears showed that gains of TERC could predict progression from lower grade smear abnormality (mild or mod- P04.199 erate dyskaryosis) to CIN3 and invasive carcinoma . Molecular cytogenetic characterization of paraffin-embedded We present the results of retrospective study, using the same TERC salivary gland tumors by comparative Genomic Hybridization probe kit, on a selection of 79 patients with negative, mild or moder- G. Floridia1, F. Censi1, M. Foschini2, V. Falbo1, D. Taruscio1; ate dyskaryosis that later progressed to CIN3/cervical cancer, or re- 1Istituto Superiore di SanitÃ , Dept.Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Roma, Italy, gressed to negative. In the cohort of patients classified as cytologically 2Section of Pathology, University of Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy. negative that subsequently developed CIN 3, 28 .5% were positive for Salivary gland tumours (SGTs) are rare tumors of the neck and head TERC gain. In the cohort of patients classified as mild or moderate that with an overall incidence in the Western world of approximately 2 .5- progressed to CIN3/cervical carcinoma, 60% and 82 .4% respectively 3/100 .000/year . SGTs are remarkable for their histopathologic and showed gains of TERC . In the cohort patients classed as negative, biologic diversity; they include benign and malignant tumors of epi- mild or moderate dyskaryosis that regressed or remained negative 30 thelial, mesenchymal and lymphoid origin . The study of molecular out of 33 patients were negative for TERC gains . This concurs with pathogenesis of SGTs is a challenging task because of the rarity and previous studies which have proposed that the acquisition of TERC is histopathological diversity of these malignancies . Comparative Ge- an important event in the progression of cervical dysplasia to cervical nomic Hybridization metaphase-based was performed in 10 paraffine cancer . The results demonstrate the potential use of TERC as an early embedded Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma samples (ACC) . Heterogene- prognostic detection of disease progression . ity was detected and gains predominated over losses; no recurrent anomaly was observed . However 3q29, 5q35, 16q24 and 21q22 gains, P04.202 detected in our study, have been reported and described in literature Effects of somatic mutations in tP53 on expression of genes as ACC loci . The correlation of CGH results with clinical-pathological involved in cell cycle arrest data and a comparison with literature data will be discussed . D. Macic1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, N. Obralic2, T. Ceric2, S. This work has been funded in the frame of “Programma di collabora- Beslija2, K. Bajrovic1; zione ISS-NIH , Area Malattie Rare” Fasc .526/B and Fasc .7GR1 . 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2Institute of Oncology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. The TP53, tumor suppressor gene, is a critical regulator of cell division and its inactivation at the gene or protein level contributes to onco-Cancer genetics  genesis and cancer progression . Mutations in TP53 are considered to In both cases family history was indicative of TS1, as confirmed by the represent the most common genetic alteration and occur in about 50% detection of mutations in the PMS2 and MLH1 genes . In one case, of human cancers . These mutations may damage the normal function instability was revealed in diluted DNA samples . Comparison of the of p53 as a transcription factor and the induction of repair or apoptosis MSI patterns in normal (leukocyte and intestinal mucosa) and tumor may be diminished . Consequently, genetic alterations may accumulate (glioblastoma and colorectal cancer) samples from one TS1 family in the cell . revealed that allelic size shifts were smaller in gliomas . Our results Evidences from previous studies imply that there is a clear correlation indicate that MSI analysis is an important tool to identify TS1-related between mutational status of TP53 and expression of gens down the pediatric gliomas, and that the pattern of microsatellite alterations in p53-signaling pathway . gliomas is less pronounced compared to colorectal cancer We examined the impact of mutations in DNA binding domain of p53 on expression of genes involved in cell cycle arrest, particularly CDK4 P04.205 and its inhibitor CDKN2 . Analysis of the molecular genetic changes in uveal melanoma This study included bioptic samples from 80 breast and colon cancer I. K. Manokhina1, N. V. Sklyarova2, S. V. Saakyan2, D. V. Zaletaev1; affected subjects with different malignancy grades . 1Laboratory of human molecular genetics, Institute of Molecular Medicine, I.M. To test hypothesis that mutation in TP53 can influence expression of Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Ophthal- CDK4 and CDKN2, TP53 has been subjected to mutational analysis mo-oncology and radiology department, Helmholts Moscow Research Institute by RFLP followed by sequencing . of Eye Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation. Expression of genes involved in cell cycle arrest was measured using Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary cancer of the eye SYBR-green based real-time PCR . and has a strong predilection for hematogenous metastasis, particular- Mutations in TP53 were detected in 8% of the examined cases . ly to the liver. Investigation of the specific genetic mechanisms respon- We compared expressions of CDK4 and CDKN2 in the samples that sible for the malignant behavior of UM could play an important role for harbor a mutation to those without mutations . the development of new approaches to UM diagnosis and treatment . Pathohistological findings obtained from clinic were correlated with We investigated 105 UM for allelic losses at chromosomal regions 3p, molecular alterations . 3q, 1p, 9p23, 10q23, 13q14, close or within some tumor suppressor genes (VHL, FHIT, RASSF1A, CDKN2A, PTEN, RB1) . Moreover, we P04.203 investigated the methylation status of the promoter regions of these Association study of codon 10 polymorphism of the genes . Transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-β1) gene with prostate 45 UM (43%) had LOH at all informative loci of chromosome 3, indicat- cancer and hyperplasia ing of monosomy 3 . Methylation analysis discovered frequent methyla- M. Omrani, S. Bazargani, S. Salari, B. Farshid; tion of RASSF1A (24 patients, 23%), located at 3p21 .3 and inactivated Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran. in a large number of human cancers . Important to notice, methylation Introduction: Transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-β1) has a mul- of RASSF1A was found predominantly in UM without monosomy 3 (20 tifactorial role in the development of cancer . Genetic polymorphisms patients). These findings could reinforce the role of RASSF1A in the in codons 10 of the TGF-β1 gene have been shown to be associated pathogenesis of UM . with the production of high or low TGF-β1 levels. The role of this poly- LOH at 1p was found in 28 samples mainly at all informative loci (5 MS morphism in development of prostate cancer and hyperplasia was in- markers, 1p31 .3 to 1p36 .3) without any relation to the monosomy 3 . vestigated . Five samples had partial allelic losses at 1p31 .3 or 1p36 .3 . 1p contains Material and Methods:Using ASO-PCR method, association between wide range of TSGs, and for the moment we could not identify those the T (Leu) to C (Pro) polymorphism at codon10 of the TGF-ß1 gene who might be candidate genes for the UM .Additionally, we conclude (TGFB1) and the risk of PCa or BPH in 100 controls were deter- that inactivation of the regulation pathway CDKN2A→RB1 with pro- mined . moter methylation or LOH is not the major mechanism of the patho- Results: Significant differences in the CC versus TT genotype distribu- genesis in UM unlike cutaneous melanoma . tion between PCa patients and male controls (P = 0 .009), and between BPH patients and male controls (P = 0 .005) were noticed . Males with P04.206 the TT genotype had a 1.67-fold increased risk of PCa [95% confi- VANGL1 effects cell invasion rather than cell motility dence interval (95% CI) = 1 .49-1 .87, P = 0 .009] and TC /TT genotype, O. Cetin1, A. Toylu2, N. Atabey2, Z. Sercan2, M. Sakizli2; 1.14-fold increased risk of PCa [95% confidence interval (95% CI) = 1Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 1 .02-1 .26, P = 0 .047] and a 1 .54-fold increased risk of BPH with the Denizli, Turkey, 2Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine, Department of TT genotype (95% CI = 0 .98-1 .14, P = 0 .005) and 1 .06-fold increased Medical Biology and Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. risk of BPH with the TT/TC genotype (95% CI = 0 .98-1 .14, P = 0 .061) Van Gogh like 1 (Vangl1) is a transmembrane protein on Wnt planar cell compared with those with the CC genotype respectively . polarity pathway . It has an important role in planar cell polarity and con- Conclusion: Based on our findings, it was possible to conclude that the vergent extension in embryonic development . In adults, it is expressed codon10 polymorphism in TGFB1 may have a significant influence on specifically in testis and ovaries as well as in brain and prostate.VANGL1 the development of PCa and BPH and the T allele of TGFB1gene has expression has been shown in several human cancer cell lines including the dominant effect on development of PCa and BPH . hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) . Our aim in this study was to investigate the changes in the behaviour of the HCC cells whose VANGL1 gene was P04.204 silenced by siRNA . subtle microsatellite instability in pediatric gliomas as an VANGL1 expression in HCC cell lines was shown by RT-PCR and real indicator of type 1 turcot syndrome time PCR. The siRNA template which will transcribe the specific hairpin L. Giunti1, V. Cetica2, U. Ricci1, S. Giglio3, I. Sardi2, M. Paglierani4, A. Bucco- siRNA for VANGL1 gene was designed following the determination of the liero4, L. Genitori5, M. Genuardi3,1,4; target sequence . The siRNA template was ligated to a siRNA expression 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, vector and HepG2 cells were transfected . The colonies expressing the 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 3Medical siRNA were detected by RT-PCR, quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot- Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, Florence, Italy, 4Depart- ting . Motility and invasion of the cells were assessed by Boyden chamber ment of Biomedicine, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 5Neurosur- assay while cell cycle analysis was performed by flow cytometry. gery Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy. The motility of the cells was not effected with gene silencing while there Type 1 Turcot syndrome (TS1) is characterized by the association of was a three fold decrease in the invasion potential of the cells express- early-onset glial and colorectal tumors and is caused by mutations of ing the siRNA. The proliferation assay revealed no significant difference the mismatch repair genes . To determine the role of genetic predis- between the transfected cells and parental cells with regard to S phase position in glial tumor development, we investigated the frequency of cell ratio . microsatellite instability (MSI) in a series of 38 pediatric gliomas using In conclusion, VANGL1 gene has an effect on cell invasion rather than a panel of 5 quasimonomorphic mononucleotide markers . A pattern of cell motility . Further investigations are needed to understand the mecha- “subtle” MSI for most tested markers was observed in 2 glioblastomas . nisms of this effect .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P04.207 cholelithiasis . Eleven mutations (9 in PFIC3) cause truncated protein mutational spectrum of missense VHL gene mutations in spain while 41 mutations (12 in adult) cause single amino acid change . and their genotype-phenotype correlation The relative low percentage of patients which co-segregates with J. Oriola1, I. Blanco2, I. Salinas3, A. Goday4, J. Chillaron4, C. Villanova5, J. ABCB4 mutations suggests a genetic heterogeneity for PFIC3 disease Rosell6, S. Pedrinaci7; and a possible role of ABCB4 as a modifier or gene susceptibility in 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut Català d’Oncologia, Barcelona, adults with chronic or transient cholangiopathies triggered by a cho- Spain, 3Hospital Universitari Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital del Mar, lestatic injury . Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Princeps d’Espanya, Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 7Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Grana- P05.002 da, Spain. The autoimmune regulator PHD finger binds to non-methylated Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease (MM#193300) is an inherited neo- histone H3K4 to activate gene expression plastic disorder characterized by a predisposition to develop mainly T. Org1, F. Chignola2, C. Hetényi3, M. Gaetani2, A. Rebane1, I. Liiv1, U. Maran3, retinal angiomas (RA), central nervous system hemangioblastomas L. Mollica2, M. J. Bottomley4, G. Musco2, P. Peterson1; (HB), clear cell renal carcinomas (CCRC) and pheochromocytomas 1Tartu University, Molecular Pathology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Dulbecco Telethon Insti- (PHEO) . tute c/o S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Tartu University, Institute of It’s well known that patients that present microdeletions/insertions, Chemical Physics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare, nonsense and deletion mutations usually do not develop PHEO (type Pomezia, Italy. 1) but do develop RA, HB and CCRC . Mutations in Autoimmune Regulator protein (AIRE) cause autoimmune In patients with missense mutations, PHEO can be present (type 2) polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) . even as the only feature, or not present . One way to improve our AIRE is expressed in thymic medullary epithelial cells where it pro- knowledge about the correlation between missense mutations and motes the expression of tissue-restricted antigens . By the combined the phenotype associated is the finding of more and new mutations use of biochemical and biophysical methods we show that AIRE se- in families . lectively interacts with histone H3 through its first PHD finger (AIRE- We have studied 17 different families with missense mutations (12 dif- PHD1) . AIRE-PHD1 discriminates between different degrees of his- ferent mutations) and their correlation with phenotype . Eight of these tone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation and preferentially binds non- mutations fit well with the phenotype previously described: PHEO was methylated H3K4 (KD ~4 uM) . Accordingly, in vivo AIRE binds and present in patients with G114S, R161Q, R167Q (5 families), R167W, activates promoters containing non-methylated H3K4 in HEK293 cells . Y175C mutations, and PHEO was not present in patients with N78S (2 We propose that AIRE-PHD1 is a prototype of a new class of PHD fin- families), L128R and L178P mutations . Three mutations showed dis- gers that specifically recognize non-methylated H3K4, thus providing a crepancies with the phenotype previously described according to the new link between the status of histone modifications and the regulation presence or absence of PHEO (T157I, Q164R and L184P) . We also of tissue-restricted antigen expression in thymus . describe the mutation X214R not reported previously, which was pres- ent in a patient with bilateral PHEO . This mutation probably extends P05.003 protein by an additional 14 aminoacids . The co-localization of ASC with Aβ fibrils in post-mortem brain These data support previous associations in eight mutations, add de- samples of Alzheimer’s disease patients tails about genotype-phenotype correlation in three mutations and give Z. E. Taskiran1, B. Balci-Peynircioglu1, F. Soylemezoglu2, E. Yilmaz1; information about the phenotype associated to X214R mutation . 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, An- Databases searched: kara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pathol- The UMD-VHL Locus Specific Database: http://www.umd.be:2020/ ogy, Ankara, Turkey. The HGMD professional release 7 .4: http://www .hgmd .cf .ac .uk/ac/in- Amyloid is an extracellular insoluble protein aggregate which accumu- dex .php lates in several tissues in various clinical conditions . The co-localization of ASC (Apoptosis associated Speck like protein containing a Caspase P05. Molecular and biochemical basis of recruitment domain), a key molecule in both apoptotic and inflamma- tory processes, with AA type amyloid fibrils has previously been dem- disease onstrated by our group . ASC is known to form cytosolic aggregates called specks . The aim of this study was to determine whether the P05.001 distribution of ASC is altered around Aβ deposits and senile plaques in ABcB4 gene mutations and differential involvement in liver post-mortem brain samples of Alzheimer’s disease patients . Immuno- diseases histochemical staining of paraffin-embedded tissues from post-mortem D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo1, B. Acaia1, P. Battezzati2, M. Seia1, L. Costantino1, brain samples of 12 Alzheimer’s disease patients revealed co-local- V. Paracchini1, A. Crosignani2, S. Nozza1, M. Antelmi2, S. Saino1, L. Porcaro1, V. ization of ASC protein with senile plaques . This co-localization was Motta1, C. Melles1, D. A. Coviello1; confirmed by ASC-Aβ co-staining by using immunofluorescence stain- 1Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina ing technique . To investigate whether ASC expression was correlated Elena, Milan, Italy, 2University of Milan, S. Paolo School of Medicine, Milan, with amyloid deposition, sequential sections from AD patients were Italy, Milan, Italy. analyzed after congo red staining . There was a strong correlation be- ABCB4 gene mutations are responsible for type 3 Progressive Familial tween ASC expression and the presence of amyloid deposits . We fur- Intrahepatic Cholestasis in children (PFIC3), while a possible role in ther investigate the interaction between ASC and Aβ in ASC-YFP and idiopathic cholangiopathies in adults has not been explored . We know APP (Amyloid Precursor Protein) co-transfected COS-7 cells which that absence or deficiency of the floppase activity necessary for biliary also demonstrated that specks are located near the intracellular Aβ excretion of phosphatidylcholine, leading to lack of phospholipid pro- deposits . We hypothesize that expression of ASC may be important in tection in the bile against the detergent action of bile acids and damage the pathogenesis of Aβ amyloid formation and in senile plaque develo- of the biliary epithelium . Our aim was to unveil the role of ABCB4 gene ment in predisposed tissues .) Further functional studies are required to in clinically relevant hepatobiliary diseases in children and adults . explore the link between ASC and Aβ amyloid formation. We collected DNA samples from 168 patients (80 children with PFIC3 phenotype, 41 women with Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy P05.004 (ICP), 16 adults with idiopathic cholestasis, 27 adults with primary A new candidate haplotype in the ps2 gene associated with late- sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), 4 patients with juvenile cholelithiasis), onset familial alzheimer disease? 150 healthy subjects including 50 two-parous women without ICP . J. I. Lao1, C. Montoriol1, I. Morer1, E. Fernández1, D. Poyatos1, K. Beyer2; Molecular analysis of ABCB4 gene has been so far completed in 110 1Unit of Molecular Genetics - Medical Lab. Dr. Echevarne, Barcelona, Spain, patients and 100 healthy subjects . 2Pathology Department, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain. We observed 52 ABCB4 mutations in 32 patients: 37 were found in Mutations within the APP, presenilin 1 (PS1) or presenilin 2 (PS2) 19 PFIC3 children, 5 in 5 ICP women, 7 in 5 patients with PSC, 2 in genes are found in familial Alzheimer disease (AD) . Whereas muta- 2 adults with idiopathic cholestasis and 1 in one patient with juvenile tions within PS1 cause AD of early or very early onset, APP as well asMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  PS2 mutations are responsible for both early and late onset familial at centrosomes with gamma-tubulin . In contrast, the colocalization of AD . Promoter and intronic polymorphisms have been detected on both p53 and gamma-tubulin takes place in Mre11-defective cells estab- PS genes and some of those have been reported as risk factors for lished from an AT-LD patient . In conclusion, the monitoring of the mi- sporadic AD development . totic spindle appears to be an ATM-dependent phenomenon . With the aid to detect PS2 mutations in four unrelated late-onset AD Oricchio E ., Saladino C ., Iacovelli S ., Soddu S ., Cundari E . Cell Cycle patients with familial history we sequenced PS2 exons 3 - 12 . Primers 5/1, 88-92, 2006 were designed to amplify each exon and its surrounding sequences . Since intron 9 is relatively small exons 9 and 10 were coamplified. No P05.007 mutation within the coding region was detected, instead all four pa- incidence of NLGN genes in greek autistic patients tients carried the haplotype TGTCG corresponding to polymorphisms K. Volaki1, A. Pampanos1, O. Papadaki-Papandreou2, S. Giouroukos2, L. C129T on exon 3, A(-24)G on intron 3, C261T on exon 4, G(+160)C Thomaidou2, V. Oikonomakis1, E. Kanavakis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1; polymorphism on intron 9 and A(+24)G on intron 11 . The polymor- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School of Athens University, Aghia phism G(+160)C, located on the shortest of all PS2 introns, had not Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2First Department of Pediatrics, been identified before. The additional genotyping of fifty non-demented Medical School of Athens University, Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, age-matched control individuals revealed that the TGTCG haplotype is Greece. present at a very low frequency (2%) in the normal population . Autism and Autism Spectrum Disorders (A .S .D .) belong to the group of To conclude, the haplotype constituted by five different polymorphisms neurodevelopmental disorders with a prevalence of 5-10/10,000 and on the PS2 gene described in the present study seems to be asso- male to female ratio 3-4:1 . ciated with familial AD . The analysis of further familial late-onset AD This study aimed to analyse the Neuroligin 3 gene (NLGN3, Xq13) and cases will reveal its importance as diagnostic marker . Neuroligin 4 gene (NLGN4, Xp22 .3) in patients with A .S .D . The sample includes 367 individuals of Greek origin (169 patients, 154 mothers, P05.005 44 first-degree relatives). All patients had been diagnosed with A.S.D. mutation detection in ENAm and mmP20 genes in amelogenesis by neurologists, psychiatrists and clinical geneticists according to the imperfecta DSM-IV criteria . Patients carrying chromosomal aberrations or Fragile M. Bahaminpour, P. Aref, M. Shahrabi, M. Ghandehari Motlagh, B. Seraj, M. X syndrome were excluded from the study . The mutation p .Y74Y of Heidari; NLGN3 was examined with ARMS PCR whereas mutations p .R451C School of Dentistry,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of NLGN3 and p .1186insT of NLGN4 were screened by dHPLC .Muta- Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) is one of the common of inherited tooth tions p.Y74Y and p.R451C were not identified in our samples. How- disorders . AI is distinguished by abnormality in enamel formation . The ever, the dHPLC screening for the p .1186insT mutation suggested the frequency of this disease is different through the worldwide . Studies existence of a mutation in two samples (in a patient and his mother) . have demonstrated that several genes were associated with AI such Sequencing revealed the c .1597A>G mutation (p .K378R) in NLGN4 . as ENAM and MMP20 genes . MMP20 gene is part of a cluster of ma- This gene is thought to play an important role in synaptogenesis and trix metalloproteinase (MMP) genes . Protein of the (MMP) family is in- synapse remodelling in the neuronal circuitry of the brain, representing volved in the breakdown of extracellular matrix in normal physiological a good functional candidate for A.S.D. This is the first molecular study processes . ENAM is another gene and it plays crucial role in normal of individuals with A .S .D . in Greece . Sequencing of the rest of the ex- teeth development . The aim of this investigation was to study muta- ons of our samples may allow for a genotype-phenotype correlation in tion detection in 10 Iranian families with non-syndromic AI . . We carried the Greek population . out a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and single-stranded conforma- tion polymorphism (SSCP) for mutation detection within ENAM and P05.008 MMP20 genes . SSCP analysis of genomic DNA from the AI family re- Auto-brewery syndrome - genetic testing vealed the presence of an abnormal conformer in the AI patients . DNA S. Wisniewski, K. Kordel, R. Wachowiak; Sequencing revealed the presence of mutation in the different part of University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. the subjected . We found genetic changes in patients with different type The concentration of ethanol in blood, expired air and urine constitutes of inheritances, one patient in exon 4 of MMP20 gene and one patient important proof to accuse drunk drivers . However the reliability of al- for ENAM exon 9 . The data presented here is in agreement with the cohol concentration analysis results is very often questioned by the previous studies that suggested these genes are associated with tooth lawyers . One of the argument is the opinion that alcohol could be pro- disorder. Taken together these findings support MMP20 and ENAM as duced in the body, due to “auto-brewery” syndrome - increased level disease genes, and opened a new window on the molecular mecha- of blood alcohol caused by yeast or bacterial fermentation in the small nism of the AI disease and to the function of the enamelin protein in intestine . Moreover, endogenous alcohol is produced in blood even enamel formation . after human death. Our aim was to prepare genetic test to confirm or exclude presence of microbial flora of intestine and blood. DNA was P05.006 isolated from blood and intestinal content samples collected during the role of Atm in monitoring the integrity of mitotic spindle autopsies of car accidents victims and was used in PCR reaction with L. Chessa1, A. Prodosmo2, A. De Amicis1, M. Gabriele3, M. Piane1, S. Soddu2, universal primers targeting the conserved regions ITS1 and ITS2 . Au- E. Cundari3; topsy samples were compared with known fungal strains . The results 1II Faculty of Medicine, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy, 2Department of Ex- induced us to propose one hybridization fluorescent probe combined perimental Pathology, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Roma, Italy, 3Institute of with Cy5 and LNA nucleotides . The probe works with LightCycler sys- Biology and Molecular Pathology, National Research Council, Roma, Italy. tem in one reaction with SYBR Green and allows to detect specifically Centrosomes are cytoplasmic organelles that organize the interphase 6 common yeast species . The method seems to be fast, cost-effective cytoskeleton and contribute to bipolar spindle formation during mi- and decisive in cases of judicial doubts . totic cell division . Dysfunction of the centrosome/centriole regulatory controls can generate supernumerary centrosomes, abnormal mitotic P05.009 spindles and finally chromosomal instability. Role of PHD fingers and COOH-terminal 30 amino acids in AIRE We previously showed that during the cell cycle progression ATM is transactivation activity activated by phosphorylation at Ser1981 at each mitosis and localizes M. C. Rosatelli1, A. Meloni2, F. Incani1, D. Corda1, A. Cao2; at centrosomes together with p53 phosphorylated at Ser15, so as to 1Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto keep it inactive at centrosomes when the spindle is correctly in place . di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche In case of disruption of mitotic spindle, as the result of nocodazole (CNR), Cagliari, Italy. damage, the colocalization of ATM and p53 is lost at centrosomes but Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy present in form of spots dispersed in the cytoplasm (Oricchio et al ., (APECED) is a rare autosomic autoimmune disease resulting from the 2006) . defective function of a gene codifying for a transcription factor named Here we show that in ATM-defective cells (both lymphoblasts and pe- autoimmune regulation (AIRE) . The AIRE protein contains several do- ripheral blood lymphocytes from AT patients) p53 does not colocalize mains among which two PHD fingers involved in the transcriptionalMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 activation.We investigated the function of the two PHD finger domains MKS1 . We also found two families with missense or splice mutations and the COOH terminal portion of AIRE by using several mutated con- in MKS3, one of which also bears a homozygous nonsense mutation structs transfected in mammalian cells and a luciferase reporter assay . in NPHP6 that likely truncates the extreme C-terminus of the protein . The results predict that the second PHD as well as the COOH terminal These data extend the genetic stratification of ciliopathies and suggest regions have marked transactivational properties . Our studies indicate that BBS and MKS, although clinically distinct, are allelic forms of the a prevalent role of the second PHD since the C446Y mutation, which same molecular disorder . alters the PHD2 sequence led to a complete loss of the transactivation activity . P05.012 The COOH terminal region contains the fourth LXXLL and the PXX- Bartter syndrome: think of CLCNKB PXP motifs which play a critical role in mediating the transactivation E. Kamsteeg, J. Schoots, N. V. A. M. Knoers, H. Scheffer, L. H. Hoefsloot; capacity of the AIRE protein . On the other hand, the Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. crucial role of the PXXPXP sequence has already been defined by the Bartter syndrome (BS) is an autosomal recessive disorder character- finding of the disease-causing mutation in the sequence of APECED ized by renal salt wasting and hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis . The patients. Our study provides a definition of the role of the PHD fingers primary defect is a reduced NaCl reabsorption in the thick ascending in transactivation and identifies a new transactivation domain of the limbs of Henle’s loop . Four types of recessive BS exist: congenital AIRE protein localized in the COOH terminal region . without (I/II) or with sensorineuronal deafness (IV) and the milder form (III) . Mutations in SLC12A1, KCNJ1, CLCNKB and BSND give rise to P05.010 BSI-IV, respectively . Here, we have analyzed CLCNKB in a group of Homozygosity mapping with sNP arrays as a useful technology KCNJ1-mutation negative BS patients (n=60) . for diagnosis in complex diseases as Bardet-Biedl syndrome in More than half of the published mutations in BSIII are (partial) consanguineous families CLCNKB deletions, caused by unequal cross between the homolo- I. Pereiro1, M. Piñeiro1, D. Valverde1, D. Nishimura2; gous CLCNKA and CLCNKB . Therefore, we have performed multiplex 1University of Vigo. Spain, Vigo, Spain, 2Department of Paediatrics, Howard ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis of CLCNKB . Deletion Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. of the entire gene has been observed homozygously in four and het- Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM 209900) is a rare pleiotropic human erozygously in 2 patients . Three patients have a heterozygous deletion genetic disorder that has as primary phenotypic features: early-onset of the 5’ end of the gene (promoter region through exon 8) . Addition- retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, renal abnormalities, limb abnormalities ally, sequence analysis revealed a second mutation in the five patients and also a variable degree of cognitive impairment . with a heterozygous deletion . In the remaining patients, we have found This disorder is genetically heterogeneous with twelve genes identified seven patients with two mutations (both in the homozygous or com- (BBS1-BBS12) . BBS also shows considerable inter- and intra-familial pound heterozygous state), but also 7 patients with only one mutation . variation of the phenotype . To date mutation screening has resulted It is unclear whether the second mutation is present elsewhere in the in the identification of approximately 70% of the causative mutations, CLCNKB gene, or whether one of the other genes involved in BS is indicating that additional BBS genes have to be identified. mutated . At the moment is very hard and time consuming to search for mutations Together, BS type III has been confirmed in 16 of the 60 BS patients. in each of the genes involved, as some of them have been implicated Since we have found mutations in KCNJ1 in 10 patients, we suggest in a very low percentage . In this study we employed high-density SNP that BSIII is more prevalent than BSII . genotyping for homozygosity mapping in the identification of gene mu- tations to simplify this task in consanguineous families . P05.013 Nine consanguineous families were analyzed, and in five of them link- Exploring the contribution of conserved Non-coding sequences age to a known BBS loci was detected . Sequencing of the BBS gene (cNcs) to Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPEs) that localizes in the locus where linkage was detected, revealed 5 new B. N. D’haene1, C. Attanasio2, M. Friedli2, D. Beysen1, B. Lorenz3, P. Lapunzi- mutations (G2X, BBS3; L454P and G250R, BBS6; P108 and del 2pb na4, B. Lowry5, M. Pugeat6, T. de Ravel7, W. Reardon8, G. Pierquin9, A. Reiner10, in 372, BBS12) . Cosegregation of the mutation in the family corrobo- R. Fisher11, S. Del Polo12, B. Menten1, K. Buysse1, F. Pattyn1, F. Speleman1, A. rates the pattern of autosomic recessive inheritance . De Paepe1, S. E. Antonarakis2, E. De Baere1; For the rest of the families linkage indicated several novel candidate 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department BBS gene loci . of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Regensburg University Medical Center, Department P05.011 of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Regensburg, Germany, 4Department of Medical Hypomorphic mutations in syndromic encephalocoele genes are and Molecular Genetics, Pathology and Paediatric Endocrinology, Hospital associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Alberta A. Diaz-Font1, C. C. Leitch2, N. A. Zaghloul2, E. E. Davis2, C. Stoetzel3, S. Rix1, Children’s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, 6Department of Endocrinology, East M. Al-Fadhel4, R. A. Lewis5, W. Eyaid4, E. Banin6, H. Dollfus3, P. L. Beales1, J. L. Pole of Lyon Hospitals, and INSERM Unit 0322, Lyon, France, 7Center for Badano2,7, N. Katsanis2; Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 8National 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2McKusick-Nathans Institute Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady‘s Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Dublin, Ireland, 9Department of Human Genetics, Hôpital du Sart Tilman, Liege, MD, United States, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine Belgium, 10Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life, University de Strasbourg, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France, 4Department of of Newcastle, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 11St James’s University Hospital, Pediatrics, King Fahad Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Departments of Oph- Leeds, United Kingdom, 12Department of Paediatrics, Hospital 12 de Octubre, thalmology, Molecular and Human Genetics, Pediatrics, and Medicine, Baylor Madrid, Spain. College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 6Department of Ophthalmol- Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is a development disorder caused ogy, Hadassah-Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 7Institut Pasteur by FOXL2 mutations, total gene deletions or extragenic deletions . In de Montevideo, Montevideo, Uruguay. 12% of patients however, the molecular defect remains unknown . We Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a genetically heterogeneous, neo- hypothesise that copy-number variations (CNVs) or point mutations in natal lethal malformation and the most common form of syndromic cis-regulatory regions mapping within the minimal extragenic deletion neural tube defects (NTDs) . To date, several MKS genes have been region could affect FOXL2 transcription and cause disease . identified, whose protein products affect ciliary function1-5 . Here we In a panel of 33 molecularly unresolved BPES patients, one novel ex- show that mutations in MKS1, MKS3 and NPHP both cause Bardet- tragenic deletion upstream of FOXL2 was found by array CGH . This Biedl syndrome (BBS) and also have a potential epistatic effect on mu- deletion overlaps with the previously defined shortest region of overlap tations in known BBS loci . Five of six families with MKS1 and BBS mu- (SRO) of upstream extragenic deletions, and was confirmed by qPCR. tations manifested seizures, a feature that is not a typical component In addition, qPCR of 25 CNCs located in this SRO revealed putative of either syndrome. Functional studies in zebrafish showed that mks1 CNVs in 9 patients, of which the significance is being evaluated. More- is necessary for gastrulation movements and that it interacts geneti- over, sequencing of the 25 CNCs revealed 4 putative pathogenic vari- cally with known bbs genes . These observations are not restricted to ants, which are further being investigated by luciferase assays .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Second, we characterized 9 known deletions of the FOXL2 region us- previously reported . We also describe a previously unreported recur- ing array CGH. In addition, 10 new deletions identified by MLPA were rent EYA1 gene mutation c .867+5G>A found in 21% (3/14) of EYA1 further defined by qPCR. These deletions prove to be highly hetero- mutation-positive BOR probands in our patient cohort . RNA analysis geneous with regard to deletion size and breakpoint localization . They indicates that the c .867+5G>A mutation affects splicing of the EYA1 account for 12% of molecular defects in BPES, highlighting the impor- gene, and produces an aberrant mRNA transcript skipping exon 8 and tance of copy number analysis in BPES . leading to a premature termination signal in exon 9 . The aberrant tran- In conclusion, we showed that copy number changes of FOXL2 com- script lacking exon 8 was present at approximately 50% level of wild- prise a considerable fraction of the molecular defects in BPES . More- type EYA1 mRNA in fibroblasts, and suggests that certain transcripts over, the extensive search for CNVs and point mutations in CNCs map- of EYA1 escape nonsense-mediated decay and encode truncated EYA ping distantly of FOXL2 in BPES patients, support the importance of long protein capable of dominant-negative interactions causing disease . distance gene regulation in the molecular pathogenesis of this disorder . P05.016 P05.014 BscL2 and its possible function in adipogenesis molecular analysis of the ATPVB and ATPV0A genes in D. Jud, T. Schwarzbraun, C. Windpassinger, K. Wagner; distal renal tubular acidosis Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria. I. Carboni1, E. Andreucci1, I. Pela2, G. Lavoratti3, M. Materassi3, D. Serafini3, M. Congenital generalized lipodystrophy, first described by Berardinelli R. Caruso4, M. Rigoldi5, M. Genuardi1, S. Giglio1; (1954) and Seip (1959), is a rare autosomal recessive disorder char- 1Dept. of Clinical Pathophysiology, University of Florence and Medical Genetics acterized by near complete absence of adipose tissue from birth or Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Paediatric Nephrolo- early infancy . Two distinct forms can be distinguished: CGL1 and gy, Dept of Paediatrics, University Of Florence and Meyer Children’s University CGL2, whereas CGL1 is caused by mutations in AGPAT2 and CGL2 Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Paediatric Nephrology, Dept of Paediatrics, University by mutations in BSCL2 . Whilst mutations in AGPAT2, a member of the of Florence and Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Division acyltransferase family, likely cause lipodystrophy by reducing triglyc- of Nephrology and Dialysis, OORR Hospital, Bergamo, Italy, 5Metabolic Di- eride synthesis in adipose tissue, the pathogenic effects of mutations seases Unit, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy. in BSCL2 on a molecular level are not yet fully understood . Further Primary distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) is characterized by de- clinical features of both subtypes include severe insulin resistance, fective secretion of H+ ions by intercalary cells of the collecting duct . acanthosis nigricans, muscular hypertrophy, hepatomegaly, diabetes Both autosomal dominant (AD) and recessive (AR) forms have been mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia . However patients with CGL2 show a described . The AD form is caused by mutations of the SLC4A1 gene . more severe phenotype with lack of both metabolically active and me- The AR form has been associated with mutations of either ATP6V1B1 chanical adipose tissue, a higher prevalence of mild mental retardation - in individuals who usually display sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . - or ATP6V0A4 - in individuals who do not have SNHL or show hearing To elucidate the function of BSCL2 in adipogenesis we generated loss only after the first decades of life. BSCL2 knock-out flies. These knock-out strains showed altered ar- We report on the first investigation of the ATP6V1B1 and ATP6V0A4 chitecture and distribution of lipid droplets in adipose tissue . Therefore genes in dRTA patients in Italy. Mutations were identified in 8/8 pa- our data suggest that BSCL2 is involved in lipid droplet formation and/ tients analyzed . or maintenance in Drosophila. To confirm these data in mammals we The ATP6V0A4 Arg807Gln mutation was found at the homozygous created a mouse knock-out model for BSCL2 . We chose the Cre-loxP state in a patient with severe early-onset SNHL, that is generally not system to obtain conditional knock-out mice in order to investigate the observed in subjects with ATP6V0A4 defects . Only another case with function of BSCL2 in relevant tissues specially during adipocyte devel- the same genotype, who had a comparably severe phenotype, is re- opment . We will apply molecular genetic, histological, biochemical and ported in the literature . cell culture methods to further determine the enigmatic role of BSCL2 A monoallelic de novo ATP6V1B1 mutation (Arg394Gln) was observed in adipogenesis and in the pathophysiology of CGL2 . in one patient with a typical dRTA renal phenotype without deafness . This mutation has been previously described in two cases, who also P05.017 were apparently simple heterozygotes . The functional significance of the C1 inhibitor gene promoter We also detected three previously unreported mutations, two in AT- mutations P6V0A4 and one in ATP6V1B1 . L. Grodecka1, H. Grombirikova1, B. Ravcukova1, J. Litzman2, T. Freiberger1; Our results shed further light on phenotype-genotype correlations in 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Trans- dRTA. In particular, the association of a specific monoallelic ATP6V1B1 plantation, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Clinical Immunology and Allergol- mutation with a dRTA phenotype without hearing loss suggests that ogy, Faculty of Medicine of Masaryk University, St. Anne’s University Hospital, other genetic mechanisms, in addition to autosomal recessive inheri- Brno, Czech Republic. tance, may be associated with ATP6V1B1 alterations . C1 inhibitor (C1INH) is a key negative regulator of complement activa- tion . Decreased level of functional C1INH causes hereditary angio- P05.015 edema which is usually transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait . An EYA gene mutation in intron 8 [c.867+5G>A] causes Till now, three promoter mutations have been detected in the C1 in- alternative RNA splicing and is a recurrent mutation causing hibitor gene (C1NH), one of them (-45 C>A) having been newly identi- Branchial-oto-renal syndrome fied in our laboratory. Mutations -40 C>G and -45 C>A both appeared T. L. Stockley1,2, R. Mendoza-Londono1,2, E. J. Propst1,2, S. Sodhi1, L. Dupuis1, to cosegregate with other mutations in coding region, while the third B. C. Papsin1,2; mutation -103 C>T did not . Interestingly, in patients suffering from 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The University of To- hereditary angioedema, mutation -103 C>T was found exclusively in ronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. homozygous state while heterozygous individuals were healthy . The Branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome is a heterogeneous autosomal objective of our work was to assess functional importance of the three dominant disorder characterized by branchial arch abnormalities, promoter mutations on the C1NH gene expression . Results of lucifer- hearing loss and renal abnormalities . Variable expression of clinical ase reporter gene assay showed that two of the mutations, -40 C>G features is found within and between affected families . Mutations in and -45 C>A, have negligible effect on C1INH expression . Surpris- the EYA1 gene are reported to account for 40-70% of reported BOR ingly, mutation -103 C>T increased luciferase gene expression by 59 syndrome cases . We have developed a strategy for molecular testing % in comparison to wild type promoter construct . Yet plasma levels of of the EYA1 gene causing BOR syndrome consisting of 1) sequencing C1 inhibitor in patients with this mutation were significantly decreased. of the complete coding region and flanking intronic regions and 2) mul- The reason for this discrepancy is not obvious . However, a negative tiple ligation probe amplification (MLPA) analysis. Using this strategy correlation between amount of mRNA and plasma levels of C1INH has EYA1 mutations were identified in 82% (14/17) of a cohort of paediatric already been described in healthy controls . Such a correlation sug- BOR syndrome probands. Forty-five percent (5/11) of BOR syndrome gests that a negative feedback regulation of C1INH expression may probands in our cohort had de novo EYA1 mutations, suggesting that exist . the incidence of de novo cases in BOR syndrome is higher than 10% This study was supported by grant of IGA MZ CR No . NR 9192-3 .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.018 gasaki, Japan, 10Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, Tobetsu-cho, Japan. screening for cADAsiL in central italian patients The C syndrome is characterized by trigonocephaly associated with L. Pianese1, A. Cappelli1,2, M. Scarcella3, G. Cacchiò3, P. Staffolani1, M. unusual facies, psychomotor retardation, redundant skin, joint and Ragno3; limb abnormalities, and visceral anomalies . In an individual with 1Laboratorio Medicina Molecolare, ASUR ZT13, Ascoli Piceno, Italy, 2School of the C syndrome harboring a balanced chromosomal translocation, Advanced Studies: Environmental Sciences and Public Health, Camerino, Italy, t(3;18)(q13.13;q12.1), we identified a gene (CD96), which encodes 3U. O. Neurologia, ASUR ZT13, Ascoli Piceno, Italy. a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, was disrupted at the Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 3q13 .3 breakpoint . In mutation analysis of karyotypically normal pa- leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an inherited autosomal dominant tients with the C or C-like syndromes, we identified a missense muta- condition characterized by a variable combination of recurrent cerebral tion in exon 6 of the CD96 gene in one patient and found reduced ex- ischemic episodes, cognitive deficits, migraine with aura and psychi- pression in two patients . In order to know the function of CD96, we es- atric symptoms . It results from mutations distributed throughout the tablished normal CD96 or the mutated CD96 expressed cell lines and 34 EGFRs (epidermal growth factor-like repeats) of the Notch3 gene, investigated their characters especially on cell-adhesion activity and leading to the addition or the loss of a cysteine residue . cell-growth activity . Cells with the normal CD96 protein increased both We performed genetic testing for Notch3 mutations in 45 probands the cell-adhesion and growth activities compared with MOCK cells . On of different family with suspected CADASIL who had been referred to the other hand, cells with the mutated CD96 protein lost the activities in our service in 2007 . DNA samples were analyzed for mutations in all vitro. These findings may indicate that CD96 mutations cause a form of exons of EGFRs using an appropriate screening protocol considering the C syndrome by interfering with cell adhesion and growth . the mutations distribution in exons gene . The sequence analysis of Notch3 gene revealed the presence of three P05.021 previously reported missense mutations: C144F in exon 4, G528C in Evidence on microRNA-mediated regulation of CDK5R1 gene exon 10 and R1006C in exon 19 . In particular, the mutation C144F was expression found in one family, whereas the mutations G528C and R1006C were S. Moncini1, M. Venturin1, A. Salvi2, V. Lanzi1, C. Sabelli2, G. De Petro2, S. found in two and seven families respectively, with the same regional Barlati2, P. Riva1; origin . These results suggest a higher frequency of exon 10 and 19 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. mutations in central Italy and confirm that the genetic procedures could CDK5R1 encodes for p35, an activator of CDK5, which is involved be optimized by a geographical region-oriented genetic analysis . in neuronal migration and differentiation during central nervous sys- We are extending genetic analysis to the remaining exons of Notch3 tem development and has been candidated for mental retardation . gene in patients with clinical and strumental features more suggestive We recently reported that the large 3’ untranslated region (3’UTR) of of CADASIL phenotype, negative for EGFRs mutations . CDK5R1 contains regulatory elements affecting transcript stability . Besides several AREs, many microRNAs (miRNAs) target sites have P05.019 been predicted by PicTar software . We evaluated the expression of KRIT1 gene mutations in Sardinian patients with cerebral nine pre-miRNAs, among the 20 miRNAs predicted to bind CDK5R1, cavernous malformations in six cell lines, including two neuroblastoma derived lines . Among the M. A. Melis1, M. Addis1, R. Congiu1, C. Meloni1, A. Loi2, M. Melis3, M. Loi3, M. expressed miRNAs, we observed that miR-15a, miR-103 and miR- Cau1; 107 presented a high number of target sites with a free energy <-20 1University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 2Ospedale Regionale per le Microcitemie, kcal/mol . A preliminary quantitative analysis of the three above miR- Cagliari, Italy, 3Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu, Cagliari, Italy. NAs and p35 showed an inverse correlation between miR-107 and Cerebral Cavernous Malformations (CCM) are CNS vascular anoma- p35 expression, suggesting a negative effect of miR-107 on CDK5R1 lies associated with seizures, headaches and hemorrhagic strokes and expression. Overexpression of miR-107 by transfection of the specific represents 10 to 20 percent of cerebral lesions . CCM is present in 0 .1 precursor in neuroblastoma SK-N-BE cells showed, after 72 hours, a to 0 .5 of the population . This disorder most often occurs sporadically 45 and 75% decrease in p35 expression respectively using 50 and 100 but may also be familial . Familial cases are inherited as a dominant nM of the precursor . trait with incomplete penetrance and are estimated to account for 10- Transfection of anti-miR-107 will be tested . Luciferase constructs 40 % of the patients. The identification of the genes involved in such will be used to validate the predicted miRNA target sites in CDK5R1 disorders allow to characterize carriers of the mutations without clear 3’UTR . These preliminary data allow us to hypothesize a role of miR- symptoms. The first gene involved in CCM1 is KRIT 1. In addition to NAs in post-transcriptional CDK5R1 regulation . KRIT1 two other genes have been described: MGC4607 (CCM2) and PDCD10 (CCM3) . We selected 14 patients belonging to seven Sar- P05.022 dinian families on the basis of clinical symptoms and Magnetic Reso- Expression of ceruloplasmin and ferroportin in human nance results . MLPA analysis of KRIT1, MGC4607 and PDCD10 gave peripheral blood lymphocytes: a new link between iron negative results . Sequencing analysis of KRIT1 gene was performed metabolism and the immune system in all the patients. We identified a 4bp deletion in exon 9 leading to a L. Marques, J. Banha, R. Oliveira, L. Costa; premature stop codon in a patient with clear phenotype . The same mu- Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. tation has been found in three relatives showing very mild symptoms . Background: Ceruloplasmin (Cp) is a multicopper oxidase with a rel- In 5 subjects belonging to four unrelated families a unique nonsense evant role in iron (Fe) metabolism mainly due to its ferroxidase activity . mutation (C329X) has been found . Haplotype analysis in these four Cp exists in a secreted form (sCp) and a membrane glycosylphos- families revealed a common origin of the mutation . These data sug- phatidylinositol-anchored form (GPI-Cp) . Recent studies showed that gest a “founder effect”, already described in different populations . Cp ferroxidase activity is required for ferroportin (Fpn) stability on cell surface . Herein we report the expression of both Cp isoforms and Fpn P05.020 in human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) . Functional analysis of cD96, a causative gene for a form of c Material and Methods: PBL were isolated followed by total RNA extrac- (Opitz trigonocephaly) syndrome tion, cDNA synthesis and subsequent analysis of Cp and Fpn tran- T. Kaname1,2, K. Yanagi1, Y. Chinen1, Y. Makita3, N. Okamoto4, K. Kurosawa5, scripts by PCR . For immunoblotting, protein extracts from membrane H. Maehara1, Y. Fukushima6, A. Bohring7, J. M. Opitz8, K. Yoshiura9,2, N. Niika- and cytosolic fractions were prepared. For immunofluorescence, cells wa10,2, K. Naritomi1,2; were cultured with and without PI-PLC (an enzyme that cleaves GPI 1University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 2SORST, JST, Kawaguchi, groups) followed by immunolabeling for Cp and analysis by confocal Japan, 3Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, Japan, 4Osaka Medical Center microscopy . and Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Japan, 5Kanagawa Results and Conclusion: Both Cp isoforms and Fpn were shown to Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 6Shinshu University School of be expressed at both mRNA and protein level . Cp and Fpn were also Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 7Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, shown to be localized at PBL membrane . Confocal analysis of immu- Germany, 8University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United nolabeled PBL treated with PI-PLC showed a significant reduction of States, 9Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Na- Cp labeling compared to untreated PBL, showing that at least part ofMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  Cp expressed at PBL membrane is GPI-anchored . Altogether, these P05.025 data show that human PBL express both sCp, GPI-Cp and Fpn . Study- in depth study of hCYPA in spanish General Population: ing the expression of these proteins in cells of the immune system (IS) High frequency of gene duplications and sequence variations may contribute to understanding the regulation of the Fe homeostasis S. Parajes1, B. Giménez1, C. Quinteiro1, F. Domínguez1,2, L. Loidi1; by the IS and also allow to access Cp isoforms and Fpn activities as- 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, sociated to pathological conditions, often neurological, in cells from Spain, 2Dpto. Fisiología, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de peripheral blood . Compostela, Spain. 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21OHD) is one of the most common au- P05.023 tosomic recessive disorders . The 21-hydroxylase enzyme is encoded Myotonia congenita: identification of eleven new mutations in by hCYP21A2 gene, which is highly homologous to the hCYP21A1P the cLcN1 gene pseudogene . The high variability of the CYP21A2 locus hinders the J. F. Quesada, I. S. Pascual, J. Martiáñez, J. M. Molano; characterization of 21OHD alleles and complicates disease carrier de- Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. tection and genetic counselling . We present the study of hCYP21A2 Introduction . Myotonia congenita (MC) is a rare autosomal inher- in 288 Spanish population chromosomes to estimate frequency of ited disorder characterized by muscle stiffness and hypertrophy . MC 21OHD carriers, hCYP21A2 duplications and hCYP21A2 novel varia- is inherited in two different forms: a dominant form, designated as tions . Thomsen´s myotonia, or a recessive form, designated as Becker´s hCYP21A2 was sequenced after PCR amplification in two fragments generalized myotonia . However, both forms are caused by mutations and hCYP21A2 dosage was done by Real-Time PCR . Haplotype con- in a unique gene, the CLCN1 gene, which encodes the major chloride struction was based on a Bayesian method using 20 polymorphisms channel in skeletal muscle. In this communication, we identified 11 new all over hCYP21A2 . mutations in Spanish patients . We assumed these are disease-caus- Copy number variations . 3 .5% of alleles carried two copies of hCY- ing mutations and no polymorphisms because the mutated amino-acid P21A2 associated mostly with p .Gln318X . residues are conserved through evolution . Our future project is to char- Frequency of putative disease-causing alleles. 23 hCYP21A2 muta- acterize, using patch-clamp analysis, the effect of these mutations on tions were found (8% of alleles): 17 are known to allow 30-60 % of the the clc1 channel function . WT activity, 2 completely impairs enzyme activity, and 4 were novel, Patients and Methods . We analyzed DNA extracted from peripheral which effect on the activity is unknown . blood of patients attending to Neurology Services from several tertiary hCYP21A2 polymorphism. 79 different variations were found distrib- Spanish hospitals . Each CLCN1 exon and boundary intron regions uted all over the gene and its close vicinity . were amplified by the DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and prod- Haplotypes. 75 different haplotypes were identified, most appearing ucts were DNA sequenced in an ABI Prism® 3130 XL instrument . only once, but some recurrent . Results . We analyzed DNA from 103 patients (51 families) with myo- This study shows the highest frequency of 21OHD carriers reported tonia as major symptom having previously excluded the myotonic dys- by genotyping study . Furthermore, it showed a high frequency of trophies . We have found 20 different mutations, including 11 mutations hCYP21A2 duplications with one of the copies mutated and also high that are not described before . Four mutations (F167L, Y302H, M485V frequency of novel mutations with unknown effect on the 21OH ac- and R894X) were recurrent in our serie . tivity . These novel variations as well as gene duplications should be Conclusions . Analysis of mutations in CLCN1 gene in 51 Spanish fami- considered when doing the genetic 21OHD diagnosis and genetic lies with myotonia suggest that there are remarkable differences in the counselling . mutation profiles between Spanish and other Caucasian populations. P05.026 P05.024 inactivating mutations in the ABcc8 gene in patients with A silent mutation within protectin (cD59) gene and exon congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy (cHi) skipping in a family with coeliac disease A. Benet-Pagès1, O. Blankenstein2, S. Lösecke1, K. Mohnike3, T. M. Strom1, B. C. Vidal1, J. Borġ1, A. Fenech2, A. Xuereb-Anastasi3, C. Scerri1; Lorenz-Depiereux1; 1Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Msida, Malta, 2Department of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University Munich and Helmholtz Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuher- 3Institute of Health Care, Msida, Malta. berg-Munich, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics Endocrinology and Diabetes, Protectin (CD59), which inhibits the assembly of the membrane attack Charité Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics and Neo- complex following complement activation, was reported to be upregu- natology, Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany. lated in coeliac disease [1] . Its gene is located on chromosome 11p12, Congenital Hyperinsulinism of Infancy (CHI) is a genetically heteroge- to which suggestive linkage was observed in a Maltese family with neous disease characterized by severe hypoglycemia due to excessive coeliac disease . insulin secretion from pancreatic ß-cells . Two histopathologically and Sequencing of CD59, APAF-1 interacting protein and CD44 genes, re- genetically distinct groups are recognized among patients with CHI . A vealed a number of variants . Two synonymous variants, a C/T transi- diffuse form, which involves the entire pancreas, arises predominantly tion (rs1071695) in CD44 and a novel G/A change within CD59, were from autosomal recessive inheritance . A focal form, which shows lo- co-segregating with the linked haplotype in all affected individuals . calized adenomatosis of islet cells within the normal pancreas, arises Only one A allele, from 442 chromosomes, was found in the general from a germline mutation of the paternal allele in addition to somatic population (0 .23%)and was completely absent in a group of coeliac loss of the maternal allele in adenomatous pancreatic ß-cells . The patients, showing that this is a rare variant found within this family . most common cause of CHI are inactivating mutations in the genes Two constructs consisting of normal and mutated exons together with coding for the two subunits of the ß-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel, adjacent introns were cloned into pSPL3, and transfected into HeLa ABCC8/SUR1 (regulatory subunit) and KCNJ11/Kir6 .2 (pore-forming and COS-7 . Reverse transcriptase-PCR was performed, followed by subunit) . We examined 64 children with a diffuse, focal, atypical or agarose gel electrophoresis and sequencing . Both wild-type and mu- unknown form of CHI and sequenced the entire coding region and the tated constructs for the CD59 variant resulted in a normally and an ab- exon/intron boundaries of the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes . We found normally spliced transcript lacking the exon involved (coding for signal 34 mutations (4 homozygous, 7 compound heterozygous, 23 hetero- peptide), which was more pronounced in the presence of the A allele . zygous) in the ABCC8 gene (53%) and 2 heterozygous mutations in No abnormally spliced transcripts were observed for the other variant the KCNJ11 gene (3%) . In 28 patients (43%) no mutations were identi- within CD44 . fied (see table). Three patients with a heterozygous mutation in the In this study, a novel synonymous variant within the CD59 gene was ABCC8 gene and diffuse CHI inherited the mutation from the mother . shown to affect splicing, possibly due to effects on the secondary We missed the second paternal mutation with our screening method . structure of pre-mRNA, increasing the susceptibility to coeliac disease Most likely, the low detection rate is caused by missed mutations in in this family . ABCC8/KCNJ11 and further locus heterogeneity . 1 . Berstad, AE & Brandtzaeg, P . Gut. 1998; 42: 522 - 529Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  ABCC8 mutations in 64 children with CHI the known c .791C>G (p .P264R) and additionally a novel c .1619C>A Form of CHI diffuse focal atypical unknown total (p .A540E) in exon12 . In-silico analysis (SIFT, http://blocks .fhcrc .org/ homozygous 3 0 0 1 4 sift/SIFT .html, polyphen, http://genetics .bwh .harvard .edu/pph) indicat- compound heterozygous 7 0 0 0 7 ed that p.A540E is not pathological, which is confirmed since the unaf- heterozygous 10 9 0 4 23 fected father also carries c .649_650delGT (p .Cys217fsX) in exon6 and no mutation 18 1 1 8 28 c .791C>G (p .P264R) in exon7 . The novel 2bp deletion is predicted to total 38 10 1 13 62 cause a premature termination codon, and since it is apparently in- P05.027 cis to the previously described c .791C>G mutation, presumably the Homozygousity mapping of congenital hyperinsulinism of deletion mutation has the over-riding impact on the expression of the infancy (cHi) in italian patients phenotype . A. Gessi1, M. Proverbio1, E. Mangano1, R. Spinelli2, M. Bove3, P. Sogno Valin3, S. Di Candia3, I. Zamproni4, S. Mora4, L. Bosio3, M. Caruso5, A. Salvatoni6, G. P05.029 Chiumello3, C. Battaglia1; Creatine deficiency syndromes in Spain: enzymatic and 1Department of Science and Biomedical Technologies (DiSTeB) , University of molecular genetic studies Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Institute of Biomedical Technologies (ITB-CNR), Segrate, P. Alcaide1,2, A. Ribes3,4, A. Arias3,4, R. Artuch5,4, J. Campistol5,4, B. Merinero1,2, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Endocrine Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific M. Ugarte1,2, P. Rodríguez-Pombo1,2; Institute, Vita Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy, 4Laboratory of Pediat- 1Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa. Dpto Biología Molecular . Univer- ric Endocrinology and BoNetwork, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, sidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Instituto 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania., Catania, Italy, 6Department of de Bioquímica Clínica, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospi- Clinical and Biological Science (DSCB) , Pediatric Clinic, University of Insubria, tal San Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain. Varese, Italy. Creatine deficiency syndromes (CDS) are a group of underdiagnosed Congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy (CHI) is a heterogeneous disor- inborn errors caused by defects in the biosynthesis of creatine or its der due to genetic mutations 80% of which are found in genes encod- transporter . The two defects affecting biosynthesis, namely arginine- ing both subunits of pancreatic KATP channel ABCC8 and KCNJ11 . glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) and guanidinoacetate methyltrans- Other causative genes have been identified but, up-to-date, in 30% of ferase (GAMT) are autosomal recessive traits, whereas the creatine patients the genetic basis of CHI has yet to be determined, suggesting transporter (CRTR) is an X-linked disorder . additional locus heterogeneity . We present the results of a collaborative CDS prospective screening SNP microarrays have improved the possibility for autozygousity map- based on abnormal metabolite excretion or decreased creatine signal ping of rare disorders with founder mutations, in order to identify dis- in brain MRS in a cohort of patients with mental retardation (MR) and/ ease susceptibility loci . or suspected metabolic disorder . Three GAMT and nine CRTR cases In our study we have performed a genome wide SNP mapping in twen- were selected. Confirmatory diagnosis was assessed by measuring ty two CHI probands and their families using Affymetrix GeneChip® GAMT activity or creatine uptake in fibroblasts using MS/MS methods. 250K Human Mapping arrays . Using a complex computational ap- Direct sequencing analysis of GAMT and SLC6A8 genes was carried proach, we identified long contiguous stretches of copy number neu- out . tral-homozygous loci (autozygousity) on chromosomes 1, 5, 7, and 8, In two of the three potential GAMT patients, deficient activity was both in consanguineous and in non consanguineous families . Three confirmed in fibroblasts (<4 % of matched control), and three new se- patients, two of which carried a causative mutation on ABCC8/KCNJ11 quence variations were detected: c .145delT (p .Y49fs), which appeared genes, showed a wide common region of homozygousity on chromo- in homozygous fashion, and c .316C>T (p .Q106X) and c .407C>T some 11p15 . Additionally, two probands shared stretches of homozy- (p .T136M), both in heterozygous fashion . Four out of the nine CRTR gousity on chromosomes 4, 6, 10 ,11 and 18 . cases selected (two from the same family) presented a deficient cre- Moreover, one patient, negative for ABCC8/KCNJ11 gene mutations, atine transport in fibroblasts. Mutational analysis of SLC6A8 gene led showed a homozygous region of 79Mb on chromosome 4 containing us to identify three nucleotide changes, two of them novel: c .1210G>C the causative gene HADH . Direct sequencing of the coding region of (p.A404P); c.1079-1081delTCT (p.F360del). All changes identified in HADH gene showed a homozygous C to T transition in exon 6 leading both genes fulfilled several criteria to be considered as pathogenic to a premature stop of the synthetized protein.Further refinement of mutations . other candidate regions by microsatellites marker analysis and linkage Our results confirm the presence of CDS patients in a broad population analysis will be necessary to map other disease loci in CHI families . of neurological patients including those with MR of unknown aetiology highlighting the importance of screening for these potentially treatable P05.028 disorders . congenital Nephrotic syndrome (cNs) caused by a complex genotype in the Nephrin gene (NPHs1) revealing 2 novel P05.030 mutations two novel mutations in the CYPA gene causing congenital E. Fylaktou1, S. Megremis1, A. Mitsioni2, C. Stefanidis2, S. Kitsiou - Tzeli1, E. Adrenal Hyperplasia and severe Hypertension in a 46,XY Female Kanavakis1, J. Traeger - Synodinos1; Patient 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, “Aghia Sofia” Children´s Hospital, Athens, S. Kofman-Alfaro1, N. Nájera1, N. Garibay2, G. Queipo1; Greece, 2Department of Pediatrics Nephrology “P. A. Kyriakou” Children´s Hos- 1Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina Universidad Nacional pital, Athens, Greece. Autónoma de México SDEIPTID.05-1, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Endocrinology Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is characterized by gross proteinuria, hypo- Department, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico. albumenia, edema and hyperlipidemia, which in CNS manifest in utero In the steroidogenic pathway, cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone or within 3 months after birth . Inherited impairments of the glomerular which can be processed to either mineralocorticoids in adrenal glands filtration barrier are an important cause of NS, and in CNS and infan- or to sex steroids in the gonads. This effect is due to a 17α-hydroxyl- tile NS ~60% of cases are caused by mutations in 4 genes: Nephrin ation and 17, 20-lyase activity respectively . The microsomal enzyme (NPHS1), Podocin (NPHS2), Laminin-β2 (LAMB2) and Wilm’s Tumor cytochrome 450c17 has a deep impact in the progress of the steroido- suppressor gene (WT1). In a newborn with clinical findings compat- genic pathway because it has both 17α-hidroxilase and 17, 20-lyase ible with CNS, and his parents, the 27 exons of the NPHS1 gene and enzymes activities . Mutations in the CYP17A1 gene cause 17α-hi- 8 exons of the NPHS2 gene were subject to direct DNA sequencing droxilase deficiency (17OHD), an unusual form of Congenital Adrenal analysis and mutation detection analysis (Surveyor mutation detection Hyperplasia (CAH) . This anomaly occurs in 1/50000 newborns and kit, Transgenomic, Elancourt, France) . No mutations were found in the it accounts for nearly 1% of the CAH cases . Classical adrenal and NPHS2 gene . However, the proband was found to have three hetero- gonadal phenotype of the complete 17OHD includes hypertension and zygous mutations in NPHS1: c .1096A>C (p .S366R) in exon9, c .649_ hypokalemia, secondary to massive overproduction of the 17-deoxys- 650delGT (p .Cys217fsX) in exon6 and c .791C>G (p .P264R) in exon7 . teroid, 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) and corticosterone in patients The mother was found to be heterozygous for c .1096A>C (p .S366R) with a 46,XY female phenotype . Nevertheless, there is considerable while the father was heterozygous for the novel c .649_650delGT, variation in the clinical and biochemical features of 17OHD . Approxi-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  mately 56 mutations have been described in the CYP17A1 gene . We regarding size of the expanded allele, Southern blot must be pursued present the molecular characterization of two novel mutations in this for RPPCR-positive patients . For RPPCR-negative patients, Southern gene in a mexican-mestizo 46,XY female with CAH and severe hyper- blot analysis is unnecessary . tension who does not respond to treatment . Gene sequence revealed a compound heterozygous (K110X/ R362H) leading to a complete lack P05.033 of enzyme activity . The patient was heterozygote for four SNPs . We Human miRNAs on chromosome 21 are differentially expressed suggest that these polymorphisms could be related to the failure of in Down syndrome fetal hearts blood pressure treatment . We propose that all DSD patients require a F. Fabbrini, A. Izzo, R. Negri, R. Cicatiello, A. Ferraro, R. Genesio, A. Conti, L. multidisciplinary team to determine the etiology and orient the thera- Nitsch; peutic approach to minimized medical, psychological and social com- University Federico II, Napoli, Italy. plications . We previously demonstrated dosage-dependent upregulation of chro- mosome 21 (Hsa21) genes and dysregulation of mitochondrial and P05.031 ECM genes in heart tissues of Down syndrome (DS) fetuses . Some molecular genetic analysis of cYP2D6 gene and used methods of these dysregulated genes might be responsible for the DS cardiac E. Flodrova1,2, A. Žourková3,2, T. Kašpárek3, J. Juřica2, R. Gaillyová1,2; phenotype, but it is evident that also other functional non-coding se- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, quences, such as miRNAs, might play an important role . MiRNAs are 2Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department highly expressed in the heart and regulate cardiac development and of Psychiatry, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. function . Five miRNAs, according to Sanger miRBase, are on Hsa21: The cytochrome CYP2D6 is enzyme responsible for metabolisation miR-99a, miR-125b, let-7c, miR-155 and miR-802 . Nothing is known of many commonly used drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants, neu- about their expression in trisomic tissues . roleptics, beta blockers and antiarhythmics . CYP2D6 is localized to- We evaluated by qRT-PCR the expression of Hsa21 miRNAs in heart gether with pseudogenes CYP2D7 and CYP2D8 at chromosome 22 tissues from DS fetuses and controls . We found that miR-99a, miR- and it is highly polymorphic . The polymorphisms leads to different in- 125b, let-7c and miR-155 were expressed in 20-22 weeks fetal heart . dividual responses following drug administration and increased risk of MiR-802 was not expressed . MiR-99a, miR-155 and let-7c were over- adverse reactions or the lack of the therapeutic response . According expressed in trisomic hearts, whereas miR-125b was normoregulated . to the enzymatic activity the population has been grouped as - poor Target genes of upregulated miRNAs were obtained by merging Pic- metabolizers, intermediate metabolizers, effective metabolizers, ultra- Tar, TargetScan and MiRanda prediction lists . As miRNAs could affect rapid metabolizers. There are studied influences of polymorphisms to protein expression by either interfering with RNA translation or promot- the antidepressants treatment for a long time in Department of Medical ing mRNA degradation, we evaluated the mRNA expression of target Genetics and Department of Psychiatry . genes of overexpressed miRNAs by using the data set of our previous Methods such as direct sequencing and agarose electroforesis are study . Seventeen targets of miR-99a, 12 of miR-155 and 15 of let-7c subsequently combinated with more modern, faster and more effective were expressed in fetal heart and downregulated in trisomic samples . method - Real-Time PCR and High Resolution Melting using the Light Target genes possibly involved in DS phenotype were found such as Cycler 480 System . Recently we can detect the most frequent null al- SLC25A4, let-7c target, downregulated in DS hearts and involved in leles 3* 4* 6* 7* and 8* using the specific fluorescent labeled probes. mitochondrial function, and CYP26B1, miR-99a target, showing a dos- Up to 99% of poor metabolizers in the Caucasian population can be age-dependent effect on ventricular septal defects . detected with genetic testing for only 5 alleles (plus allele 5*, which can be detected by using the Sybr green) . The High Resolution Melting has P05.034 been performed for the most frequent SNP´s in CYP2D6 gene . Het- study of folate genes alteration CBS 844ins68 and MTR A2756G erozygous samples are readily distinguished from homozygous and as maternal risk factor of Down syndrome among iranian cases wild-type samples with used dyes . This paper provides an overview of M. T. Mirgani, A. Aleyasine; current technologies available for assessing polymorphisms in Depart- National Institue for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic ment of Medical Genetics . Republic of Iran. Supported by research project MSM 0021622404 (2005 - 2011) Down syndrome is the most common chromosomal abnormality oc- cured 1 in 700 live birth . Abnormal segregation of chromosome 21 in P05.032 meiosis is the cause of trisomy 21 . Common polymorphisms in en- the clinical Use of Fluorescent Repeat-Primed PcR Assay in the zymes coding genes in folic acid pathway have been suggested to Diagnosis of myotonic Dystrophy type 1 play role in etiology of chromosome 21 nondisjunction . In this study, E. L. Spriggs1,2, P. Frosk1, R. Ray1; the role for 844ins68 polymorphism in cystathionine beta synthase 1Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Diagnostic Services of Manitoba, Winnipeg, (CBS) gene and A2756G polymorphism in methionine synthase gene MB, Canada, 2Departments of Biochemistry & Medical Genetics and Pediatrics (MTR) in folic acid pathway has been investigated as maternal genetic & Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. risk factor of Down syndrome among Iranian patients . CBS 844Ins68 Some trinucleotide repeat expansion disorders require Southern blot polymorphism is a 68 bp insertion in exon 8 of this gene and MTR analysis to confirm the presence or absence of a large repeat expan- A2756G polymorphism causes an A>G transition at 2756 bp . We have sion adding days to turnaround time . Cagnoli et al . (2004) successfully studied 93 mothers having DS children and 116 aged matched con- applied the use of fluorescent repeat-primed PCR (RPPCR) method to trol mothers for the frequency of above polymorphisms using RFLP differentiate between patients who are homozygous for a normal-sized PCR analysis . Genomic DNA was extracted from blood Leukocytes by allele and those who are heterozygous for a very large expansion for salting out procedure . Frequencies of 844Ins68 polymorphism were 8 Friedreich ataxia and spinocerebellar ataxia types 10 and 12 . Using (8 .6%) in mother cases and 18 (15 .5%) in control mothers with no ho- a slight modification of this RPPCR method, we were able to consis- mozygousity in both groups . Frequency of A2756G polymorphism was tently detect the presence of large repeat expansions in the 3’UTR of observed as AA in 56 (60 .2%) AG in 33 (35 .5%) and GG in 4 (4 .3%) in the DMPK gene, the mutation underlying myotonic dystrophy type 1 . cases mothers and were 56%, 35 .3% and 10% among control moth- To assess the validity of this assay in a clinical setting, all 63 patient ers respectively . Statistical analysis showed no association between samples and 9 quality assurance samples received over 18 months for 844ins68 and A2756G polymorphisms and risk of Down syndrome in myotonic dystrophy type 1 were analyzed by the usual “gold standard” Iranian mothers (P-value for 844Ins68 and A2756G were 0 .146 and method as well as by RPPCR . In the standard method, the number of 0 .451 respectively) . Combination of these polymorphisms also have CTG repeats is determined using fluorescent PCR followed by capillary no effect on risk of Down syndrome’s mother (P-Value was 0 .216 ) . electrophoresis . For a situation where only one normal-sized repeat is observed or two normal-sized repeats that are only one trinucleotide repeat apart in size, the sample is further tested by Southern blot anal- ysis . A review of all data showed 100% correlation between the results obtained from the “gold standard” and RPPCR . As RPPCR can only show the presence of the expansion and cannot provide informationMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.035 P05.037 supporting the appropriate ordering of genetic laboratory tests Early myoclonic encephalopathy caused by a disruption of the in the UK healthcare workforce Neuregulin-1 receptor ErbB4 C. Barker, C. Bennett, C. Cooley, P. Farndon; H. Van Esch1, B. Ceulemans2, J. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1, L. Backx1; NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Rehabilitation and Epilepsy United Kingdom. Centre for Children and Youth, Pulderbos, Belgium. To address an increased need to promote the clinically appropriate The tyrosine kinase receptor ErbB4 (erythroblastic leukemia viral on- and equitable ordering of genetic laboratory tests in the UK, the NHS cogene homolog 4) plays a crucial role in numerous neurobiological National Genetics Education and Development Centre is working to processes in the developing and adult brain . One of the most impor- raise understanding and knowledge of genetics in the UK healthcare tant and well-studied ligands of ErbB4 is Neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and it workforce for non-genetics specialists . was shown that NRG1-ErbB4 signaling is essential for neurobiologi- The Centre identified the key knowledge and attitudes required to en- cal processes like neurogenesis, migration, synaptic plasticity and dif- courage appropriate ordering of genetic laboratory tests as part of a ferentiation of neurons and glia . Moreover, recent molecular genetics wider project to integrate genetic skills into clinical practice, job plan- studies implicate ErbB4 in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia . How- ning, evaluation, education and training . The knowledge and attitudes ever, the phenotypic consequences of haploinsufficiency of ErbB4 are identified allow healthcare staff to recognise where genetic tests will not known, since no coding mutations have been identified until now. inform clinical management within the limits of their role and where Here, we present a patient with early myoclonic encephalopathy and referral is appropriate . Healthcare staff will also be equipped to recog- profound psychomotor delay with a de novo reciprocal translocation nise any social, ethical or legal implications in ordering the genetic t(2;6)(q34;p25 .3), disrupting the ErbB4 gene . This patient represents laboratory test . the first case of haploinsufficiency for one of the ErbB family members To integrate these skills into clinical practice, the Centre has targeted of tyrosine kinase receptors . health professionals for whom genetics is highly relevant and is work- ing with these groups and other professional bodies to identify how P05.038 genetics affects their clinical practice . mutation analysis of epidermolysis bullosa in the czech Using this information, the Centre is creating tools allowing healthcare Republic staff to recognise where genetics impacts on their clinical practice . For B. Jerabkova1,2, L. Fajkusova1,2, H. Buckova3,2,4, K. Vesely5,6, R. Gaillyova7,2; example, relevant case scenarios allow healthcare staff to draw paral- 1Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, lels with their own clinical practice . These tools are further supported Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department by the Centre through the provision of education and training support of Pediatric Dermatology of 1st Pediatric Clinic, Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, and learning and teaching resources . Czech Republic, 4Institute of Medical Postgraduate Studies Prague, Prague, It is envisaged that this work will lead to more appropriate and eq- Czech Republic, 51st Institute of Pathological Anatomy, St. Ann´s Hospital, uitable ordering of genetic tests and ultimately the enhancement of Brno, Czech Republic, 6Medical Faculty of Masaryk University Brno, Brno, patient care . Czech Republic, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. P05.036 Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a clinically and genetically heteroge- Vascular type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: Evidences for a neous group of heritable skin disorders . It is characterised by skin blis- stochastic effect of COL3A1 haploinsufficiency tering and mucous membrane . EB has been divided into three major A. Plancke1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, V. Rigau3, C. Rene1, M. Taulan1, B. Cat- categories based on the level of blister formation in dermal-epidermal teau2, R. Sfeir2, S. Coopman2, N. Pallares-Ruiz1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2, M. junction zone . Claustres1, P. Khau Van Kien1; EB is diagnosed by evaluation of clinical findings, by transmission 1CHU Montpellier/INSERM U827, Montpellier, France, 2CHRU de Lille, Lille, electron microscopic examination of a skin biopsy and immunohisto- France, 3CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. chemical mapping of protein components of dermal-epidermal junction Mutations that confer an unusual pattern of inheritance in a gene zone from a skin biopsy . Molecular-genetic diagnostics of EB was initi- related to a well known genetic disease can sometimes highlight a ated in 2004 . particular mechanism useful to correlate genotype to phenotype . Here Dystrophic EB (EBD) is caused by mutations in the collagen type VII we describe a case of recessive Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) in (COL7A1), which consists of 118 exons . EB simplex (EBS) is caused a young girl of asymptomatic and related parents (uncle-niece) . She by mutations in the keratin 5 (KRT5), which consists of 9 exons and exhibited: atrophic scars, extensive bruising, joint hypermobility and keratin 14 (KRT14), which consists of 8 exons . died at 12 years-old from an extreme intestinal fragility . According to DNA from EB patients and their relatives were screened for mutations the Villefranche nosology, she fulfilled the criteria of EDS vascular type in COL7A1, KRT5 and KRT14 genes . Analysis was performed using for laboratory testing . Total sequencing of COL3A1 cDNA (obtain form PCR, denaturing high performance liquid chromatography, high reso- skin cultured fibroblasts) identified an homozygous nucleotide dupli- lution melting analysis and direct sequencing . We could identify KRT5 cation (c .479_480dupT) resulting in a premature termination codon or KRT14 dominant mutations in 11 out of 18 EBS families . As regards (p .Val160fsX46) . Studies in genomic DNA showed that this mutation 27 EBD probands, we revealed disease causative mutations in 16 pa- in exon 5 of the COL3A1 gene was inherited from each parent . As tients and screening of COL7A1 is in progress . Prenatal diagnosis of expected, the expression analysis (RT-PCR, quantitative-PCR, Immu- one pregnancy in family with occurrence of EBS predicted the fetus nohistochemistry, WB) showed a strong mRNA decay, which results in being normal and subsequently a healthy child was born . an absence of type III collagen in the proband . Determination of EB at the level of DNA has important implication for This case, shows that a deficit in collagen III is viable in early child- final confirmation of diagnosis, possibility of genetic counselling and hood in Man. Here, the expected COL3A1 haploinsufficiency in her early prenatal diagnosis . asymptomatic ascendants did not lead to the severe clinical manifes- This work was supported by IGA MH NR9346-3 . tations of EDS vascular type cause by haploinsufficiency of one allele as described in the literature . This case provides evidences for a sto- P05.039 chastic effect of COL3A1 haploinsufficiency in Man with (a) modifying Erythropoietic protoporphyria in a czech family caused by a new factor(s), which remains to be identified. 84G>A (W28X) mutation in the ferrochelatase gene J. Prochazkova1, J. Sperl2, S. M. Farrag1, L. Barnincova1, J. Spicak2, P. Mar- tasek1; 11st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) is a disorder with autosomal domi- nant inheritance caused by partial deficiency of ferrochelatase (FECH). Ferrochelatase is the ultimate enzyme of heme biosynthesis . EPP is characterized by excess accumulation of protoporphyrin, particularlyMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  in the erythroid cells of the bone marrow . Biochemical features of EPP has been observed in two chromosomes and c .3037 ins G in three include increased protoporphyrin levels in erythrocytes, plasma, feces, chromosomes . According to our results we propose that there might be and bile . Clinical manifestations of the disease are characterized by “hot points” in UNC13D gene, where mutations are found with higher cutaneous photosensitivity, which almost always appears in childhood frequency . and includes burning, itching, swelling, and redness in sun-exposed areas . Hepatic failure occurs in some patients (about 1-10% of EPP P05.042 patients) which may necessitate liver transplantation . The gene en- Familial hypercholesterolemia: experience from a portuguese coding human FECH is localized on chromosome 18q21 .3, and spans genetic department over 45kb with eleven exons . The cDNA encodes a protein containing I. M. Gaspar1, A. Gaspar2, S. Martins3, A. Mourato4, M. Antunes3, L. Sousa4, 423 amino acids, and the enzyme exists as a homodimer of 86 kDa . A. Cabral5, D. Gaspar6, O. Moldovan7, M. Simao7, I. Gomes7, H. Santos7, C. Each subunit contains residues 65-423 and one [2Fe-2S] cluster . Alves8, S. Silva8, A. Medeiros8, M. Bourbon8; Mutational analyses of the FECH gene revealed a novel unpublished 1Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Consulta de Prevenção mutation in the FECH gene in a patient from Czech Republic with EPP: de Doenças Cardiovasculares, Serviço de Pediatria - Hospital de Santa Ma- a G→A transition at position 84 in exon 2. This point mutation alters to ria, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Consulta de Prevenção de Doenças Cardiovasculares, a tryptophan to a stop codon (W28X) . The amino acid tryptophan at Serviço de Pediatria Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Consulta de position 28 is located in a mitochondrial targeting sequence spanning Prevenção de Doenças Cardiovasculares, Serviço de Pediatria Hospital de amino acid residues 1-62 that is removed during proteolytic process- Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Consulta de Prevenção de Doenças Cardiovas- ing . Analyses were carried out on seven members of proband’s family; culares, Serviço de Pediatria Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 6Cen- all persons, except one, are asymptomatic carriers . tro Estudos - Ministerio de Educação, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Serviço de Genética Supported by grants # 1M0520 and MSM 0021 620806 from Ministry Medica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 8Unidade de Investigação of Education, Youth and Sports of Czech Republic . Cardiovascular, Instituto Nacional de Saúde, Lisboa, Portugal. Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- P05.040 der, usually caused by mutations on the low density lipoprotein re- Identification of the molecular defects in Turkish FHL patients ceptor gene (LDLR), the gene encoding apolipoprotein B (APOB) or assigned to Perforin and munc13-4 genes Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/Kexin type 9 (PCSK9) which is as- G. Balta1, H. Okur1, N. Akarsu1, S. Berrak2, S. Unal1, A. Gurgey1; sociated with premature atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease 1Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey. (CHD) . Familial Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare auto- OBJECTIVES: Clinical and molecular characterization of patients and somal recessive, if untreated, fatal disorder of early childhood . The their children with family history of premature CHD and abnormal lipid purpose of this study is to evaluate the genetic defects underlying profile. clinical phenotypes observed in Turkish patients with this disorder . The MATERIAL AND METODS: a clinical questionnaire from the “Portu- subjects of this study were a total of 79 FHL patients (52M/27F) from guese FH Study” was completed, characterized their lipid profile and 74 unrelated families (consanguinity:62, family history:31) . Linkage study mutations in LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 genes . analysis used for subtyping the patients to FHL type II revealed homo- RESULTS: We observed 163 persons, 111 adults and 52 children in zygosity or consanguineous common alleles in 19 of these families . Di- 56 families . 13 patients with CHD were younger than 50 years of age . rect sequencing of Perforin gene led to the identification of 5 different The mean total cholesterol was 264, 41 mg/dL and 294,09 mg/dL and sequence changes in 12 families . Six patients had nonsense W374X mean LDL-cholesterol was 189 .87 mg/dL for and 206 .1 mg/dL for chil- mutation in homozygous state except one who was coming from a dren and adults respectively . All families received counseling regard- non-consanguineous family . Two patients had G149S, one V50M, two ing lifestyle and dietary modifications. After dietary or pharmacological A91V and one novel A523D homozygous missense changes . Muta- therapy, mean cholesterol was 222,14 mg/dL and 238,6 mg/dL and tions in this gene account for about 16% of Turkish FHL patients in this mean LDL-cholesterol was 148 .25 mg/dL and 160 .6 mg/dL for chil- study . On the other hand, 20 families were found to show either ho- dren and adults respectively . Molecular study of the LDLR gene was mozygosity or consanguineous common alleles for Munc13-4 gene in performed in 56 families, and a mutation was found in 23 families . No the linkage analysis . These patients were screened for mutations in 32 mutations were identified in APOB or PCSK9 genes. exons of Munc13-4 gene by SSCP/heterodublex analysis . Sequenc- CONCLUSION: Molecular study of FH patients offers the possibility ing the aberrant bands, thus far, led to the identification of 3 different of identification of the mutation in relatives at risk for premature ath- homozygous mutations in 3 unrelated patients who were coming from erosclerosis. Early diagnosis allows earlier lifestyle modifications and consanguineous families . A frameshift (627delT) mutation was detect- dietary or pharmacological intervention in mortality and morbidity . ed in a female patient who also had heterozygous A91V mutation in Perforin gene while nonsense (R1065X) and novel missense (R414C) P05.043 mutations were found in 2 male patients . This study was supported by Functional analysis of potencial splice site mutations by Rt-PcR TUBITAK (Project No: 105S386; SBAG-3193) . of LDLR mRNA isolated from fresh blood mononuclear cells A. C. Alves, M. A. Duarte, A. M. Medeiros, L. Marques, V. Francisco, M. Bour- P05.041 bon; six new mutations in UNCD gene in Russian patients with Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- N. Poltavets1, M. Maschan2, A. Polyakov1, G. Novichkova2, A. Maschan2; der associated with high risk of coronary heart disease . FH is caused 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal mainly by inherited defects on the Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor Research Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and immunology, gene (LDLR) resulting in increased circulating LDL cholesterol . Of the Moscow, Russian Federation. many different LDLR mutations found in FH patients worldwide, about FHL is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of immune regulatory path- 6 % of single base substitutions are located near or within introns ways characterized by a defect in natural killer cell function . UNC13D and are predicted to result in exon skipping, retention of an intron or gene codes a protein involved in vesicle priming function and its muta- activation of cryptic sites during mRNA splicing . Ten such mutations, tions have been shown to cause FHL. We have examined five Russian four of them novel, were found in the “Portuguese FH Study”, and unrelated patients with FHL in age ranged from 1 to 5 years ( two fa- those whose effect on splicing was untested have been investigated milial and three sporadic cases) . We have investigated DNA samples by RT-PCR of LDLR mRNA isolated from fresh blood mononuclear for mutation in UNC13D gene coding area by direct sequencing . All cells . Four of these variants (313+6 T>C, 1060+1G>A, c .2389G>T our patients were found to be compound heterozygotes, carring two (p .V776L), 2547+1G>A) caused exon skipping, and one caused reten- mutations (c .2343 del 2344-2347 / c .3037 ins G; c .3037 ins G / c .3173 tion of an intron (c .1359-5C>G),while two others (c .2140+5 G>A and T>C ( p .1058 Leu > Pro); c .627 del T / c .1828 ins A; c .322-1 G>A (CD c .1061-8T>C) had no apparent effect . Variants in two patients lost to 042833) / c .3037 ins G; c .2215 del 2216-2239 / c .2343 del 2344-2347 follow-up could not be tested experimentally, but they almost certainly ) .Only one mutation c .322-1 G>A (CD 042833) has been previously affect splicing because they disrupt the invariant AG or GT in acceptor reported, and six others are new . The mutation c .2343 del 2344-2347 (818-2A>G) or donor (1845+1delG) spice sites . These mutations rep-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  resent 9% of all mutations in the “Portuguese FH Study”. Our findings StripAssay for 12 common mutations might be used in routine muta- emphasize that care must be taken before reporting the presence or tion screening analysis . absence of a splice site mutation in LDLR for diagnostic purposes . Our study also demonstrates that relatively simple, quick and inex- P05.046 pensive RNA studies can evaluate putative splicing mutations that are Promoter studies in the FA genes not always predictable by available software, thereby reducing genetic D. Meier, K. Neveling, D. Schindler; misdiagnosis of FH patients . Department of Human Genetics, Biocenter, Wuerzburg, Germany. Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genome-instability disorder with the fre- P05.044 quent presence of congenital malformations and bone marrow failure . co-ocurrence of four mutations in a clinical case of Familial Other characteristic features include predisposition to FA-typical ma- mediterranean Fever lignancies and cellular hypersensivity to DNA-interstrand crosslinking . I. Navarro-Vera1, B. Hernandez-Charro1, M. Sanchez1, P. Armero1, R. Marín2, At least 13 genes and corresponding complementation groups are un- P. Madero1; derlying the disease . Eight of the FA proteins (FANCA, -B, -C, -E, -F, 1Centro de Análisis Genéticos, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Hospital Puerta del Mar, Ca- -G, -L and -M) and other components assemble in a nuclear complex, diz, Spain. the FA “core complex” . Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) type 1 is characterized by recur- Little if any is known about the promoter regions. However, identifica- rent short episodes of fever associated with different inflammatory pro- tion and characterization of the promoters would be essential for under- cesses . MEFV is the only gene currently known to be associated to standing the regulation of transcription, including intergenic regulation, FMF . E148Q in exon 2 and several mutations in the exon 10 of MEFV of the FA genes . Our aim is to provide an explanation for the equimolar are the most common . FMF is inherited in an autosomal recessive composition of the core complex . We used a variety of in silico meth- manner, so both parents of a proband are considered obligate carriers . ods to predict potential promoter regions. To confirm these, we have We studied a FMF clinical case and his family and surprisingly four set up dual luciferase reporter assays. We cloned the identified regions different mutations were found . (~1kb) in the pGL3 basic vector that carries the reporter gene for firefly The family consisted in the affected proband, a sister and the par- luciferase . As co-reporter we used the pRL null vector that contains ents, all of then unaffected . The study was carried out by bidireccional the renilla luciferase gene . With these constructs, we transfected HeLa sequencing of exon 10 and targeted mutation analysis by RFLPs of and HEK293 cells to assay luciferase activity using a luminometer . In a E148Q mutation in exon 2 of MEFV gene . second approach we used mutated constructs to detect any decrease The E148Q was present in heterozygous state in the proband . The of activity . Further characterization includes transcription factor bind- sequencing analysis of the exon 10 showed the p .R653H and p .I640M ing sites and conserved sequence elements . First results indicate that mutations and the deletion p .I692del, all of them previously described . there is generally strong promoter activity . Short half-life of the gene The study of familial samples revealed the presence of two mutations products is consistent with high transcriptional activity of the FA genes, in each and everyone: father p .I640M and p .R653H, mother E148Q and rapid regulation in response to DNA damage . and p .I692del and sister p .I640M and p .R653H (haplotype in cis phase from his father) . P05.047 The inheritance pattern showed that each parent carries two mutations MYCN gene mutation screening in 9 patients with Feingold in cis phase, the sister inherited the wild type phase of the mother and syndrome the mutated phase of the father and the affected son is therefore car- A. Nougayrede, C. Golzio, A. Munnich, S. Lyonnet, J. Amiel, L. de Pontual; rying all four mutations . INSERM U-781, Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, Paris, This case makes us aware of the importance of considering the haplo- France. type phase of multiple mutations in recessive disorders . MYCN is a transcription factor amplified in about 30% of neuroblas- toma . MYCN is also the disease-causing gene in Feingold syndrome, P05.045 with a dominant mode of inheritance. Feingold syndrome is defined mEFV mutations in turkish Patients suffering From Familial by microcephaly, digital anomalies (syndactyly, brachymesophalangy), mediterranean Fever digestive atresia (oesophagus, duodenum), facial features (retrogna- O. Cilingir1, M. Ozdemir1, M. H. Muslumanoglu1, E. Tepeli1, G. Bademci1, C. tism, small palpebral fissures) and occasional malformations of heart, Korkmaz2, O. Kutlay1, U. Demir1, H. Aslan1, B. Durak1, S. Artan1; kidney and spleen . 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical We studied the coding sequence of MYCN in 9 patients and found Genetics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, 3 mutations in the bHLH or the Leucine Zipper domain: 2 frameshift Department of Rheumatology, Eskisehir, Turkey. mutations leading to a truncated protein and a nonsense mutation . Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive periodic Loss-of-function is highly likely for frameshift mutations, while a domi- disorder. Over 50 mutations have been identified in the MEFV gene nant-negative due to altered DNA binding and preserved dimerisation responsible for FMF . For diagnosis of FMF; molecular methods and is hypothesised for the nonsense mutation . MYCN deletion are cur- Tel-Hashomer Clinical Criterias (THCC) can be used . AIM: To identify rently being tested for the remaining patients . distribution and frequency of the MEFV gene mutations in Turkish FMF We performed in situ hybridization on human embryos (Carnegie patients, compare two molecular different technics and correlation of stages 12, 15 and 17) to determine MYCN expression pattern dur- clinical-molecular diagnosis . PATIENTS-METHODS: The study was ing development . At C12, MYCN is ubiquitous expressed . Later (C15 carried out on 604 clinically diagnosed Turkish FMF patients . Mutation and C17), expression is restricted to mesencephalon, diencephalon, screening of the MEFV gene was performed by sequencing of exon 10 spinal cord, limb buds, oesophagus and stomach, in accordance with in 448 patients and by FMF specific StripAssay (PCR-Reverse Hybrid- Feingold syndrome features . MYCN is also expressed in the primitive ization) for E148Q, P369S and F479L mutations of exons 2,3, and 5, mesonephros and the Rathcke pouch. These later findings argue for respectively in 256 patients . RESULTS: Of the 604 unrelated patients kidney anomalies to be regarded as a feature of Feingold syndrome investigated, 344 (56 .95%) had one or two mutations : 85 patients and raise the hypothesis of an endocrine involvement for the short (24 .71%) were homozygous; 88 (25 .58%) were compound-heterozy- stature observed in the syndrome . gous; 171 (49 .71%) were heterozygote mutations . Of the mutations, M694V (A>G), V726A, M680I (G>C), R761H accounted for 65 .99, P05.048 19 .18, 17 .44, and 4 .36 %, respectively . StripAssay was observed molecular characterization of familial hypercholesterolemia in completely correlate with direct sequencing in 100 patients . For deter- iranian patients mining the correlation between mutation status, clinical diagnosis with M. -. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori1, E. Farrokhi1, F. Shayesteh2, M. Modarresi2, THCC was investigated in 90 patients . Only 33 patients were exactly M. Shirani1, F. Roghani Dehkordi3, K. Ghatreh Samani4, G. Mobini1, M. Bani- diagnosed by THCC whereas 53 patients were reported mutations by talebi1, K. Ashrafi1, M. Shahrani1, N. Parvin1; StripAssay . CONCLUSION: Exon 10 is the most common site for FMF 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, mutations whereas exons 2,3 and 5 accounts for 11 .63% of the cases . 2Department of Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Payam-e-noor University, The most common mutation among Turks is M694V (A>G) . As a result, Esfahan Center, Esfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Cardiology,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  School of Medicine, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, METHODS: A total of 21 patients with rheumatic heart disease were Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Clinical Chemistry, School of Medicine, enrolled . The diagnosis of mitral stenosis was established with echo- Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. cardiography or angiography . Patients with predominant mitral regur- Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- gitation or isolated aortic or tricuspid valve disease were excluded . der caused mainly by mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor Genetic analysis was carried out by the NanoChip® Molecular Genet- (LDLR) and apolipoprotein B (APOB) . Until now, the molecular basis of ics Workstation . FH has been demonstrated in detail in many populations, but there is RESULTS: Four of the patients were found to have heterozygote still very limited Molecular data concerning FH in Iran . The aim of this MEFV mutations . Three of these mutations were E148Q/- and one study was to characterize the LDLR and APOB gene mutations in an was V726A/- . Iranian population . CONCLUSION: In the light of our preliminary results, we may conclude A total of 50 non-related Iranian heterozygous FH subjects were stud- that the frequency of MEFV mutations are not higher than the normal ied . All samples were initially tested for 3 common APOB gene mu- population . Further studies with larger sample sizes are needed for tations including R3500Q , R3500W and R3531C using PCR- RFLP better understanding the possible relationship between these two dis- assay . Subsequently, LDLR gene were screened partially (exons 2, 4, orders and to clarify whether specific mutations play role in the patho- 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 14) by PCR-SSCP analysis and positive results genesis . were confirmed by DNA sequencing. Four previously reported polymorphisms 1413 G >A, 1725 C >T, 1773 P05.051 T > C and 2140 + 5G>A were found in 18% of population studied . comparison of mutations screening assay on mEFV gene in Moreover, no variation was found in APOB gene . Our data indicated turkish FmF patients. that LDLR and APOB gene mutations have not contribution to FH B. Eroglu Kesim1,2, O. Kagnıcı1,3, G. Karatas1, S. Guz Eroglu1, S. Eraslan1,4, A. in Iranian population studied here . However, we examined 3 com- Dagdemir1, Y. Laleli1; mon APOB mutations and 9 exons of LDLR in only 50 patients, and 1Duzen Laboratuaries Groups, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Sisli Etfal Training and Re- to determine the role of these genes in developing FH in Iran, more search Hospital,Medical Genetic ., Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul university institute samples/populations needed to be investigated for the whole coding for experimental medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Genklinik Genetics , Genetıc Diag- regions and promoter of the genes . nostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal-recessive disor- P05.049 der characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis common correlation of mEFV gene mutations and bone mineral density in in eastern Mediterranean populations . Over 70 mutations have been children with familial meditterian fever identified in the MEFV gene responsible for FMF. The aim of this study A. Bukulmez1, H. Samli2, U. Dundar3, R. Koken1, V. Kavuncu3, M. Solak4; is to determine the frequency of the mutations which has been re- 1Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, ported comparatively rare, to define the most effective mutation set, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, and to select the most suitable DNA analysis system for Turkish FMF Department of Medical Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 3Afyon Kocatepe patients . University, School of Medicine, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabili- 1709 patients were referred by specialists to the Moleculer Genetic tation, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 4Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Diagnostic Centrum of Duzen Laboratuaries Groups from various Department of Medical Biology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. regions of Turkey . First, mutation screening of the MEFV gene was Objective: Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited disorder performed for the 3 most common mutations, namely M694V, M680I, caused by an abnormal recessive gene Virtually all cases are due to V726A, in 1182 unrelated patients by polymerase chain reaction and a mutation in the MEFV gene, which codes for a protein called pyrin restriction enzyme digestion analysis . The rate of mutation detection or marenostenin . The aim of this study is evaluating the correlation was 46 .2% and these three mutations accounted for 64 .4%, 22 .6% between bone mineral density and mutations in children with FMF . and 12 .7% of the alleles, respectively . . Second, we investigated 12 Methods: 36 prepupertal children diagnosed FMF according to Tel mutations (E148Q, P369S, F479L, M680I G>C, M680 G>A, 1692del, Hashomer Criteria were included in the study . Bone mineral density M694V, M694I, K695R, V726A, A744S and R761H) in 527 patients (BMD) was measured in all patients by dual energy X-ray absorpti- using reverse dot-blot hybridization (RDBH) assay . We found the rate ometry, both at the lumbar spine (antero-posterior projection of L1-L4) of detection to be 50 .5% . The most common mutations were found to and total body . BMD data were expressed as grams per centimeter be M694V, E148Q, M680I, V726A and R761H . Percengate of these square and standard deviation scores (Z score). The five MEFV gene mutations were 47 .7, 19 .9, 14 .3, 9 .8 and 4 .1, respectively . Our study mutations (M694V, M694I, V726A, M680I, E148Q) were scanned in all showed that the RDBH method increased the detection rate of FMF cases by PCR- ELISA method . According to the results of the genetic mutations about 4% compared to PCR-RFLP method for Turkish pop- investigation, cases were grouped as cases with no scanned muta- ulation . tions and cases with heterozygous and homozygous mutations . Results: Both lumber vertebrae and total body bone mineral density P05.052 of the patients were found to be low . No differences were detected missense mutations in the forkhead domain of FOXL lead to among BMD values of the groups . subcellular mislocalization, protein aggregation and impaired Conclusion: In conclusion, no significant relation was detected between transactivation. MEFV gene mutations and BMD in the patients with FMF . This result E. De Baere1, L. Moumné2, H. Peters3, B. P. Leroy4, A. De Paepe1, R. A. Veitia2, does not mean there is no low bone density risk in patients with FMF . D. Beysen1; Due to this, we think that study will be significant with more patients 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2IN- and in association with biochemical markers, signs of bone health . SERM U567, Team21, Genetics and Development Department, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin P05.050 Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hos- the prevalence of familial mediterranean fever gene mutations pital, Ghent, Belgium. in patients with rheumatic heart disease Mutations of FOXL2, encoding a forkhead transcription factor, have Y. Tunca, I. Simsek, C. Koz, I. Sari, H. Erdem, S. Pay, D. Gul, A. Dinc; been shown to cause blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), charac- GATA, Ankara, Turkey. terized by an eyelid malformation variably associated with premature BACKGROUND: Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) has been considered ovarian failure . Recently, polyalanine expansions and truncating muta- in the differential diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) be- tions were shown to lead to protein mislocalization, aggregation and cause these two diseases have some clinical and laboratory similari- altered transactivation . Here, we study the molecular consequences of ties . There are also autopsy reports of rheumatic mitral stenosis in 17 naturally occurring FOXL2 missense mutations on subcellular local- patients with FMF and amyloidosis . Moreover, a history of ARF during ization and transactivation capacities in cellular systems . Most of these childhood is not infrequent in patients with FMF . mutations map to the conserved DNA-binding forkhead domain (FHD) . OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of familial Mediterranean According to their subcellular localization in COS-7 cells, the mutant fever gene mutations in patients with rheumatic heart disease . proteins could be divided into four groups . We also studied the trans-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 activation capacity of the mutants in FOXL2 expressing granulosa-like of recessive NSHI. It has been identified that one particular GJB2 mu- cells (KGN) . Several mutants led to a loss-of-function, while others tation named 35delG is the most prevalent for the populations of the might induce a dominant negative effect . Interestingly, one mutant that European origin . is located outside the FHD (S217F), proved to be hypermorphic and Materials: We obtained DNA samples from patients with prelingual to have no effect on intracellular protein distribution . Clinically this mu- NSHI in whom syndromic forms and environmental causes of deaf- tation gives rise to a mild BPES phenotype, and to growth hormone ness had been excluded, their relatives and individuals with hearing deficiency. In general, missense mutations located in the FHD lead to loss positive family history . a classical BPES phenotype, but cannot be correlated with the pres- Methods: DNA was extracted from whole blood . The GJB2 gene exon ence of an ovarian phenotype . However, a potential predictive value 2 analysis was performed using PCR, enzymatic restriction and auto- of localization and transactivation assays in the making of genotype- mated sequencing . phenotype correlations is proposed. In conclusion, this is the first study Results: 55 unrelated patients were screened for the GJB2 mutations . to demonstrate that a significant number of missense mutations in the Mutations were detected in 67 of 110 (61%) tested alleles . Four dif- FHD of FOXL2 lead to mislocalization, protein aggregation and altered ferent mutations in the GJB2 gene have been identified in Latvian transactivation, and to provide insights into the pathogenesis associ- patients with NSHI: 35delG, 311-324del14, 235delC and M34T . 28 pa- ated with missense mutations of FOXL2 in human disease . tients (51%) are homozygous for 35delG mutation, four patients (7%) are compound heterozygotes for 35delG and 311-324del14 mutations, P05.053 one patient (2%) has genotype 35delG/235delC and one patient (2%) the spectrum of GALt gene mutations in south regions of is heterozygous for M34T mutation . One heterozygous 51del12insA Russia mutation was detected in unaffected individual with positive family his- S. Mordanov, F. Lagkueva, S. Matulevich, S. Amelina, G. Listopad, S. Kutsev; tory . Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. Conclusion: Our results verify the GJB2 mutations to be causative for Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) deficiency galacto- NSHL and confirm previous reports on the mutation distribution. Still, semia is clinically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder . New- the cause of hearing loss remains unclear for patients with no or single born screening can identify patients with GALT deficiency galactosae- GJB2 mutation . However, GJB2 related diagnosis cannot be excluded mia. The diagnosis needs to be confirmed by enzyme activity test. Un- until mutations in non-coding regions and adjacent GJB6 gene have fortunately, in many cases the results of GALT activity measurement been screened . can be ambiguous and further molecular testing is required . More than 200 point mutations were revealed in the GALT gene, but the preva- P05.056 lence of these mutations varies among ethnic groups . Classical galac- Role of CYPB mutations in Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma tosemia newborn screening was started in Russia during 2006/2007 P. López-Garrido1,2, F. Sánchez-Sánchez1,2, J. Escribano1,2; years . Total of 160 990 newborns were screened in South Russia and 1Genetics, Castilla-La Mancha University Medical School, Albacete, Spain, 11 patients with galactose level more than 7,2 mg/dL were revealed . 2Cooperative Research Network on Age-Related Ocular Pathology, Visual and Blood samples of this patients were submitted for confirmatory test- Life Quality, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. ing for classical galactosaemia . The GALT gene were sequenced in Glaucoma is a complex and genetically heterogeneous disease char- all cases. The mutational spectrum included five missense mutations acterized by the progressive apoptotic death of retinal ganglion cells . M142L, H186Y, Q188R, K285 N, N314D . The classical galactosemia Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common form of was revealed in 4 cases with genotypes Q188R / Q188R, K285 N / glaucoma, featured by an adult onset (>40 years), a gonioscopically M142L, H186Y / N, K285N / N; Duarte variant was revealed in 5 cases open angle, and a reduced outflow facility. Heterozygous mutations in with genotypes Q188R / N314D, Q188R / N314D, , N314D / N314D, CYP1B1 gene are presented in the 4-9% POAG patients of different N314D / N, N314D / N . In 2 cases mutations were not founded populations . Our purpose is to establish the genotype-phenotype relationship in P05.054 Spanish POAG patients carrying CYP1B1 mutations . We have ana- Novel mutations in the gap junction gene GJB2 show that lyzed the enzymatic activity of different CYP1B1 mutations found in keratoderma is associated with connexin protein transport these patients, in transfected HEK-293T cells . The CYP1B1 enzymatic defects activity assay was carried out using ethoxyresorufin as a substrate in M. A. M. Van Steensel1, E. A. de Zwart-Storm1, P. Martin2, M. van Geel1; a fluorimetric assay. 1University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University of Glasgow, CYP1B1 mutations found in POAG patients show reduced enzymatic Glasgow, United Kingdom. activity, supporting that loss of function mutations may play a role in Mutations in the skin expressed gap junction gene GJB2 (coding for the development of POAG . connexin26) cause a plethora of sometimes severe skin disorders with sensory deafness. Specific mutations are associated with distinct phe- P05.057 notypes and the reasons for this strong genotype-phenotype correla- Analysis of secretion and processing of wild type myocilin and tion are poorly understood . Commonly used functional parameters of myocilin-glaucoma mutants co-expressed in cell lines gap junction functionality, such as dye transfer and electrical conduc- J. Aroca-Aguilar1,2, F. Sánchez-Sánchez1,2, F. Martínez-Redondo1,2, M. Coca- tance, do not correlate with disease phenotype or severity . We have Prados3, J. Escribano1,2; now identified a number of novel mutations that are specifically associ- 1Área de Genética. Facultad de Medicina /CRIB. UCLM, Albacete, Spain, 2Co- ated with palmoplantar keratoderma. Using fluorescent fusion proteins, operative Research Network on Age-Related Ocular Pathology, Visual and Life we show that this skin symptom may be specifically caused by protein Quality, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Ophthal- transport defects . What’s more, its severity is inversely correlated to mology and Visual Science, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 George St, that of the transport defect . We are now working to understand the R.8100, New Haven, 06510, CT, United States. cellular sequelae of the disturbed protein trafficking. Preliminary data Glaucoma is a leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide . The indicate that ER stress responses may be involved . main known risk factor for this disease is an elevated intraocular pres- sure (IOP), mainly caused by an increased resistance to aqueous hu- P05.055 mour outflow. Heterozygous mutations in the olfactomedin-like domain Analysis of GJB2 gene exon 2 in Latvian patients with of the myocilin gene (MYOC) cause autosomal dominant juvenile-on- nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss set glaucoma, and approximately 4% of all adult-onset primary open- O. Sterna1,2, N. Pronina1, I. Grinfelde1, S. Kuske3, D. Bauze1, R. Lugovska1; angle glaucoma (POAG) cases . The mechanisms by which these mu- 1Medical Genetics clinic, University Children’s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Rigas tations elevate IOP and cause glaucoma are currently controversial . It Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 3Latvian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, has been described that myocilin undergoes an intracellular endopro- Latvia. teolytic processing by calpain II, in the middle of the polypeptide chain, Background: Nonsyndromic hearing impairment (NSHI) is the most which is reduced by glaucoma-associated MYOC mutations . common form of deafness . Mutations in the GJB2 gene, which en- To gain insight into the molecular mechanisms by which mutations in codes gap-junction beta-2 protein (connexin 26), are the main cause the MYOC gene lead to glaucoma, we have analyzed, by SDS-PAGEMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  and Western blot, the secretion, endoproteolytic processing and ex- tosis/endocytosis and release of glutamate . In this view, mutations of tracellular aggregates of wild-type myocilin and 5 glaucoma-associ- molecules involved in such mechanisms may be added to other known ated myocilin mutants (E323K, R346T, Q368X, P370L and D380A) genetic causes of glomerulopathies . transiently co-expressed in a cell line in culture . Our results show that coexpression affects secretion and proteolytic processing of wild type P05.060 and mutant myocilins . These phenomena could play a role in the de- Identification, characterization and regulatory role of a new velopment of glaucoma . tFii-i family member, GtF2iRD2, located at the Williams-Beuren syndrome locus P05.058 A. Antonell1, M. I. Tussie-Luna2, A. L. Roy2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,3; screening for glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism among 1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, U-735 CIBERER, Barcelona, hypertensive patients in Bulgaria Spain, 2Dept. of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, J. A. Matrozova1, R. Saraeva2, R. Bogeska2, R. Kaneva2, I. Kremensky2, S. United States, 3Programa de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital Vall Zacharieva1; d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. 1University Hospital of Endocrinology “Akad. Ivan Pentchev”, Sofia, Bulgaria, GTF2I, GTF2IRD1 and GTF2IRD2 are three related genes located in 2Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. the 7q11 .23 Williams-Beuren Syndrome (WBS) locus that encode dif- Background. Primary aldosteronism (PA) is currently considered the ferent members of the TFII-I family of transcription factors, character- most frequent form of endocrine hypertension . Glucocorticoid-remedi- ized by the presence of several HLH-like domains known as I-repeats . able aldosteronism (GRA) is a genetic variety of PA, affecting about The functions of GTF2I and GTF2IRD1, hemizygously deleted in all 1% of patients, which is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern . typical WBS patients, have been studied in depth . However, little is GRA is caused by a chimaeric gene with aldosterone synthase activ- known about GTF2IRD2, a multicopy gene that is variably deleted in ity originating from an unequal crossing-over between the CYP11B1 WBS patients, and thus a candidate to influence the variable severity (11 beta-hydroxylase) and CYP11B2 (aldosterone synthase) genes . of the phenotype . We have studied the function of the three expressed Hypertension in GRA can be severe leading to cerebrovascular com- GTF2IRD2 copies termed medial, telomeric and the chimeric found in plications at a young age and female carriers of the mutation have some WBS patients . In vitro transfection assays in COS7 cells revealed a higher incidence of preeclampsia during pregnancy . On the other that all three GTF2IRD2 proteins formed heterodimers with GTF2I, but hand GRA can be successfully treated by glucocorticoids, which justi- only the GTF2IRD2-tel copy could interact with GTF2IRD1 . The cellular fies its screening and early diagnosis. Objective. The aim of this study localization pattern was different among the three proteins . GTF2IRD2- was to assess the prevalence of GRA among patients with confirmed tel protein appears mainly nuclear while the GTF2IRD2-chi was found PA . methods. The study population consisted of 170 hypertensive pa- to be mostly cytoplasmatic . The GTF2IRD2-tel and GTF2IRD2-med tients, referred to a specialized Endocrinology department . In order to proteins, but not the GTF2IRD2-chi, changed their distribution pattern identify patients with PA we used the aldosterone to renin ratio and the when co-transfected with GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 . In addition, the GT- Captopril test. The diagnosis of PA was confirmed in 11 subjects who F2IRD2-tel protein was able to activate transcription of the c-fos gene were investigated for GRA using the long PCR technique . Results. in a synergistic way with GTF2I . In conclusion, GTF2IRD2 proteins None of our patients was positive for the CYP11B1/CYP11B2 chimae- appear to act as transcription regulators by virtue of interacting with ric gene. coclusions. Our study demonstrated that GRA can be suc- GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 with different functional outcomes . The variable cessfully excluded in patients with PA, using the long PCR technique . amount of the different TFII-I family proteins in WBS patients, depend- Further studies in larger groups of patients are needed to evaluate the ing on deletion breakpoints, could contribute to modulate the variable prevalence of GRA among patients with PA, which is probably lower expression of target genes and thus the WBS phenotype . than previously reported P05.061 P05.059 investigating Factor V (G1691A), Prothrombin (G20210A) the crv mouse model reveals a new role of the metabotropic and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (c677t) gene glutamate receptor type 1 (Grm) in the kidney glomerulus polymorphisms in recurrent pregnancy loss A. Puliti1,2, V. Conti1,3, G. Caridi4, A. Corbelli5, L. Musante3,4, F. Piccardi6, J. L. H. Samli1, N. Imirzalioglu1, G. Koken2, A. Ozgoz1, G. Ceylaner3, S. Ceylaner3; Guenet7, G. Candiano4, R. Gusmano3, M. P. Rastaldi5, R. Ravazzolo1,2; 1Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genet- 1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, ics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, 2Dept. of Pediatric Sciences “G. De Toni”, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 3Zekai Tahir 3RenalChild Foundation, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 4Laboratory on Burak Women’s Hospital, Department of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. Pathophysiology of Uremia, Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 5Renal Immunopa- In 75% of women trying to be pregnant, early pregnancy loss occurs . thology Laboratory, D’Amico Renal Research Foundation, Milano, Italy, 6Animal Habitual abortion is the termination of two or more consecutive preg- Models Facility, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy, nancies before 20th gestational week . 7Pasteur Institute, Paris, France. Various etiologic factors are responsible for recurrent pregnancy loss . We recently described the crv4 mouse mutant, where a spontane- In the performed studies these factors are reported to be, 7% chromo- ous mutation causes the lack of the metabotropic glutamate receptor somal abnormalities, 10% anatomic problems, 15% hormonal irregu- type 1 (Grm1) . Homozygous crv4 mice exhibit a complex phenotype, larities, 6% unclear reasons and 55-62% coagulation protein/platelet mainly characterized by ataxia and by morphological and functional problems. The importance of genetic defects causing defficiency in the renal anomalies . coagulation system are better understood recently . Among them the By PCR screening of a cDNA library of human tissues, we found Grm1 most frequently related ones are some of the mutations take place in expressed in the kidney . Expression of Grm1 was also evidenced by the Factor V, Prothrombin and the MTHFR genes . amplifying and sequencing cDNA obtained from renal tissues of wild In our study we objected to investigate the existence of the FV Leiden, type mice. The expression of the receptor was confirmed in wild type Prothrombin and MTHFR gene mutations in 110 women with recurrent renal tissues by western-blot and immunofluorescence analyses, us- pregnancy loss and in 30 women with healthy children and no preg- ing specific antibodies. nancy loss . Mutation screening was perfomed by PCR-RFLP method Electron microscopy analyses of the crv4 kidneys, compared to the using Hind III and Hinf I restriction enzymes for the blood samples of wild type, evidenced major glomerular alterations of the glomerular which DNAs were isolated . basement membrane and the podocytes, and immunofluorescence FV Leiden, Prothrombin, MTHFR mutations were detected to be 13 .6 analyses of specific podocyte proteins, such as nephrin, synaptopodin, %, 6 .4%, 55 .5% in the case and 6 .7%, 6 .7%, 53 .3% in the control and ZO1, showed a reduced expression in the mutated mice . groups, respectively. No significant differences were detected between Urine analyses by ELISA showed a statistically significant albuminuria the case and the control group according to the mutation frequencies . in crv4 homozygous relative to wild type mice . It is thought that the risk of pregnancy loss is related to the combined These evidences support a recent hypothesis according to which augmentation of the thrombophilic mutations rather than a specific mu- podocytes communicate by neuron-like mechanisms . The podocyte, tation . Probably, investigating prevalence of more thrombophilic muta- similarly to the neuronal cell, has vesicular structures for the exocy- tions in women with habitual abortion will be more significant.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.062 P05.064 Duplication of exons 1 to 22 of the F gene: a new mechanism investigation of human mitochondrial DNA in iranian related to multiple copies of the intron 22 int22h sequence? Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Hcm) patients C. Costa1,2, E. Bieth3, P. Boisseau4, S. Letourneau1, F. Dastot1,2, E. Girodon- M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya2; Boulandet1,2, M. Goossens1,2; 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Russian Research Center of 1AP-HP, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, Laboratoire de Génétique Mo- Medical Genetics Laboratory of DNA Research, Mosque, Russian Federation. léculaire, Créteil, France, 2INSERM U841, Département de Génétique, équipe Mitochondrial (mt) DNA defects, both deletions and tRNA point muta- 11, Université Paris 12, Créteil, France, 3Hôpital Purpan, Laboratoire de Gé- tions, have been associated with cardiomyopathies . The aim of the nétique Médicale, Toulouse, France, 4CHU Hotel Dieu, Service de Génétique study was to determine the mtDNA mutations in Hypertrophic cardio- Médicale, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Nantes, France. myopathy (HCM) Iranian patients. Interspersed repeats account for 56% of the euchromatic X chromo- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is widely accepted as a pluri- some sequence, compared with a genome average of 45% . Intrachro- causal or multifactorial disease . Because of the linkage between en- mosomal duplications are estimated to account for 2 .59% of the X ergy metabolism in the mitochondria and cardiac muscle contraction, chromosome while interchromosomal duplications account for a very it is reasonable to assume that mitochondrial abnormalities may be small fraction 0 .24% of the X chromosome . Among these duplications responsible for some forms of HCM . We analysed the whole mito- are well-described cases that are associated with genomic disorders . chondrial genome in a series of 31 patients with HCM for alterations Some disorders may result from rearrangements involving duplicated and compared the findings with those of 30 control subjects. A total of sequences in Xq28, such as in haemophilia A . In severe haemophilia A, X sequence changes could be identified. These sequence changes mutations are frequently the results of inversions between a sequence were distributed among the whole mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) . An in- in intron 22 (int22h-1) of the F8 gene and one of two more distally creased number of novel missense mutations could be detected nearly located copies (int22h-2, int22h-3) described to be in the same orien- in all genes encoding for protein subunits in HCM patients subjects . tation. Recently a novel finding from analysis of the DNA sequence Four mutations were found that are unpublished . The c .4384T>C in of the human X chromosome (Ross et al, Nature 2005) has revealed tRNA glutamin , c .9063A>G in AtPase6 , c .2071 T>C, c .3170C>A, that the two distal copies are in opposite orientations . Recombination in noncoding MTRNA2 16S . Also 33 polymorphisms were identified should then produce deletion or duplication rather than inversion . A in this study which had not been published in the MitoMap database . deletion consistent with this prediction has been reported in a family The c .16189T>C mutation in the D-loop region that is associated with in which carrier females are affected by a high spontaneous-abortion susceptibility to DCM could be detected in 3% of patients as well as in rate in pregnancy. We report here the first case of duplication of exons 0% of controls . Furthermore, mtDNA mutations may play an important 1 to 22 in a carrier female in a family were none haemophiliac patient role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest which has remained unexplained was available . The duplication was detected by MP-LC (Multiplex Liq- for long . uid chromatography) and confirmed by MLPA. We believe this new rearrangement could be linked to the multiple copies of the intron 22 P05.065 sequences and would confirm the hypothesis that recombination could investigation of 69 common mutations in MYH gene in iranian produce duplication . population with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, M. Ghani Kakhki1, G. Estahbanati2, M. M. P05.063 Peyghambari3, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya4; A comparison of quantitative real time PcR (Q-Rt-PcR) and 1nrcgeb, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical Sciences Multiple Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) for Shaheed Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic molecular diagnosis of deletions in cases of severe haemophilia Republic of Iran, 3Iran University of Medical Sciences Shaheed Rajaie Car- A diovascular Medical Center, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, A. Venceslá, M. Baena, M. J. Barceló, J. Juan, L. Alias, M. Cornet, M. 4Russian Research Center of Medical Genetics Laboratory of DNA Research, Domenech, P. Gallano, M. Baiget, E. F. Tizzano; Moscow, Russia., Moscow, Russian Federation. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by hypertrophy of Haemophilia A (HA) is an X-linked bleeding disorder caused by muta- ventricles and intrventricular septum . Patients could develop serious tions in coagulation factor VIII. The identification of HA carriers is an complications including heart failure, arrhythmias and sudden death . essential part of genetic counselling . Large rearrangements frequently Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a single gene disorder and occur within the F8 gene in severe haemophiliacs . These include the has autosomal dominant inheritance . In this study we focused on intron22 inversion (40-45%) the intron1 inversion (2-5%) and gross exons 13-15 and 19-21 of MYH7 gene and introns located between deletions encompassing one or more exons (5-10%) . Although gross them, which contain hotspots for so called “malignant mutations” that deletions are readily detectable in males, the identification of hetero- increase sudden cardiac death risk . Methods: Fifty unrelated Iranian zygosity in possible carriers of these families constitutes a challenge . patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were selected sequentially To identify a deleted allele over the background of the normal allele in and informed written consent was obtained from them . Exons 13-15 these carriers, we previously set up a Q-RT-PCR method employing and 19-21 of MYH7 gene and their related introns were amplified by LightCycler technology . A comparison was performed with the recently polymerase chain reaction . Then PCR products were sequenced . Re- described MLPA P178 FVIII probemix that contains probes for each sults: Mutations were detected in fourteen (28%) of the patients . We of the 26 exons of the F8 gene . We studied patients with deletions in didn’t find any malignant mutation, but three mutations were found in exon 13, in exons 23-25, in exon 15 and in exons 1-22 . Carrier and targeted exons . One of them, A10419C (N444T) in exon 14, may be non-carrier females from these families previously defined by quantita- a novel mutation . tive or marker analysis were also tested . MLPA results in HA patients revealed the absence of the peak in the corresponding exon(s) . There P05.066 was a complete correlation with results in the carrier group (one copy A novel mitochondrial DNA tRNAile (m.4322dupc) mutation of the corresponding exon(s) by Q-RT-PCR and 40- 55% of reduced associated with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy relative peak area in MLPA) and also in the non carrier group (two S. Mahjoub1, D. Sternberg2, R. Boussaada3, S. Filaut2, F. Guemira4, R. Mech- copies and 85-100% of peak area) . MLPA may be incorporated into mech3, C. Jardel2, S. Ben Arab1; routine molecular diagnosis of severe HA after screening of inversions . 1Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Fédération de génétique-UF Supported by Fundació Catalana d´Hemofilia, CIBERER, Real Fun- Cardio et Myogénétique , Hôpital Pitié-salpétrière, Paris, France, 3Hôpital La dación Victoria Eugenia. Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Hôpital Salah Azaiez, Tunis, Tunisia. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease character- ized by cardiac dilatation and impaired contraction of the left ventricle (LV) or both ventricles . The age at disease onset is highly variable, ranging from early childhood to late adulthood . Only 50% of patients with DCM survive >5 years after diagnosis . Approximately 20% to 25% of cases seem to have a genetic component . DCM can be transmit-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  ted as autosomal dominant and recessive, X-linked, or mitochondrial in heterozygous form, 3(9 .67%) (35delG/35delG and R143W/ R143W) traits . Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) defects are found in an increas- and 1 (3 .2%) (R32H+35delG) were homozygous and compound het- ing number of cases of DCM. We identified a novel heteroplasmic erozygous respectively . mitochondrial DNA (m .4322dupC) mutation in tRNAIle gene associ- Two polymorphisms V153I and (F154F +F146F) also were detected ated with isolated dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) as maternal trait . in four families and a polymorphism S86T was identified in all cases. Mutation screening techniques and automated DNA sequencing were In this population study, our data showed that the rate of GJB2 muta- performed to identify mtDNA mutations and to assess heteroplasmy tions is high in heterozygous form so other loci and genes related to in family’s proband and healthy control subjects . All family members deafness must be investigated . Moreover, the most frequent mutation tested had heteroplasmic mtDNA (m .4322dupC) mutation . We also was 35delG because 9 out of 18(50%) mutant alleles had this mutation screened 350 normal controls for this mutation and found no evidence .This is lower than that reported in western populations of heteroplasmy . The m .4322dupC mutation was found in the skeletal tissue from the P05.069 proband that exhibited slightly reduced deficiency of mitochondrial re- Hereditary congenital Hearing Loss: molecular analysis of spiratory chain enzymes (complex III) . The present study reports the connexins 26, 30 and A1555G mitochondrial Point mutation in novel m .4322dupC mutation in tRNAIle gene, which is possibly associ- italian population ated to the disease, to isolated DCM . It was localized in a hot-spot L. Trotta1, P. Castorina1, F. Sironi1, U. Ambrosetti1, A. Cesarani1, L. Garavelli2, region for mutations and is possibly pathogenic because of a cosegre- P. Formigoni2, A. Murri3, D. Cuda3, D. A. Coviello1, P. Primignani1; gation with the matrilineal transmission of DCM . 1Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3Ospeda- P05.067 le Guglielmo da Saliceto, Piacenza, Italy. Analysis of the 12srRNA and tRNAser(UcN) genes (mtDNA) in Mutations in GJB2, encoding the gap-junction protein Connexin26, patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss from different Russia are the most common cause of non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) regions and account for about 32% of cases in the Caucasian population . We L. U. Dzhemileva1, A. M. Tazetdinov1, O. L. Posukh2, K. A. Barashkov3, E. K. analyzed 852 patients and identified mutations in 527/1662 chromo- Khusnutdinova1; somes . We characterised 40 different mutations and 6 polymorphisms 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of in 299 NSHL patients . More than 100 different mutations are described Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, but one is particularly common, the 35delG, accounting for about Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Yakutsk Research Centre, Siberian Branch 68% of all the Cx26 alleles we identified. The GJB6 gene deletion, of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. del(GJB6-D13S1830), which can cause hearing loss in combination Hearing loss is common congenital disorder and more than 50% of with GJB2 mutations in trans, has been found in 3 of our patients, while deafness has a genetic cause . The m .1555G>A (12SrRNA) was con- the del(GJB6-D13S1854) was not present in our patients’ population . firmed as the main cause of aminoglycoside induced deafness in dif- Our results show that GJB2/GJB6 genes account for less than 30% of ferent populations . Families with maternally inherited sensorineural NSHL in the screened cohort of patients and confirm that the 35delG hearing loss are also described in association with A7445G, T7511C, mutation is the most frequent one . Moreover, 27 affected subjects and 7472insC mutations in the tRNASer(UCN) gene . We report here were compound heterozygous for recessive GJB2 allele not including the results of mutational screening for 12S rRNA and tRNASer(UCN) 35delG and 8 were carrying dominant mutations (T55N, P58A, D179N genes among Cx26- and Cx30-negative deaf individuals of different and R184Q), indicating that the complete sequence of the gene is ethnicity from different regions of Russia . Previously, 301 unrelated needed for an appropriate molecular diagnosis . The analysis of the patients from Volga-Ural region, 78 unrelated patients from the Re- deafness-causing A1555G substitution in MTRNR1 mitochondrial public Sakha (Yakutia, northeastern Siberia), and 119 deaf patients gene was carried out in patients with one or without Cx26 recessive (75 unrelated families) from the Republic Altai (south Siberia) were mutations . We found 21 affected subjects carrying the A1555G and the analyzed for Cx26 and Cx30 mutations . Different variations at the 961 subsequently family analysis performed in each case has led to the position in 12S rRNA gene have been found among deaf individuals pre-symptomatic identification of this mutation in relatives. from Volga-Ural region . Five patients of different ethnicity (Russian, Ta- tar, Latvinian) with m .961insC, two Tatars with m .del961TinsC, three P05.070 n Russian patients with m .961T>G (one from Volga-Ural region and two GJB2 analysis in Portuguese cochlear implant users from Altai), and one Russian with m .961T>A, were detected . Also, the J. Chora1, T. Matos1, S. Andrade2, J. Humberto2, M. Alves2, L. Silva2, C. Ri- m .7444G>A (tRNASer(UCN)) was found in one Russian patient with beiro2, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,3; NSHL . . Finally, m .7445G>C (tRNASer(UCN)) was found in two sibs 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Por- of one Kazakh family (Altai region) in whom moderate sensorineural tugal, 2ORL Department - Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, hearing loss was co-existed with goiter . Further studies are needed to 3Higher College of Health, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal. confirm pathogenicity of some mtDNA variations associated with deaf- Hearing impairment affects approximately 1 in 1000 newborns and at ness in patients from some regions of Russia . least 60% of these cases have a genetic origin . Despite large genetic heterogeneity, mutations in a single gene - GJB2 - are the most fre- P05.068 quent genetic cause of severe to profound pre-lingual recessive deaf- Prevalence of the GJB2 mutations in iranian patients with ness in many populations . Therefore, GJB2 became the most impor- deafness tant gene in the understanding of deafness . Hearing loss is a condition M. Hamid1, M. T. Akbari2; that interferes with the development of the child at a cognitive and lan- 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modaras guage level . Therefore early diagnosis of deafness is important for ear- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. lier rehabilitation, namely through the use of cochlear implants . These The commonest form of non-syndromic recessive deafness is caused devices replace the cochlea in a physiological context . Some studies by mutation in GJB2, encoding gap junction beta 2 protein on chromo- suggest a correlation between the GJB2 genotype of the implanted some location 13q11 . It is known as DFNB1 responsible for half of individual and a phenotype that allows the success of rehabilitation autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness . The most frequent mu- due to cochlear implant tation 35delG accounts for about 60-80% of mutations in white people The aim of our study is to analyse the GJB2 gene in a sample of 100 of European . Portuguese cochlear implant recipients . All individuals, presenting In this study, we report the frequency of the GJB2 gene mutations in non-syndromic sensorineural severe to profound bilateral recessive 31 unrelated Iranian families from 48 subjects affected by hereditary deafness prior implantation, were implanted in the Centro Hospitalar hearing loss (HHL) . de Coimbra . Screening of GJB2 gene was performed by PCR and se- Eight different mutations were detected in 12 families (38 .7%) by us- quencing in of the entire coding region . The results obtained may rep- ing direct-sequencing technique in coding region of GJB2 gene . Cx26 resent a valuable indicator when counselling candidates for cochlear related deafness mutations (35delG, R127H, V27I+E114G, Y155X, implantation . M163V and a novel 355-356 delGA) were identified in 9(29%) familiesMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.071 P05.073 characterization of the Dfna5 promoter region Genetic etiology and spectrum of mutations in GJB2 and K. Vrijens, L. Van Laer, G. Van Camp; sLc26A4 genes Center Medical Genetics, University Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. D. Raskova, D. Stejskal, P. Seeman, M. Putzova, E. Hlavova, O. Bendova, J. DFNA5 mutations cause a non-syndromic, progressive, sensorineural Stoilova, R. Pourova, I. Vackova; hearing loss in humans. Four different mutations have been identified GENNET, Praha, Czech Republic. at the genomic level, all leading to exon 8 skipping at the mRNA level . Hereditary hearing impairment clinic was established at our institute As a consequence, it was hypothesised that DFNA5-related hearing in October 2003 . 226 families have been investigated until October loss is associated with a gain-of-function, and that only skipping of 2007 . Genetic etiology of hearing impairment was found at 70,35 % exon 8 leads to disease . With the objective to clarify the molecular ba- of families (53,46% with autosomal recessive inheritance,15,10% with sis of this gene’s regulation, we have characterized the mouse Dfna5 autosomal dominant inheritance and 13,83% with genetic syndromes, promoter region . chromosomal aberrations and another genetic diseases with deafness, Initially, in silico analyses of the mouse Dfna5 promoter region were at 17,61 % families the mode of inheritance could not be determined) . performed followed by 5’-RACE experiments using mouse cochlear The rest (29,65%) were families with idiopathic hearing loss . cDNA. The latter enabled us to identify the cochlear Dfna5 transcription The mutations in the GJB2 gene (Cx26) were investigated at 321 pa- initiation site (TIS) in vitro . Subsequently, constructs were generated tients by sequencing of entire coding region of GJB2 . In patients car- for transfection experiments in HEK293 cells. After confirmation of the rying only one pathogenic mutation the IVS 1+1 G to A mutation in core promoter region in a 400bp construct surrounding the suspected the non-coding region was further tested . We found 4 mutations not TIS, constructs of increasing length were generated to identify regu- reported before (Ala149Thr, Ile140Ser, c .683+3 C to A, Gly130Val) . latory elements . Both an enhancer and a silencer element could be At least one pathogenic mutation was found at 157 (48,91%) patients . identified in the region upstream of the TIS. Next, transfection experi- Both pathogenic mutations were detected at 65 (20 .25%) patients . ments performed with the organ of Corti cell line OC-k3 demonstrated No pathogenic GJB2 mutation was detected at 134 (41,74%) patients that the suspected core promoter also drives expression in inner ear and 30 (9,35%) patients are carriers of various polymorphisms or mu- cells . Furthermore the enhancer and silencer elements act similarly in tations not reported before . The mutation 35delG is by far the most OC-k3 cells . Transfections using the 400bp construct in reverse ori- common of all pathogenic mutations and with mutations Trp24Stop, entation were performed as negative control . However, this construct 313del14 and -3170 G to A accounted in total for 95% of all causal also revealed promoter activity, suggesting the presence of an anti- mutated alleles in all patients . sense regulatory element . Finally, transcription factor binding sites in Molecular genetic analysis of SLC26A4 gene was introduced in Czech the Dfna5 regulatory region where identified using several computer Republic in 2006 . 23,08% patients with congenital deafness, goiter or modelling programs . enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) have both pathogenic mutations of SLC26A4 gene . P05.072 mutational screening of GJB2 non-coding regions in Portuguese P05.074 hearing loss patients A systems Biology Approach to Hearing: combining Genomic, T. D. Matos1, H. Simões-Teixeira1,2, H. Caria1,3, D. P. Kelsell4, G. Fialho1; Proteomic and microRNA characterization 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Por- K. B. Avraham1, T. Elkan1, A. Dror1, R. Elkon1, T. Satoh2, G. Toren1, R. Hertza- tugal, 2Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, no1, M. Irmler3, J. Beckers3, E. Hornstein4, D. M. Fekete2, L. M. Friedman1; 3Higher College of Health, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal, 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, Sackler School 4Centre for Cutaneous Research, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Biological Sciences, Purdue and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of University, West Lafayette, IN, United States, 3GSF-National Research Center London, London, United Kingdom. for Environment and Health, GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Department of Hu- Many hearing loss mutations in the GJB2 gene have been described man Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. in the last decade, being most of them located within the coding re- Systems biology involves studying the interaction and interplay of gion . During this period, only a few mutational studies were performed many levels of biological information . We have combined transcrip- on the non-coding regions of the gene . Such studies focused on the tomic and proteomic analyses of cochlear and vestibular sensory epi- first exon, the donor splice site and, occasionally, the promoter region. thelia in order to identify networks of genes and proteins essential for None, to our knowledge, has ever included the whole 3’ UTR . Two the development and function of these inner ear organs . We further pathogenic mutations have so far been reported in GJB2 donor splice identified microRNAs (miRNAs) that are uniquely expressed in the au- site, and recently we have found a novel pathogenic mutation, -3438 ditory and vestibular sensory epithelia using bioinformatics tools and C>T, occurring in the GJB2 basal promoter . These mutations, or novel experimental approaches, including microarray profiling and in situ ones, in the GJB2 non-coding regions may therefore be involved in hybridization . other unelucidated cases of hearing loss . Expression profiling of vestibular and cochlear sensory epithelia us- In this study, we analysed by sequencing the GJB2 promoter, exon 1, ing Affymetrix microarrays and proteomics analysis using the Q-TOF donor splice site and 3’UTR of about 100 unrelated Portuguese pa- mass spectrometer with ITRAQ labeling has led to the identification of tients previously screened for GJB2 coding region mutations . genes and protein networks which function differently in the cochlear An interesting finding was the identification of one homozygote for the and vestibular systems . A network analysis was applied to determine -493del10 deletion upstream GJB2 basal promoter, without any ac- if a set of proteins of interest are physically connected, assuming that companying GJB2 coding mutation. The significance of this mutation physical interaction between proteins points to some common func- is yet unclear . However, in a previous study, over 6% of carriers, but tion/pathway/complex . Two major sub-networks emerged from the no -493del10 homozygotes, were found in a control sample of 630 integrated transcriptomic-proteomic clusters, indicating multiple in- individuals, which might suggest this could be a pathogenic recessive teractions between proteins expressed in the cochlear and vestibular mutation . Results regarding other non-coding variants are being as- systems . sessed . miRNAs are recognized as important regulators of gene expression at These data, and the previous reports on pathogenic non-coding GJB2 the post-transcriptional level and mutations in miRNAs can lead to dis- mutations, justify routine screening of these regions in order to improve ease . Combining our transcriptomic and proteomic data with miRNA molecular diagnostic and genetic counseling of hearing loss patients . identification in the inner ear has led us to make predictions regarding putative targets, which are being experimentally validated . For a num- ber of miRNAs, morpholino experiments in zebrafish demonstrated ab- normalities in inner ear development and/or structure, demonstrating the importance of these miRNAs in the inner ear . These miRNAs are candidates for causing deafness .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.075 ficult to detect by the usually applied methods for mutation screening three novel mutations in slc40A1 gene causing in X-chromosomal linked disorders . hemochromatosis type 4 In about 80 haemophilia A patients (from a total of approx . 2000) we V. Koubi1, F. Houriez1, C. Delacroix2, J. Marie3, S. Pissard1,4; could not identify any mutation by long range PCR, DGGE and ad- 1laboratory of genetics, AP-HP,Hop Henri Mondor, creteil, France, 2Hematology ditional sequencing of all 26 exons and flanking intronic regions of the Unit, AP-HP,Hop cochin, Paris 13, France, 3Hematology Unit, AP-HP, Hotel FVIII gene . These patients were investigated by multiplex ligation-de- dieu, Paris 1, France, 4University Paris 12, Creteil, France. pendent probe amplification (MLPA, MRC-Holland) for large duplica- The Hemochromatosis type 4(OMIM : 606069, 2q32) is caused by tions . We detected eight exon-spanning duplications of different length mutations in the SLC40A1 gene which encodes the ferroportin, a 10 in nine haemophilia A patients . In two patients we found duplications transmenbrame domains protein’s which export iron from enterocytes of only one exon: exon 13 and 14, respectively . The other duplications and RE cells to blood transferrin . It is supposed to be regulated through affected more than one exon: exons 1-5, exons 5-25, exons 23-25, interaction with the Hepcidin . Nowadays, 21 mutations and 7 polymor- exons 2-25, exons 14-21 and exons 7-11, respectively . All duplications phisms of the SLC40A1 gene are described . It is the most frequent were confirmed by DHPLC analysis (denaturing high performance liq- etiology for the “non HFE” hemochromatosis and it is inherited as an uid chromatography) . autosomal dominant trait . We found common mutations in SLC40A1 In conclusion, we found large duplications in the FVIII gene to be caus- in 13 from 93 families referred to the laboratory for a “non HFE” hemo- ative mutations for haemophilia A in about 10% of all pre-screened chromatosis :G490D, G490S, G80S, V162Del and Q248H . The Study patients in which we could not detect any mutation by the convention- of three families which do not displayed a typical HH 4 iron overload ally used methods . (hyperferritinemia and low transferrin saturation), allowed us to discov- MLPA is a convenient method for detection of large duplications and ered 3 new mutations : c . 212C >T (p .Ser71Phe) in exon 3, c .697C> also deletions of whole exons particularly in X-chromosomal linked dis- A (p .ala232Asp) in exon 6 and c .797T>C (p .Met266Thr) in exon 7 . orders as haemophilia A . All patients were heterozygous for the mutation and the autosomal dominant inheritance has been proven for p .Ser71Phe mutation since P05.078 HH type 4 and mutation were present in mother and son . Interestingly, Frequency of factor Viii intron-1 inversion among hemophilia A from those 3 mutations two are located in the loop between the TM patients from Republic of macedonia and Republic of Bulgaria domain 4 and 5 (p .ala232Asp and p .Met266Thr)where are located 11 E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, M. Bojadzievska1, V. Dejanova2, P. Tchakarova3, from the 21 mutations already described giving more evidences for the G. Petkov3, G. D. Efremov1; role of this loops in the function or the regulation of this protein . This 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian work highlight the frequency of HH type 4 and brings data to better Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of understands the function of the protein . Macedonia, 2Center for Transfusiology, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, Stara Za- P05.076 gora, Bulgaria. Novel sLc40A1 mutations in centre-south mediterranean Hemophilia A (HA) an X-linked bleeding disorder, is characterized by families with autosomal dominant iron overload. a wide allelic heterogeneity, as numerous mutations are spread out F. C. Radio1, S. Majore1, N. Preziosi1, A. Villa1, M. De Muro2, R. Villani3, C. De through the whole exonic, intronic and regulatory regions of the factor Bernardo1, P. Grammatico1; VIII gene . The most recurrent molecular defect is the inversion involv- 1Medical Genetics, “Sapienza University”, S.Camillo Hospital, Rome, Italy, ing the intron-22, accounting for >40% of the patients with severe dis- 2Emathology, University “Campus Biomedico”, Rome, Italy, 3Epathology, ease . Recently, Bagnall et al . (Blood, 2002) reported an inversion of in- S.Camillo Hospital, Rome, Italy. tron-1 as a further recurrent mutation . The prevalence of this mutation Iron overload due to mutations in ferroportin is the most common form is between 0 .6 and 5%, according to reports from different groups . of “Non HFE hemochromatosis” . Ferroportin disease or hemochroma- The aim or this study was to determine the frequency of intron-1 inver- tosis type IV has a dominant inheritance and two main clinical pheno- sion among 57 severe hemophilia A patients from Republic of Mace- types . Most cases show early increase in serum ferritin in the presence donia and 40 patients from Republic of Bulgaria . DNA samples from of a low-normal transferring saturation, iron loading predominantly in all 97 patients were analyzed for the presence of intron-22 inversion . reticoloendothelial cells and, sometimes, low tolerance to the phlebot- Patients negative for the intron-22 inversion, were screened for the omy program . On the contrary, some cases are similar to the typical intron-1 inversion. Two PCR reactions flanking each int1h repeat (in- “classical hemochromatosis” characterized by early high transferring tronic and extragenic) were used . saturation and prevalent parenchimal iron overload . We have identified the presence of intron-1 inversion in four out of Different kind of mutations in the iron exporter ferroportin (SLC40A1) 57 (7 .0%) severe HA patients from Republic of Macedonia . None of result in hemochromatosis type IV . Loss-of-function mutations cause these patients exhibited inhibitor development . Analysis of the factor an impairment of iron export from reticuloendothelial cells with tis- VIII gene haplotypes demonstrated that the intron-1 breaking inversion sue iron accumulation but decreased availability of iron for circulating has occurred independently in three (out of four) patients . No intron-1 transferrin . Instead a phenotype overlapping with ‘classical hemocrho- inversion was detected among HA patients from Bulgaria . matosis’ is the result of gain-of function mutations in SLC40A1 . Our data highlight the importance of analysis of the intron-1 inversion We describe four novel missense mutations and a rare polymorphism in the severe HA cases from Republic of Macedonia . This will ben- (p.Arg561Gly) in ferroportin (SLC40A1) found in members of five differ- efit both genetic counseling and the study of the relationship between ent families of Centre-South Mediterranean showing autosomal domi- genotype and inhibitor development . nant iron overload . Both loss-of-function (p .Ala69Thr; p .Asp181Asn) and gain-of-function (p .Arg296Gln; p .Tyr501Cys) mutations are rec- P05.079 ognizable in these families, so that a genotype-phenotype correlation molecular analysis of a novel deletion at Exon 4 of factor iX gene is possible . in a hemophilia B patient L. Kokabee1,2, E. Kamali1, S. Zeinali1, S. Jamali1, M. Karimipoor1; P05.077 1Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2khatam university, Detection of large duplications within the FViii gene by mLPA Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. S. Rost1, S. Loeffler1, A. Pavlova2, J. Oldenburg2, C. R. Mueller1; Hemophilia B (HB) is an X-linked bleeding disorder caused by the func- 1Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, tional deficiency of blood coagulation factor IX.The disease is due to 2Inst. of Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Ger- heterogeneous mutations in the factor IX gene (F9), located at Xq27 .1 . many. It spans about 34 kb of genomic DNA . Haemophilia A is caused by a variety of different mutations in the FVIII Molecular analysis of F9 gene in a severe Iranian HB patient and car- gene: missense and nonsense mutations, small and large deletions rier testing for the family referred from Kashan hemophilia center . and insertions, as well as large inversions . So far, only one duplication After obtaining informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from of a whole exon of the FVIII gene, exon 13, has been published by an the peripheral blood of the patient and his mother and sister by stan- Italian working group . Duplications comprising whole exons are dif- dard methods. PCR amplification and single strand conformation poly-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  morphism (SSCP) techniques were performed for scanning of the all screened total of 22 loci by STR markers . In families in which autozy- functional-important regions of the F9 gene. An abnormal SSCP profile gosity by descent was not identified at any of these loci, a genome- was identified in exon 4 of the gene for this patient. Then, direct se- wide screen was completed . quencing was done by chain termination method . Our data show that 15 .3% of the Iranian population with ARNSHL seg- The deletion of 19 nucleotides ( 10503-10521 del ) was detected in regate mutations in GJB2 . The most prevalent mutation in this gene this patient in exon 4 was 35delG, although more than 20 mutations have been identified, which is not reported in hemophilia B mutation database, previously . five of which are unique to the Iranian population. We also identi- The patient’s mother and his sister were heterozygous for this dele- fied novel GJB2 mutation in an endogenous population segregating tion . ADNSHL in village north of Iran . A novel deletion of 19 nucleotides (10503-10521 del ) in exon 4 leading The second and third most prevalent causes of ARNSHL were muta- to frame shift in the epidermal growth factor1( EGF1) domain . Exon tions in SLC26A4 and TECTA . We have also found mutations in PJVK 4 encoded a first epidermal growth factor-like domain, which shows and TMC1 in one family each . homology to epidermal growth factor (EGF) and, in addition, contains We have identified a number of families segregating syndromic hear- conserved carboxylate residues including a β-hydroxyaspartate at ing loss .Totally, we have been able to determine the genetic cause of amino acid 64. This domain binds an additional Ca2+ with high affin- hearing loss in over 30% of families referred to our center . ity . In conclusion, this deletion causes a severe form of disease as observed in this patient . P05.082 the investigation of NPHs1 gene in children with Hereditary P05.080 Proteinuria syndrome complete maternal isodisomy causing Reduction to O. Ryzhkova1, N. Poltavets1, L. Prihodina2, A. Polyakov1; Homozygosity for a Novel LAMB mutation in Herlitz Junctional 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re- Epidermolysis Bullosa search Сenter of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. D. Castiglia1, M. Castori1, G. Floriddia1, E. Pisaneschi2, C. Covaciu1, I. Torren- Hereditary Proteinuria Syndromes (HPS) is a group of inherited dis- te2, G. Zambruno1; eases in which proteinuria is the primary clinical manifestation . The 1IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy. genetic cause of these diseases is mutations in genes providing the Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa (HJEB) is a very rare lethal structure and function of filtration barrier. genodermatosis characterized by blister formation with tissue separa- DNA from 63 children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in age are tion within the lamina lucida of the basement membrane zone . It is ge- ranged from 1 to 17 years, consisting of 33 boys and 30 girls, have netically heterogeneous, being caused by null mutations in the LAMA3 been analyzed . The disease manifestation had been observed at the (18q11 .2), LAMB3 (1q32), or LAMC2 (1q25-q31) genes encoding for age ranged from 1 month to 16 years . The control group has consisted the alpha3, beta3 and gamma2 subunits of laminin 332 . Although it is from 50 healthy persons . The mutations in NPHS1 gene were investi- usually inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion, four cases have gated by using SSCP-analysis and consequent sequencing . been described in which the disease arose from reduction to homozy- No mutations in coding and regulation regions of this gene were gosity for a mutant allele caused by uniparental disomy (UPD) . Here, found . we report on a baby presenting with multiple blister formation at birth At researched patients has been revealed five single nucleotide sub- and who died due to acute respiratory insufficiency secondary to up- stitution (table 1), one of which c .605-20 A> C has not been described per airway obstruction at 1 year of age . The diagnosis of HJEB was earlier. For specification of influence of this substitution by occurrence first confirmed by immunoepitope mapping of a skin biopsy. Molecu- of Proteinuria Syndrome, we investigated frequency of occurrence in lar analysis identified a novel frameshift mutation at the homozygous control sample . Authentic distinctions have not been revealed . state in LAMB3 . Parental genotyping established the mother as a We have not found significant distinctions allele frequency of four healthy carrier, while in the father the mutation was absent . Haplotype others polymorphisms NPHS1 gene between our patients and control analysis of 8 intragenic and 15 extragenic polymorphisms, spanning group . We think that contribution of these polymorphisms to disease the entire chromosome 1, demonstrated that the proband was homo- is unimportant . zygous for a single maternal haplotype . The present case represents Minor allele frequency of polymorphisms NPYS1 gene in our patients the fifth example of UPD in HJEB. Based on literature data and our and control group (%) experience in genotyping 20 HJEB patients from several European HPS control Fisher exact exon polymorphism countries, reduction to homozygosity due to UPD is not exceptional in group group test (P) this condition and should be considered in sporadic cases in order to Ex3(c .349G>A) c .349A 25 26 0 .87 properly counsel the couple . Ex10(c .1175C>T) c .1175T 2 4 0 .45 Ex10(c .1223G>A) c .1223A 4 3 0 .72 P05.081 Minor allele frequency of polymorphisms NPYS1 gene in our patients Genetic causes of hearing loss in the iranian population a 10 and control group (%) year study control H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, K. Kahrizi1, N. C. Meyer2, N. Bazazzadegan1, J. HPS group Fisher exact L. Sorensen2, M. Mohseni1, Y. Riazalhosseini1, M. Malekpour1, G. Asaadi Teh- exon polymorphism group (our test (P) rani1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, P. Imani1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, S. Abedini1, data) N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, R. J. H. Smith2; Ex7(c .791C>G) c .791G 1 1 1 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Ex6(c .605-20A>C) c .605-20C 1 0 0 .5 Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Re- search Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, P05.083 IA, United States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck Analysis of SPASTIN in a spanish series shows both recurrent Surgery, Iran university of Medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and novel mutations Approximately one in 1000 newborns has severe-to-profound deaf- M. Zennaro1, G. Martinez-Nieto1, A. Sesar2, M. Arias2, I. J. Posada3, B. Ares2, J. ness, which has a genetic basis in more than half of this group . In Pardo2, M. Seijo4, C. Navarro5, C. Andrade6, A. Carracedo1,7,8, M. J. Sobrido1,7; ~70% of congenitally deaf newborns the loss is nonsyndromic . 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, The purpose of this study has been to determine the cause of syn- Spain, 2Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínico, Santiago de Compostela, dromic and non-syndromic hearing loss in the Iranian population . Spain, 3Department of Neurology, Hospital 12 de Octubre-Universidad Com- Over a 10 year period, 2434 families segregating deafness have been plutense, Madrid, Spain, 4Sección de Neurología, Hospital do Salnés, Ponte- referred to Genetics Research Center in Tehran . In each of these fami- vedra, Spain, 5Department of Pathology, Hospital do Meixoeiro-CHUVI, Vigo, lies, informed consent was obtained . Every family was screened for Spain, 6Department of Neurology, Hospital Xeral-Cíes, Vigo, Spain, 7Centro mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 . Following this screen, in 300 families para Investigación de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) ISCIII, Santiago de with three and more affected individuals with presumed ARNSHL, we Compostela, Spain, 8Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-Universidad, Santiago deMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  Compostela, Spain. markedly elevated serum ferritin levels without iron overload . Ferritin is Hereditary spastic paraparesis (HSP) is a progressive gait disorder the major protein involved in iron storage and is composed of H and L with spasticity of the limbs . HSP shows both clinical and genetic het- subunits . The translation of these subunits depends on the iron status erogeneity and can be autosomal dominant (AD-HSP), autosomal of the cell and is regulated by the interaction between the iron respon- recessive or X-linked recessive . The most prevalent form of AD-HSP sive element (IRE) present in the mRNAs 5’ noncoding region and involves the SPG4 locus encoding spastin, a member of the AAA fam- cytoplasmic iron regulatory proteins . HHCS is caused by mutations in ily of ATPases . The frequency of SPG4 mutations in our population is the IRE of the ferritin light chain (FTL) gene . unknown . We studied 56 patients (43 families, 33 of them Galician, 10 In this study we have investigated the genetics of a three generation from other regions of Spain), most with uncomplicated forms of HSP . Azorean kindred with typical HHCS in 3 individuals (2F;1M) . The pro- The 17 exons of SPG4 and exon-intron boundaries were sequenced . band was identified, after detection of hyperferritinemia, through the Novel mutations and sequence variations of unknown significance review of clinical findings and biochemical tests. Hereditary haemo- were checked in 186 Galician controls. We identified six mutations, chromatosis frequent mutations in the HFE, TFR2 and FPN1 gene three of them novel . The same truncating mutation was present in four were screened . All participants gave informed consent before being apparently unrelated pedigrees . We found four sequence variations of included in the study . unknown significance, one synonymous polymorphism and six other DNA was extracted from whole blood . Promoter and coding regions sequence alterations not found in the literature or databases but un- of the human FTL gene were subjected to PCR amplification and se- likely to be pathogenic (either present in controls or not co-segregat- quenced bidirectionally . Screening of HFE mutations was performed ing with the phenotype when several affected family members were by PCR-SSO . available) . In summary, 9/43 families (21%) were positive for SPG4 The affected individuals are heterozygous for HFE mutation, H63D . mutations and another four families (9%) harbour sequence variations Sequencing of FTL gene in the affected individuals identified a het- of unknown significance. If we consider only the cases with definitive erozygous mutation in position 47 relative to transcription initiation site autosomal-dominant inheritance, the frequency of SPG4 mutations in the descending part of the IRE (47G>A) . None of the unaffected rises up to 60% in our series, confirming that SPG4 causes most of individuals from the family had the referred mutation . the AD-HSP also in our community . In the cases with no mutations the cause may be in other genes or mutations not detectable by sequenc- P05.086 ing of the coding region . Identification of eight novel mutations in German patients with Hereditary Hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHt) and detection of a P05.084 significant association between mutations in the ACVRL gene mutational analysis of the AcVR1 gene in italian patients with and liver involvement Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP) H. Frye-Boukhriss1, M. Mälzer1, M. Abramowicz2, M. J. Bahr3, N. von Becker- R. Bocciardi1, D. Bordo2, M. Di Duca3, F. S. Kaplan4, E. M. Shore4, M. Di Roc- ath4, C. Bergmann5, M. Caselitz3,6, E. Holinski-Feder7, P. Muschke8, K. Oexle9, co5, R. Ravazzolo1,6; G. Strobl-Wildemann10, G. Wolff11, E. A. El-Harith1, M. Stuhrmann1, K. Braken- 1G. Gaslini Institute - Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Genova, Italy, 2National siek1; Cancer Research Institute, Genova, Italy, 3G. Gaslini Institute - Laboratory on 1Institut für Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Ger- Pathophysiology of Uremia, Genova, Italy, 4University of Pennsylvania School many, 2Department of Genetics, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5G. Gaslini Institute - second Unit 3Abteilung für Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie und Endokrinologie, Medizinische of Pediatrics, Genova, Italy, 6University of Genova and CEBR, Genova, Italy. Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 41. Medizinische Klinik rechts der Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP, MIM 135100) is a rare Isar, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, 5Institut für Hu- genetic disorder characterized by the presence of a congenital great mangenetik, Universitätsklinikum der RWTH, Aachen, Germany, 6Medizinische toe malformation and progressive heterotopic ossification that trans- Klinik, Klinikum Deggendorf, Deggendorf, Germany, 7Medizinisch Genetisches forms skeletal muscles to bone following a well-defined anatomic pat- Zentrum (MGZ), München, Germany, 8Institut für Humangenetik, Universitäts- tern of progression. Heterotopic ossification begins in childhood, either klinikum Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 9Institut für Humangenetik, Tech- spontaneously or upon induction of stimuli such as trauma, and pro- nische Universität München, München, Germany, 10Praxis Strobl-Wildemann, gresses episodically throughout adulthood . FOP is usually sporadic, Passau, Germany, 11Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, however, some familial cases with an autosomal dominant pattern of Germany. inheritance with variable expression have been described . Linkage Background: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), or Osler- analysis in these families led to identification of ACVR1/ALK2 as the Weber-Rendu disease, is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder gene responsible for FOP . All familial and sporadic cases with a clas- of the vascular tissue . This genetically heterogeneous multi-systemic sic FOP phenotype that have been analysed are heterozygous for the dysplasia shows a wide variation in its phenotypic expression . Up to identical mutation, c .617G>A leading to R206H substitution . The only 78% of the HHT patients show hepatic arteriovenous malformations reported exception is a recently described de novo mutation, G356R, (HAVM), but the molecular basis of liver involvement is still unknown . associated with a slowly progressing form of FOP . The ACVR1 gene In approximately 75% of the patients, mutations can be identified by encodes the activin A type I receptor, a serine/threonine kinase recep- sequencing of the two known HHT genes, ACVRL1 (ALK1) and ENG . tor for bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) belonging to the TGF- Genotype-phenotype correlations are not yet fully defined, but previ- beta receptor family . In this study, we report ACVR1 mutational analy- ously, we and others showed that hepatic involvement is associated sis in a group of 17 Italian FOP patients. We confirmed the presence with ACVRL1 mutations, but rarely caused by mutations in the ENG of the recurrent R206H substitution in 14 patients and we identified a gene . novel mutation (R258S) in the ACVR1 kinase domain in one patient . Patients and methods: In a new cohort of 18 adult HHT patients we We used bioinformatic tools to predict functional effects on the protein performed sequencing analysis of the ACVRL1 and ENG gene . caused by the identified mutations and constructed a 3D molecular Results: Eight novel and 8 already described mutations (10 missense model of the R258S mutant in order to gain a better understanding of mutations, 2 small in-frame deletions, 3 premature stop mutations the possible effects of this newly described mutation . and 1 small frameshift deletion) were identified. Analysis of our entire data revealed statistically significant differences in the distribution of P05.085 ACVRL1 and ENG mutations among HHT patients with and without Hereditary hyperferritinemia and cataract syndrome - genetic HAVM (p=0 .0016) . study of a Portuguese family from the Azores Conclusion: Our data support the growing evidence for a significant A. R. Couto1,2, P. Sousa1,2, M. Santos1,2, J. P. Pinheiro1,2, I. Dutra1,2, M. correlation between mutations in the ACVRL1 gene and liver involve- Soares1,2, A. Palma3, G. Porto2, M. de Sousa2, J. Bruges Armas1,2; ment in HHT, and suggest that molecular genetic testing in HHT pa- 1SEEBMO-HSEAH, Angra do Heroismo, Portugal, 2IBMC-Instituto de Biologia tients is important for prognosis with respect to liver disease . Molecular e Celular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Servico Oftal- mologia-HSEAH, Angra do Heroismo, Portugal. Hereditary hyperferritinemia cataract syndrome (HHCS) is an autoso- mal dominant disorder characterised by the presence of cataracts withMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.087 degenerative disorder that is caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the the GNE protein binds to alpha actinin 1 HD gene, resulting in an expansion of polyglutamines at the N-terminal S. Amsili1, H. Zer2, S. Hinderlich3, M. Becker-Cohen1, D. G. MacArthur4, K. N. end of the encoded protein, designated huntingtin, and the accumula- North4, S. Mitrani-Rosenbaum1; tion of cytoplasmic and nuclear aggregates . Not only is there a loss of 1Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hebrew normal huntingtin function, upon expansion of the CAG repeat there is University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Technische Fachhochschule Berlin, also a gain of toxic function of the huntingtin protein and this affects a Berlin, Germany, 4The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, University of Sydney, wide range of cellular processes . To identify groups of genes that could Sydney, Australia. play a role in the pathology of Huntington’s disease, we studied mRNA Hereditary inclusion body myopathy (HIBM) is a rare neuromuscular changes in an inducible PC12 model of Huntington’s disease before disorder and after aggregates became visible. This is the first study to show the caused by mutations in GNE, the key enzyme in the biosynthetic path- involvement Nrf2-responsive genes in the oxidative stress response way of sialic acid . While the mechanism leading from GNE mutations in HD . Oxidative stress related transcripts were altered in expression to the HIBM phenotype is not yet understood, we searched for pro- suggesting a protective response in cells expressing mutant huntingtin teins potentially interacting with GNE, which could give some insights at an early stage of cellular pathology . Furthermore, there was a down- about novel putative biological functions of GNE in muscle . We used a regulation of catecholamine biosynthesis resulting in lower dopamine Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)-Biosensor based assay to search levels in culture . Our results further demonstrate an early impairment for potential GNE interactors in anion exchanged fractions of human of transcription, the cytoskeleton, ion channels and receptors . Given skeletal muscle the pathogenic impact of oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, the primary culture cell lysate . Analysis of the positive fractions by in Nrf2-ARE signaling pathway is an attractive therapeutic target for neu- vitro binding assay revealed α -actinin 1 as a potential interactor of rodegenerative diseases . GNE . The direct interaction of the two proteins was assessed in vitro by SPR-Biosensor based kinetics analysis and in a cellular environ- P05.090 ment by a co-immunoprecipitation assay and confocal co-localization myBPc3 (myosin binding protein c) associated hypertrophic in 293T cells. The interaction of GNE with α -actinin 1 might point to cardiomyopathy in young maine coon cats appears to be a its involvement in α-actinin mediated processes, including cytoskel- recessive disease caused by the synthesis of mutated protein eton organization and signaling pathways . In addition these studies M. T. Nyberg Godiksen1, I. A. Laursen2, T. Nielsen3, S. Granström1, P. Højrup3, illustrate for the first time the expression of the non-muscle form of α J. Koch1, M. Christiansen2; -actinin, α -actinin 1, in mature skeletal muscle tissue, opening novel 1Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark, avenues for its specific function in the sarcomere. 2Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of P05.088 Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. NTRK, a gene involved in the enteric nervous system Human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a primary disorder of development, is related to Hirschsprung disease the myocardium associated with sudden death, stroke and heart fail- A. Sánchez-Mejías1,2, M. Ruiz-Ferrer1,2, R. M. Fernandez1,2, M. D. Mena1,2, M. ure . It is caused by mutations in genes coding for sarcomeric proteins . Lopez-Alonso1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2, S. Borrego1,2; HCM in the Maine Coon cat (MCO) is a good spontaneous model of 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal, Hos- human HCM . Variants in the MyBPC3 gene, coding for myosin bind- pitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación ing protein-C (MYBP-C), are associated with human HCM . The muta- Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Seville, Spain. tion A31P in MyBPC3 is associated with familial HCM in MCO and Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a developmental disorder character- we screened a large cohort of unrelated MCO cats to establish the ized by the absence of ganglion cells in the myenteric and submuco- association between this mutation and feline HCM . sal plexuses along a variable portion of the distal intestine, due to a Two-hundred-eighty-seven MCO cats (mean age of 2 .2 years, 23 with defect of neural crest neuroblasts migration process . Manifestation of HCM) were genotyped for the A31P . Mutation screening was performed the disease has been linked to the dysfunction of 2 principal signalling by DNA sequencing . Heart proteins were extracted from two MCO cats, pathways involved in the enteric nervous system (ENS) formation: the separated by SDS-PAGE, the MYBP-C band was trypsin digested and RET-GDNF and the EDN3-EDNRB receptor systems . Because of its sequence variants identified by mass-spectrometry (MS). etiopathogenesis it results tempting to speculate that additional sig- A31P had a minor allele frequency of 0 .20 . The odds ratio for having nalling pathways implicated in intestinal neurodevelopment could also HCM was 10.7 (95%-cfi: 3.3 - 34.4) in homozygous cats. The presence be involved in HSCR . In this way, the NTF3/TrkC signalling pathway of MYBP-C with the A31P variant in heart tissue was verified by MS in had been shown to play an essential role in the development of the a homozygous MCO cat . ENS, together with the evidences showed by murine models lacking or MyBPC3 associated HCM in MCO express itself as a recessive disease over-expressing NTF-3, and the differential localization of the receptor in young cats, as a single A31P allele does not confer an increased risk in ganglionic versus aganglionic region of HSCR intestine suggest a of HCM . However, the potential for late-onset of disease may cause potential role for those genes in the pathogenesis of HSCR . We have the significance of the genetic variant to be underestimated. The pres- sought to evaluate the candidature of the NTRK3 gene, encoding the ence of the A31P variant MYBP-C in hearts suggests that the disease TrkC receptor, as a susceptibility gene for Hirschsprung disease . Using is caused by the presence of a “poisonous polypeptide” . direct sequencing analysis and dHPLC technology we have screened the NTRK3 coding region and the intron/exon boundaries in 143 Span- P05.091 ish HSCR patients . A total of 4 previously described polymorphisms myocyte function and gene defects in arrythmogenic right and 12 novel sequence variants were detected . Of note, we have ventricular dysplasia: clinical pnehotypes and open problems detected a novel aminoacid substitution in the protein sequence in a for clinical genetics multiplex HSCR family . In silico studies point that structural alterations N. Marziliano, M. Grasso, A. Pilotto, E. Serafini, M. Tagliani, E. Disabella, B. might be introduced in the mutated protein, suggesting a pathogenic De Giorgio, P. Cassini, M. Pasotti, E. Arbustini; role for Hirschsprung disease . IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, PAVIA, Italy. Background . Desmosome proteins’ defects are associated with right P05.089 ventricular (fibro)-fatty replacement of myocardial tissue (Arrythmo- Nrf2-related oxidative stress response and impaired dopamine genic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy/Dysplasia, ARVC/D, MIM biosynthesis in a Pc12 cell model of Huntington’s disease #609040 and #107970) . The most investigated genes are: JUP (Junc- W. M. C. van Roon-Mom1, B. A. Pepers1, P. A. C. ‘t Hoen1, C. A. C. M. Verwij- tional Plakoglobin, 17q21), PKP2 (Plakophilin-2, 12p11), DSC2 (Des- meren1, J. T. den Dunnen1, J. C. Dorsman2, G. B. van Ommen1; mocollin 2, 18q12 .1), and DSG2 (Desmoglein 2, 18q12 .1-q12 .2), DSP 1LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Free University, Amsterdam, The Nether- (Desmoplakin, 6p24). We screened the five genes in a consecutive lands. series of 65 patients with ARVC/D fulfilling (n=3) and non-fulfilling Huntington’s disease (HD) is a devastating disease for which currently (n=62) McKenna et al . criteria and 55 DCM patients with arrhythmias, no therapy is available . It is a progressive autosomal dominant neuro- two with suspected myocarditis, and one with a wrong diagnosis ofMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  amyloidosis . nephrolithiasis nor hyperuricemia . She was never on allopurinol . Uric Methods . The ARVC/D was diagnosed on McKenna et al . criteria acid was quantified by specific enzymic method and erythrocytes en- (1994), the DCM according to the WHO criteria. The coding and flank- zyme with plasma purine metabolites were measured by HPLC meth- ing regions of the five genes were analysed by direct automated se- ods . Detailed purine biochemical investigations revealed in repeat quencing of the heteroduplex amplicons . serum uric acid concentrations within normal limits (314±12 μmol/); Results. We identified 38 mutations in 110 index patients (24 of the increased plasma levels of hypoxanthine:19.8 μmol/l (control values 65 ARVC/D patients and 14 of the 55 DCM patients), with 4 patients 2.5±1.0 μmol/l ) and xanthine: 7.5 μmol/l (control values 2.4±0.7 μmol/l carrying double/compound heterozygous mutations and 2 carrying a ); HPRT activity in erythrocyte lysate was surprisingly very low: 8 .6 triple heterozygosity; the segregation of the gene defects with the phe- nmol/h/mg Hb (control values :113 ±11 nmol/h/mg Hb) . Mutation analy- notype was confirmed in the 3 probands who fulfilled the criteria of sis using direct sequencing revealed heterozygous form of previously ARVC/D: two carried a missense and frameshift mutations and one a described mutation in the 3rd exon of HPRT gene, c .215A>G (Y72C) . frameshift mutation . Subsequent analysis showed skewed X-inactivation ratio in favour of Conclusions . The recurrence of double/triple mutants raises serious mutant allele (> 25:75), which could explain enzyme defect . Although problems in molecular diagnosis and family study, especially when the enzyme deficiency with urate overproduction (presenting as high plas- family is small and segregation cannot be assessed, in particular the ma oxypurines) is evident, the reason for normal serum urate concen- prediction of the development of the disease in young mutation carri- trations remains uncertain . Such results have not been reported in a ers . Due to the current uncertainties, healthy mutation carriers should female with HPRT deficiency. In conclusion our finding shows the need undergo regular clinical monitoring . of detailed purine investigation in asymptomatic female members of family with partial HPRT deficiency. P05.092 Development of a method for the genetic screening of 537 P05.094 mutations associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and Heterochromatic genes undergo epigenetic changes and escape analysis of a large cohort of patients from silencing in icF syndrome M. Hermida-Prieto1, L. Monserrat2, M. I. Rodriguez-Garcia3, J. Gimeno- M. Brun1, E. Lana1, C. Grunau1, A. Mégarbané2, G. Lefranc1, P. Sarda3, A. De Blanes4, F. Marín-Ortuño4, L. Cazón1, I. Alvariño1, M. Brión5, A. Carracedo5, A. Sario1; Castro-Beiras2; 1CNRS UPR 1142, Montpellier, France, 2Saint-Joseph University, Beiruth, Leba- 1Instituto de Ciencias de la Salud, La Coruña, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario non, 3Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France. Universitario Juan Canalejo, La Coruña, Spain, 3Instituto de Ciencias de la ICF (Immunodeficiency, Centromeric Instability, and Facial Anoma- Salud - RECAVA, La Coruña, Spain, 4Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, lies), is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder . Most of the ICF patients Spain, 5Centro Nacional de Genotipado, nodo de Santiago de Compostela, La were born from consanguineous marriages and about 60% have mu- Coruña, Spain. tations in the DNMT3B, a de novo DNA methyltransferase . ICF syn- More than 500 different mutations have been associated with the de- drome is characterized by a marked immunodeficiency (patients tend velopment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) . However, genetic to have low levels of immunoglobulins); facial anomalies are a hetero- diagnosis has not been till now a useful tool for clinicians because of geneous trait and centromeric instability is the most typical feature of its limited availability and high cost . the disease . The juxtacentromeric heterochromatin of chromosome 1, Objectives: the development of a genotyping platform to identify all 9, and 16 is markedly undercondensed and is involved in chromosome the mutations that have been associated with HCM, to perform the rearrangements and multiradiate associations . The instability corre- screening of a large cohort of patients with HCM with this platform, lates with a severe hypomethylation of the classical satellites 2 and 3, and to evaluate the clinical factors associated with the presence of which are the major components of constitutive heterochromatin . It is mutations . unknown how loss of DNA methylation in non-coding sequences ac- Methods: We analyzed by Massarray SNPtyping 537 mutations in 15 counts for the multiple symptoms associated with the ICF syndrome . genes: MYH7 (224), MYBPC3 (169), TNNT2 (37) TPM1 (11), ACTC Having observed that in tumor cells and cancer cell lines heterochro- (7), MYH6 (5), MYL2 (11), MYL3 (5), MYLK2 (1), MYO6 (1), PRKAG2 matic genes become hypomethylated and escape from silencing, we (9), TCAP (2), TNNC1 (3), TNNI3 (33) and TTN (9) in 773 consecutive asked whether the same process is found in ICF syndrome . In this index patients with HCM . work we showed that heterochromatic genes are strongly hypomethyl- Results: We identified 74 different mutations (MYBPC3 34, MYH7 24, ated and some of them escape from silencing in ICF cells relative to TNNT2 5, TNNI3 5, TPM1 2, TNNC1 1, MYH6 1, ACTC 1, MYLK2 1) controls . Having observed that some heterochromatic genes remain in 163 different patients (21%) (MYBPC3 in 98 pts, MYH7 43, TNNI3 silent, in spite of loss of methylation, we concluded that hypomethyl- 11, TNNT2 10, ACTC 7, MYH6 6, TPM1 2, MYLK2 2, TNNC1 1)(17 pa- ation is necessary but not sufficient to have transcription in heterochro- tients had 2 mutations and 1 was homozygous) . Mutations were found matic regions . ChIP experiments will show whether the activation of in 100/392 pts from center C (26%), 37/147 from center M (25%) and heterochromatic genes is regulated by histone modifications. Aberrant 26/234 from center A (16%) . transcription of heterochromatic genes may contribute to some of the Conclusions: Genetic screening of known mutations in HCM provides symptoms that are associated with ICF syndrome . the identification of mutations in 20 to 40% of our index patients. The likelihood of a positive diagnosis is higher in patients with familial dis- P05.095 ease and in patients with sudden death risk factors . clinical and molecular study of SCNA-related Epilepsy in iranian families P05.093 A. Ebrahimi1, H. Tonekaboni2, S. Zeinali3, M. Houshmand1; Unusual presentation of Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2-Shahid Beheshty Medical science I. Sebesta1,2, B. Stiburkova1, J. Minsk1, L. Dvorakova1, M. Hrebicek1, I. Rychlík3, University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biotechnology Research Centre, Z. Vernerova4; Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute SCN1A-related seizure disorders encompass a spectrum that ranges of Clinical Biochemistry, Prague, Czech Republic, 32nd Department of Internal from simple febrile seizures (FS) and generalized epilepsy with fe- Medicine,Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of brile seizures plus (GEFS+) at the mild end to Dravet syndrome at Pathology,Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. the severe end . The phenotype can vary even within the same family . Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome means partial deficiency of hypoxanthine- SCN1A-related seizure disorders are inherited in an autosomal domi- guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT), which is an X-linked ge- nant manner . Most SCN1A-related Seizures are the result of a de novo netic defect of purine metabolism . Characteristic features are hyper- heterozygous mutation .The proportion of cases caused by de novo uricemia, nephrolithiasis and gout, resulting from uric acid overproduc- mutations varies by phenotype .The percentage of probands with an tion . Female carriers have somatic cell mosaicism of HPRT activity, SCN1A-related seizure disorder and an affected parent decreases and are healthy with normal enzyme activity in erythrocytes . Only few as the severity of the phenotype in the proband increases . Material females suffering from gout with this disorder were described . and methods: Diagnostic classification of patients followed on Classi- We report a 50 year-old woman, who did not experience neither gout, fication and Terminology of the International League Against EpilepsyMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 (1989) .Family History, Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings and the greater contribution of germ cells to CS transcription . Transcript CT Scan were obtained from most patients . The study was approved levels of CS were significantly decreased in spermatogenic failure-af- by the Iranian institutional ethics committees . DNA was obtained from fected-samples (p=0.01), suggesting to play a role in the efficiency of 50 unrelated families with idiopathic generalized epilepsy as index spermatogenesis. Additionally, its significant correlation with the elon- families . The 26 exons of SCNIA were Screened for deletions and du- gated spermatid number may indicate that CS has an active transcrip- plications by MLPA. In order to finding point mutations and SNPs each tion in the latest stages of spermatogenesis with potential implications exon individually amplified from genomic DNA in PCR reactions us- in the metabolic activity of sperm . ing intronic primers and were analyzed by Single Strand conformation Supported by FIS (PI02/0120, PI05/0759, CP03/00088, CA06/0055) Polymorphism gel electrophoresis (SSCP) and conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis(CSGE) and so the PCR products with mobility vari- P05.098 ants were sequenced by ABI sequencer. We have identified some new Differential susceptibility of imprinting centers to epimutations intronic variants in SCNIA and new mutations too, in patients with IGE under DNA demethylation influence subtypes . E. A. Sazhenova1, I. N. Lebedev1, A. V. Eremeev2, A. V. Svetlakov2; Allele and genotype frequencies in the patients and in the control 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Center of Repro- groups were compared Statisticaly ductive Medicine, Krasnoyarsk, Russian Federation. Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic phenomenon, which is involved in P05.096 regulation of embryonic development, placental function and neurobe- molecular genetic analysis of SCNB gene in Russian patients havioural processes . Changes in differential methylation of imprinting with idiopathic ventricular arrhythmias control (IC) regions are one of the possible mechanisms leading to E. Ivanova1, H. Zaklyazminskaya2; aberrant gene inactivation or loss of imprinting associated with some 1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, hereditary diseases and cancer . However, incidence of epimutations 2Center of Molecular Genetics, Odintsovo, Russian Federation. in different imprinted loci as well as underlined mechanisms of its aris- Cardiac channelopathies is a new class of diseases characterized by ing remains elusive . Previously we have reported about differential high risk of life-threatening arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death with susceptibility to epimutations of three IC’s in spontaneous abortions apparently normal heart . Mutations in more than 10 different genes and described the loss of methylation of KCNQ1OT1 in 9 .5% of em- can cause these diseases . For different disorders within this group bryos . The aim of the present research was analysis of methylation approximately 25-60% patients remain genotype negative . Recently, a stability of previously investigated IC’s (SNURF-SNRPN, H19/IGF2, new gene SCN4B encoding β4-subunit of Na1 .5 was shown in Long KCNQ1OT1) under influence of DNA demethylating agent such as 5- v QT Syndrome (LQTS) family . The aim of this work is to screen mutation aza-2-deoxycytidine in vitro. Fetal fibroblasts cell cultures from 17 in- in SCN4B gene in patients with idiopathic ventricular arrhythmias and duced abortions (9 .6±0 .2 weeks of pregnancy) with normal karyotype to estimate the prevalence of genetic alterations in this gene in Rus- were treated by 5-aza-2dC with 5 μg/ml for 72 h. Methylation analysis sian patients . The DNA samples of 48 unrelated patients (mutations in was performed by methyl-specific or methylation-sensitive PCR. A nor- KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A, KCNE1 and KCNE2 had been excluded) mal differential methylation of SNURF-SNRPN and H19/IGF2 was ob- with ventricular arrhythmias had been analyzed . Fourteen patients had served in all cell cultures after 5-aza-2dC treatment . As to KCNQ1OT1, LQTS, 14 patients had Brugada Syndrome (BrS) and 20 patients had all cell cultures have revealed a loss of methylation in maternal al- Idiopathic Ventricular Tachycardia (IVT) . Molecular genetic testing was lele . Loss of imprinting in KCNQ1OT1 was observed in our previous performed by PCR-SSCP analysis with following direct sequencing of research of spontaneous abortions as well as in most children born abnormal conformers . We did not found any disease-causing mutation after IVF procedures with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome reported in in SCN4B gene . We suppose that SCN4B-associated arrhythmias are literature . Our results indicate a different susceptibility of IC’s to epimu- extremely rare in Russian patients with LQTS, BrS and IVT . Polymor- tations, providing evidence for KCNQ1OT1 as a «hot spot» of aberrant phism c . C174T (p . C58C) in exon 2 was found within group of patients epigenetic modifications in the human genome. with BrS . The prevalence of this SNP among the patients with BrS and control group (100 unrelated unaffected individuals) was about P05.099 7% without significant differences. Thus, it’s unlikely that c. C174C can Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy: challenges for identification significantly modify Na+-channel function . By now, routine analysis of and new advances in prenatal diagnosis SCN4B gene for patients without mutations in KCNQ1, KCNH2, SC- W. Lissens1, G. Buyse2, J. Misson3, L. Lagae2, C. Ceuterick-De Groote4, R. Van N5A, KCNE1 and KCNE2 seems to be inexpedient . Coster5, E. Schmedding1, S. Seneca1, L. De Meirleir1; 1University Hospital UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2University Hospitals K.U. P05.097 Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3CHU Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium, 4Born-Bunge CS expression in infertile men correlates with the efficiency of Institute, Antwerp, Belgium, 5University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. the spermatogenic process Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD; OMIM #256600) is a rare dis- S. Bonache1, E. Terribas1, J. Sánchez2, L. Bassas2, S. Larriba1; ease belonging to the group of neurodegenerative disorders together 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Center-Fundació IDIBELL, BARCELONA, with NBIA (neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, PANK2 Spain, 2Andrology Service-Fundació Puigvert, BARCELONA, Spain. gene, OMIM #234200), KARAK syndrome and Schindler disease Germ cells use mitochondrial Krebs cycle (KC)/electron transport sys- (OMIM #609241) . These diseases share the pathologic feature of axo- tem and glycolysis for the maintenance of their ATP concentration, but nal degeneration with distended axons throughout the central nervous each stage of spermatogenesis rely on one or other pathway for ATP system . In previous work there has been some controversy regarding production . Interestingly, spermatocytes and spermatids RNA and pro- whether INAD is a separate entity or is part of a spectrum of diseases tein synthesis is highly dependent on mitochondria as the major ATP with panhothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PANK) . supplier . Based on molecular studies of the PANK2 gene it became clear that Citrate synthase (CS) is the first enzyme in the KC. We have assessed INAD and PANK are genetically heterogeneous disorders . Recently, the role of KC in the progression of spermatogenesis by the CS gene a gene PLA2G6, encoding a phospholipase A2, has been recognized expression analysis in testicular biopsies of 39 non-obstructive and as causing INAD . However, there is still some overlap in phenotypes 20 obstructive infertile men. Samples were classified into four groups, resulting from deficiencies in the PLA2G6 and PANK2 genes. We pres- from 1 (total absence of germ cells) to 4 (conserved spermatogenesis), ent here the clinical features, diagnosis and molecular results of four on the basis of the Johnsen score count . patients from three unrelated families in whom a definitive diagnosis The current method has been the real time RT-PCR [LightCycler™ could be made by molecular analysis . Instrument (Roche) and SYBR Green I fluorescence dye] and the In all four patients clinical data and biochemical studies were in agree- relative quantification strategy, using cyclophilin-A as an endogenous ment with a diagnosis of neuroaxonal dystrophy . Molecular studies of control gene . The Mann-Whitney U test was used to analyse gene the PLA2G6 were performed to confirm this diagnosis. The two male expression differences between groups . siblings from family 1 were homozygous for a p .Val371Met substitu- CS transcript levels positively correlated with all germ cell stages num- tion; there was no apparent consanguinity in this family . A healthy car- ber but a negative correlation was found with Sertoli cells supporting rier female was born after prenatal diagnosis through chorionic villusMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  sampling . The 2 other patients were from consanguineous parents, P05.102 and were homozygous for a previously described p .Leu481Gln muta- Regulatory elements at INS gene and Neonatal Diabetes tion and a frameshift mutation resulting from a 2bp duplication, respec- I. Garin1, J. Locke2, G. Pérez-Nanclares1, R. Martínez1, L. W. Harries2, L. tively . Castaño1, G. Pérez de Nanclares1; 1Endocrinology and Diabetes Research Group, Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo, P05.100 Spain, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Founda- A new syndrome with infantile-onset spasticity, mental tion Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom. retardation and abnormalities of white matter and cerebellum in Introduction: Insulin secretion is tightly regulated to maintain blood glu- a large consanguineous family. cose levels within a narrow physiological range . Recent studies have A. J. M. H. Verkerk1, R. Schot2, B. Dumee1, S. Swagemakers1, M. W. Wes- reported heterozygous missense mutations at INS gene in permanent sels2, K. Schellekens1, A. Bertoli2, M. Kros3, M. H. Lequin4, J. Dudink4, R. F. de neonatal diabetes (PND) . Multiple discrete sequence elements within Coo5, R. Willemsen2, P. van der Spek1, G. M. S. Mancini2; the proximal promoter region (5’UTR) affect insulin expression, and 1Bioinformatics ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Clinical Genetics also the 3’-untranslated (3’-UTR) region has been identified as critical ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Pathology ErasmusMC, Rotter- for murine preproinsulin mRNA stability . dam, The Netherlands, 4Radiology ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Objective: To evaluate the putative contribution of INS in unrelated 5Child Neurology ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. subjects with unexplained neonatal diabetes (ND =14) . We describe in a sibship of 11 children from consanguineous parents Methods: the 3 exons (including untranslated exon 1), intron-exon 2 apparently distinct disorders . Seven sibs suffer from autosomal re- junctions and the 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions of INS were PCR am- cessive arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) caused by a homozygote plified with specific primers and direct sequencing was performed. GLUT10 mutation, as reported before (Coucke, Nat Genet, 2006) . We Results: No mutations were identified in the coding sequence. How- classified the second disorder and report linkage studies to identify a ever, we detected 5 novel variants . Three of them were situated in the distinct recessive locus . Five sibs present with a neurodevelopmen- first exon: tal disorder, consisting of neonatal hypotonia, severe psychomotor - One patient presented 2 contiguous variants in compound heterozy- retardation, no independent deambulation, progression to tetraplegia, gosis (c .[-332C>G]+[-331C>G]) . excessive drooling, strabismus, no speech development, no signs of - One patient carried a heterozygous variant (c .-170A>G) . denervation, no seizures and prolonged survival . The oldest patient One patient presented an intronic variant (c .188-31G>A) which was is 25 years old. Four of them have also ATS, but the fifth has no sign inherited from the father, who also presented with PND . of arterial tortuosity and is heterozygote for the familial GLUT10 mu- In a patient with PND a homozygous variant was detected in the 3’UTR tation . Brain MRI of this patient shows asymmetric widespread loss (c .*59A>G) . Both parents carried this variant and both presented with of periventricular white matter with normal myelination and cerebellar glucose intolerance . This variant is situated at the 6th nucleotide within atrophy . MRI of the other neurologically affected sibs is similar, with in the polyadenylation signal site; (AAAUAA - AAAUAG) . the addition of arterial tortuosity. Brain autopsy of one of the five sibs Conclusions: Alterations in regulatory elements at INS are associated who died of aspiration shows signs of neuro-axonal dystrophy . DTI and with an earlier onset of PND compared to previously described coding fiber track data analysis from MRI suggest a combined neuron and mutations . Mutations in the insulin gene are rare in Spanish patients myelin damage . We undertook linkage analysis for a second recessive with neonatal diabetes . locus in these five sibs and excluded loci for known white matter dis- orders, spastic paraplegias and infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy . We P05.103 found instead linkage for a new chromosomal locus . We conclude that FoxP3 expression on different stage of type 1 diabetes mellitus the neurological disorder in this family represents a new type of early P. V. Apanovich1, T. V. Nikonova2, T. A. Muzaffarova1, M. V. Shestakova2, A. V. onset upper motor neuron disease leading to early selective loss / un- Karpukhin1; der-development of pyramidal tracts . 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Endo- crinological Research Center, Moskow, Russian Federation. P05.101 FoxP3 expression is considered as key factor for autoimmunity pre- investigation of cytokine expression pattern associated with the venting . It is known that FoxP3 expression level is decreased under pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease type 1 diabetes mellitus . However there no information about the ex- D. IANCU1, M. Diculescu2, C. Iancu1, E. Neagu1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Con- pression level on different stage of this disease . stantinescu1, G. Girbea1, L. Barbarii1; We investigated FoxP3 expression among for the first time revealed 1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2Fundeni Clinical type 1 diabetes mellitus patients (up to 1 year, early disease stage) Hospital – Gastroenterology Department, Bucharest, Romania. and a group of patients throuhg 15-25 years after disease beginning Inflammation is the shared pathophysiological element for the two main (late stage of disease) . FoxP3 expression level was determined com- inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcer- parative to expression of GAPDH gene or CD4 gene expression level ative colitis (UC) but its contribution to the triggering and maintaining by Real Time PCR . It was revealed that FoxP3 expression was in- the pathological condition is still incompletely understood . Our objec- creased on late stage of disease relatively to early disease stage as tive was to investigate the pro-inflammatory gene expression profile in with GAPDH so CD4 genes . There were 0,32±0,13 on early disease colonic mucosa of IBD patients in order to establish correlations with stage and 1,1±0,35 on late stage for FoxP3 expression level (P= 0,02) . IBD form and disease activity . The increasing of FoxP3 expression may means the decreasing of RNA was extracted from colonic biopsy samples obtained from IBD pa- autoimmune reaction on advanced stage of diabetes. Possibly it reflect tients, after informed consent . The samples were initially screened for equilibrium state of immunity and produced by β-cells antigene. inflammatory gene expression profile with a MLPA kit (SALSA R009, MRC Holland) which allows detection of 40 RNA molecules in the P05.104 same PCR reaction . Subsequently, the selected mRNAs were quanti- The influence of the genetic polymorphisms on the transcription fied using RT real-time PCR in individual gene expression assays. We factor binding to the iL-4 promoter. investigated a total of 50 patients with IBD, 33 with CD and 17 with Y. V. Gervaziev1, L. V. Olenina2, S. A. Mazurina3, V. B. Gervazieva3; UC . Our preliminary results show an increased expression of some 1V.N. Orekhovich’s Institute of Biomedical Chemistry RAMS, Moscow, Russian monocyte-derived cytokines (IL1B, IL1RN, IL8, IL12, MIF) and some Federation, 2Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3I.I. inflammation associated transcription factors (NFkB, NFKBIA). The Mechnikov’s Institute of Vaccines and Sera RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa- cytokines’ expression pattern in apparently normal mucosa showed a tion. reduced but still significant inflammatory response. Background: Promoter polymorphisms of IL-4 gene C-33T and C- 590T are well described. They influence both IL-4 and serum IgE con- centrations in a human organism . Objective: To evaluate the mecha- nism of the phenotypic effect of these polymorphisms, specifically to identify the transcription factors (TF) selectively binding to these loci . methods: Sequences flanking these loci were analyzed in silico toMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  predict the TF binding the selected regions . This prediction was ex- PGP treatment was observed for Lif, Galr1, TrkA and p75 . Some of the perimentally analyzed by EMSA with nuclear extract of Jurkat T-cell genes which mRNA expression were changed by Semax treatment line. The sequences of Cy5-labeled ds oligonucleotides flanked the only: Fos, IL10ra, Il1b and Tgfb1; and by PGP treatment only: Fgf2, polymorphic loci and were 39bp (C-33T) and 35bp(C-590T) long . Re- Hctr1, Tacr1, Ntf5 and Ptger2 . Hence it was suggested that Semax sults: It was predicted that TFs Oct-1, CREB, C/EBP and GATA could effects observed earlier do not reflect only PGP activity. Obviously the selectively bind C-33T polymorphism locus while MZF-1, Sox-5, PU .1, mechanisms of action of these peptides are not the same and they AP-2, GR, VDR, E2F-1 and T3R-alpha could bind C-590T locus . We each have their own specific effects. From the list of genes altered observed that C-33T EMSA probes associated with two specific com- by Semax or PGP two types of growth factor targets were suggested: plexes . The TFs slightly discriminated between -33C and -33T probes . neural tissue (neurons and glial cells) and vascular cells . The unlabeled consensus ds oligonucleotides for the Oct-1 completely inhibited the lower shift band . Both bands were not inhibited by the oli- P05.107 gonucleotides corresponding to the C/EBP, CREB and GATA binding Novel mutations in myoclonin1/EFHC1 in sporadic and familial sites. As for C-590T polymorphism, two specific bands were observed juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in the sample with -590C probe rather than -590T probe . They were M. Alonso1, M. Medina2, T. Suzuki3, R. Durón2,4, I. Martínez1,4, J. N. Bailey4, D. not inhibited by the unlabeled concurrent probes for the predicted TF Bai4, Y. Inoue5, I. Yoshimura6, S. Kaneko6, M. Montoya2, A. Ochoa1, A. Jara1, M. binding . conclusions: Oct-1 transcription factor could be responsible Tanaka2, J. Machado2, S. Fujimoto7, M. Ito8, S. Hamano9, K. Sugita10, Y. Ueda11, for the phenotypic effect of C-33T IL-4 promoter polymorphism . The M. Osawa12, H. Oguni12, F. Rubio1, K. Yamakawa4, A. Delgado-Escueta4; factor responsible for the C-590T polymorphism does exist but should 1National Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery Manuel Velasco Suárez, yet be identified. The work was supported by the RFBR grant 08-04- Mexico City, Mexico, 2National Autonomous University of Honduras, Teguci- 01535 . galpa, Honduras, 3RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan, 4UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5National Epilepsy Center, Shizuoka, Japan, P05.105 6Hirosaki University, Hirosaki, Japan, 7Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan, Effect of semax treatment on expression of the neurotrophins 8Shiga Medical Center for Children, Moriyama, Japan, 9Children´s Medical Cen- and their receptors in ischemic rat hippocampus ter, Saitama, Japan, 10Ichikawa General Hospital, Shiga, Japan, 11University of V. V. Stavchansky1, L. V. Dergunova1,2, A. B. Botsina2, T. V. Tvorogova2, V. I. Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan, 12Tokyo Woman´s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1,2; Background: Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) accounts for 3 to 12% 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of of all epilepsies . In 2004, the GENESS Consortium demonstrated 4 Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation. missense mutations in Myoclonin1/EFHC1 of chromosome 6p12 .1 Neurotrophins are known as natural neuroprotectors involved in pro- segregating in 20% of Hispanic families with JME . Objective: To ex- liferation, differentiation and survival of neuronal and glial cells . We amine what percentage of consecutive JME clinic cases have muta- analyzed the effect of synthetic polypeptide Semax (Met-Glu-His-Phe- tions in Myoclonin1/EFHC1 . Methods: We screened 44 consecutive Pro-Gly-Pro) upon expression of neurotrophins Bdnf, Ngf, Nt3 and patients from Mexico and Honduras, and 67 patients from Japan using their receptors TrkB, TrkA, TrkC, p75 in rat hippocampus after global heteroduplex analysis and direct sequencing. Results: We found five cerebral ischemia . The study was carried out on 2-3-month-old male novel mutations in transcripts A and B of Myoclonin1/EFHC1 . Two nov- Wistar rats (n=85) . After 15 minutes of irreversible bilateral common el heterozygous missense mutations (c .755C>A and c .1523C>G) in carotid artery occlusion the animals were exposed to intraperitoneal transcript A occurred in a singleton from Mexico and another singleton injection of either Semax or saline 1, 4 and 8 hours after the occlusion . from Japan . A deletion/frameshift (C .789del .AV264fsx280) in transcript Ischemic rats with saline injection were used as control groups . The B was present in a mother and daughter from Mexico . A non-sense mRNA expression of neurotrophins and its receptors was assessed mutation (c .829C>T) in transcript B segregated in 4 clinically and 7 epi- by relative quantification using real-time RT-PCR . Gapdh was used leptiform-EEG affected members of a large Honduran family . The same as the reference gene . The neurotrophins’ transcription was increased non-sense mutation (c .829C>T) occurred as a de novo mutation in a compare with the level of these transcripts in control animals: for Bdnf sporadic case . Finally, we found a three-base deletion (-364^-362del . at 1h, 2h and 12h; for Ngf at 1h, 12h and 24h and for Nt3 at 1h and GAT) in the promoter region in a family from Japan . Conclusion: Nine 12h after operation . Under Semax treatment the mRNA expression of percent of consecutive juvenile myoclonic epilepsy cases from Mexico neurotophin’s receptors was increased compare with control as well: and Honduras clinics and three percent of clinic patients from Japan for TrkB at 30 min, 1h and 24h, for TrkC at 8h and 12h, and for p75 carry mutations in Myoclonin1/EFCH1 . These results represent, the at 2h, 4h and 12h after occlusion . The level of TrkA mRNA was de- highest number and percentage of mutations found for a juvenile myo- creased at 1h, 2h, 4h, and 24h after surgery; at 8h it was increased . clonic epilepsy causing gene of any population group . It could be suggested that neuroprotective effect of Semax is possibly mediated by neurotrophins and its receptors . P05.108 Long Qt syndrome: two Novel Exonic KCNH mutations P05.106 K. Banihashemi1, S. Saber2, E. Zaklyazminskaya3, M. Houshmand4, M. Eft- semax and its c-terminal Pro-Gly-Pro tripeptide change the ekharzadeh5, F. Fazelifar6, M. Rostami2, M. Khosroheidari2; transcription profile of growth factors and their receptors genes 1GPEF, Ministry of Science, Research and technology, Tehran, Islamic Republic after focal cerebral ischemia in rats of Iran, 2Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Russian V. G. Dmitrieva1, L. V. Dergunova1, O. V. Povarova2, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. Academy of Science, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Limborska1; Republic of Iran, 5Tehran Arrhythmia center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of 6Rajaii Heart Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation. Introduction . K Channels made with the KCNH2 protein are active in Neuroprotective polypeptide Semax is used for acute therapy of stroke . the heart muscle, where they transport potassium ions out of cells . The The effect of Semax and its C-terminal PGP tripeptide on mRNA ex- gene contains 15 exons spanning approximately 19 kb on chromo- pression of 84 genes representing growth factors and their receptors in some 7q35 . A feature of K channelopathy is pronounced prolongation the lesioned cortex of rat brain after 3 h of permanent middle cerebral of the QT interval and arrhythmia that can lead to sudden death . artery occlusion (pMCAO) was analyzed using the Rat Neurotrophin Materials and methods . The subjects studied included a 6 members and Receptors gene array (“RT² Profiler™ PCR Array, Superarray). family with 3 out of them involved with LQTS .Genomic DNA was ex- Under Semax treatment in the lesioned cortex mRNA expression of tracted according to a standard method, and then KCNH were PCR- 19 genes was altered, the change in transcription of 7 genes of these amplified and sequenced for identifying LQTS-causing mutations. 19 also was observed under ischemic conditions . PGP promoted the Results . Two exonic novel mutation of KCNH in the exon 6 which was transcriptional alteration of 23 genes . The list of genes which mRNA present also both in his mother and his elder sister and also One more expression was changed under Semax treatment only partly coincided novel intronic mutation . with the list of genes that was changed under PGP treatment; the di- Discussion . The present data, combined with those from previous rection of such transcription alteration was the same . The most marked studies, give more information on KCNH2 mutations which affect loop (two times and more) alteration of mRNA expression under Semax and and pore proteins . The proband , a 16 years old boy with novel muta-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  tion in exon 6 (C>T) which converts arginin into lysine . Additionally 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 4The Juliana there was an intronic mutation (C>A) which has not been reported up Children’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands, 5Hospital for Children and to this time although predicted to have no effect on protein truncations . Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Helsinki University Hos- In conclusion, this is the first frameshift mutation in Iranian population pital, Laboratory Service, Helsinki, Finland. and we have provided additional data of KCNH mutations in LQTS Background: Congenital lactase deficiency (CLD) is a severe gastro- patients. These findings will contribute to further understanding of the intestinal disorder of newborns that is inherited as an autosomal re- function and structure of KCNH and the phenotype-genotype correla- cessive trait and is enriched in the isolated Finnish population . The tion in hereditary LQTS . diagnosis is based on clinical symptoms and low lactase activity in intestinal biopsy specimens . Five mutations in the lactase gene (LCT) P05.109 have so far been identified to underlie CLD. Gene scanning of KCNQ and KCNE by high-resolution melting Methods: To search for new mutations underlying CLD we assayed analysis disaccharidase activities in intestinal biopsy specimens and screened A. Bittnerová1, J. Kadlecová1, T. Novotný2, R. Gaillyová1, M. Kozák2, L. Křivan2, the coding region of LCT gene by direct sequencing from one Italian, J. Špinar2; two Finnish and two Turkish patients with clinical symptoms compat- 1University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Repu- ible to CLD . blic, 2University Hospital Brno and Masaryk University, Department of Internal Results: Three novel mutations in the LCT gene were identified. A sin- Medicine and Cardiology, Brno, Czech Republic. gle nucleotide substitution leading to an amino acid change S688P in KCNQ1 encodes the larger subunit (KvLQT1) and KCNE1 the small exon 7 and a premature stop codon E1612X in exon 12 of the LCT were subunit (MinK) of the I protein . I protein is the slowly activating de- present in the patient of Italian origin . A novel substitution of R1587H Ks Ks layer rectifier potassium channel. Mutations in single genes reduce the in exon 12 was found in a heterozygous form from one Finnish patient . I current and cause the similar Long QT Syndrome (LQTS) pheno- Both Finnish patients were heterozygous for the Finnish founder muta- Ks type . LQTS is a cardiovascular disorder characterized by an abnormal- tion Y1370X . Analyses of another Finnish patient are still ongoing . The ity in repolarization, leading to a prolonged QT interval . previously reported missense mutation G1363S in exon 9 was found KCNQ1 consists of 16 exons and encodes a protein of 676 amino in a homozygous state in two siblings of Turkish origin . Comparison acids. There have been identified 246 mutations in this gene. KCNE1 of clinical phenotype and the location and/or type of a mutation in the consists of just 3 exons, encoding a protein of 129 amino acids . Only LCT gene shows that all mutations lead to a similar phenotype . 30 mutations of this gene have been found . Conclusions: A total of eight mutations are known in CLD . This is the For the mutation scanning we have used multiplex SSCP with sensi- first report of mutations in non-Finnish patients. tivity about 80 % . Now, we detect the mutations using high-resolution melting analysis . This method is based on PCR in the presence of the P05.112 double-strand DNA binding dye, and tracking the nucleic acid melting Functional characterization of point mutations in the LDLR gene by monitoring the fluorescence of the sample across a defined tem- found in Portuguese patients with clinical diagnosis of familial perature range. Melting profiles can be used to identify the presence of hypercholesterolaemia. sequence variation within the amplicon . The method has almost 100% S. Silva1, D. Patel2, A. K. Soutar2, M. Bourbon1; sensitivity and specificity when used on products up to 400bp. We 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2MRC-Clinical have used this method for detection of 7 described mutations (S225L, Sciences Centre, London, United Kingdom. T312I, G314S, G325R, T587M, A590T and R591H) in KCNQ1 and two The LDL receptor is a surface glycoprotein that mediates binding and SNPs (S38G and D85N) in KCNE1 with the sensitivity 100 % . uptake of cholesterol-rich lipoproteins from plasma, in particular LDL . This work was supported by grants IGA MZ CR NR/9340-3, MSM Mutations in the LDLR cause familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH), 0021622415 and by the Czech Society of Cardiology . which results in defective catabolism of LDL leading to premature ath- erosclerosis and CHD . P05.110 Five missense mutations found in the LDLR gene during the “Por- Identification of mutations in KLK4 genes among Iranian tuguese FH Study”, responsible for protein variants V408L, W469R, patients with amelogenesis imperfecta S627P, P664S and V838M, were studied in order to assess their P. Aref, M. Bahaminpour, M. Shahrabi, M. Ghandehari Motlagh, B. Seraj, M. pathogenicity . Heidari; The different LDLR mutants were generated by site-directed mutagen- Faculty of dentistry, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. esis and expressed in CHO-ldlA7 cells lacking endogenous expres- Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) refers to a group of inherited tooth disor- sion of LDLR . To determine the effects of mutations on LDLR function ders characterized by abnormal enamel formation . The incidences of we measured saturable binding plus internalization and degradation of AI vary widely; from 1 in 700 people in northern Sweden to 1 in 14,000 125I-labelled LDL at 37ºC and estimated mature LDLR at cell surface people in the United States In spite of the fact that many studies have by immunoblotting . been carried out in different centers on molecular aspects of this disor- All mutant constructs resulted in production of a detectable mature der, the genetic basis of non-syndromic forms of AI is unknown . So far, protein in CHO-A7 cells, except variant W469R which accumulated four genes have been documented that associated with AI, AMELEX, the precursor form . Variants W469R and V408L were severely im- ENAM, KLK4 and MMP20 genes . We performed molecular genetic paired in their ability to mediate uptake and degradation of 125I-LDL studies on 10 Iranian families with different models of inheritances and showed reduced amounts of LDLR at cell surface . Variant S627P according to pedigree analysis . In this study, three genes including retained ~40% and P664S ~60% of normal LDLR activity . V838M vari- ENAM, KLK4, and MMP20 which account for majority of AI and auto- ant showed essentially the same activity as the wild-type LDLR . somally inherited were chosen for mutation detection by a polymerase Results suggest that four of the variants studied are mutations caus- chain reaction (PCR) and single-stranded conformation polymorphism ing disease in patients carrying those alterations and V838M is a rare (SSCP) . Our results from SSCP revealed genetic alterations in ENAM, non-pathogenic variant . The severe effect that V408L mutation has in MMP20 and KLK4 genes . We found mutations in KLK4 exon 3 in 7 LDLR function does not correlate with the patient’s phenotype, sug- patients . In order to identify the type of mutation, samples were sub- gesting other genetic or/and environmental factors may be involved in jected for DNA sequencing. Our findings suggested that the incidences phenotype modulation . of KLK4 mutations in Iranian population might be higher than other population . P05.113 Genetic testing for Leber congenital Amaurosis (LcA): a 3-year P05.111 experience three novel mutations in the lactase gene (Lct) underlying F. Coppieters1, S. De Jaegere1, T. de Ravel2, I. Casteels3, F. Meire4, N. Van congenital lactase deficiency (CLD) Regemorter5, A. De Paepe1, P. J. Coucke1, B. P. Leroy1,6, E. De Baere1; S. Torniainen1, C. Catassi2, T. Routi3, C. Gijsbers4, E. Savilahti5, I. Järvelä1,6; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Center for Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Paediatrics, Universita Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Leuven University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  4HUDERF, Hôpital Des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 5Centre de lipase deficiency present in the first several months of life with masked Génétique de Bruxelles, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 6De- hypertriglyceridaemia, often ranging between 5000 to 10 .000 mg/dl . partment of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Hypertriglyceridaemia caused by decreased or absent Lipoprotein LCA is genetically highly heterogeneous with the involvement of large lipase (LPL) activity is associated with increased blood lipoproteins . disease genes, which hamper genetic testing . The purpose of this LPL plays a functional role in regulation of the lipoproteins . To date, study was to determine the prevalence of mutations in 6 common LCA approximately 140 mutations have been identified within LPL gene in genes in 108 LCA patients, mainly of Belgian origin, in order to opti- human genome . Most of the mutations are located within the coding mize a genetic screening strategy for LCA . region of this gene . We performed DNA sequencing of 9 exonic regions First, LCA chip screening revealed a mutation in 23% of all patients . of LPL gene including promotor region of 10 patients with hypertriglyc- Second, direct sequencing of AIPL1, CRB1, CRX, GUCY2D, and eridaemia . We detected one novel homozygous missense mutation RPE65 revealed causal mutations in 4 .6% . Third, we performed tar- that alters aminoacid at position 221 (I221T) . The homozygous muta- geted mutation analysis of the CEP290 mutation c .2991+1655A>G . tion causes the substitution of Isoleucine to Threonine at codon 221 in We found this mutation in both homozygous (2/108) and heterozygous exon 5. We evaluated the characteristic of patients, laboratory findings (16/108) state. A second mutation was identified through sequencing and associated disorders. Treatment of patients with LPL deficiency of the total coding region . Subsequently, the remaining patients were is difficult. Therefore, detection of mutations might be useful for better screened for 4 additional recurrent CEP290 mutations . p .Lys1575X therapy and prenatal diagnosis of the patients . was found in 3 .7% and c .[3310-1G>A;3310C>A] in 0 .9%, demonstrat- ing that c .2991+1655A>G is not present in all CEP290-related LCA P05.116 cases. A second mutation was identified in 3 cases; cDNA sequencing Detecion and characterization of large rearrangements in the is ongoing in the other ones . Finally, sequencing of the total coding SLCA gene in Lysinuric Protein intolerance patients region of CEP290 is being performed in the remaining 39 cases . So M. Font-Llitjós1,2, B. Rodríguez-Santiago3,4, M. Espino1, S. Mañas1, R. Sillué1,2, far, this revealed a homozygous mutation in one case . L. A. Pérez-Jurado3,4, M. Palacín5,6, V. Nunes1,6; In conclusion, we found mutations in 50% of all patients (22% in 1IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2CIBERER-U730, Barcelona, Spain, CEP290; 15% in CRB1; 6% in RPE65; 3% in AIPL1; 2% in CRX and 3Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER-U735, Barcelona, 2% in GUCY2D) . A combined genetic testing strategy consisting of Spain, 5Parc Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Universitat de Barce- LCA chip analysis and targeted mutation screening of 5 recurrent lona, Barcelona, Spain. CEP290 mutations, represented an efficient first-pass screening, re- Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) or hyperdibasic aminoaciduria type vealing causal mutations in 44 .4% of our LCA population . 2 (OMIM 222700) is a rare autosomal inherited disease, caused by de- fective cationic amino acid transport 4F2hc/y+LAT-1 at the basolateral P05.114 membrane of epithelial cells in the intestine and kidney . LPI is a multi- Genetic study of tunisian patients with Leigh syndrome: systemic disease with a variety of clinical symptoms, such as osteopo- presence of the t8993G mutation in the mt-AtP6 gene and 2 rosis, hypotonia, growth delay, pulmonar insufficiency, or renal insuf- new mutations in the mt-ND2 and mt-AtP8 genes ficiency. LPI is diagnosed by the presence of excessive urine excretion E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, W. Chaari2, S. Younes3, R. Bousoffara2, M. Sfar2, N. Bel- of dibasic amino acids, especially lysine, and by their poor intestinal guith1, C. Triki4, F. Fakhfakh1; absorption that leads to low plasma levels of dibasic amino acids . The 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine. Faculté de Médecine, Sfax, SLC7A7 gene, which encodes the y+LAT-1 protein, is mutated in LPI Tunisia, 2Service de Pédiatrie. Hôpital Taher Sfar., Mahdia, Tunisia, 3Service patients . Mutation analysis of the two promoters and all exons of the de Neurologie. Hôpital Taher Sfar., Mahdia, Tunisia, 4Service de Neurologie, SLC7A7 gene was performed in ten patients from nine unrelated LPI C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia. families from different ethnic backgrounds . Point mutation screening Leigh syndrome (LS) is a genetically heterogeneous, neurodegen- was performed by exon direct sequencing and a new multiplex ligation erative disorder that predominantly affects children in early infancy or probe amplification (MLPA) assay was set up for large rearrangement childhood and leads to death within months or years . This disorder is analysis . Eleven SLC7A7 specific-mutations were identified in these characterized by necrotic lesions in the brainstem, basal ganglia, and patients . Two out of seven novel mutations were large rearrangements thalamus . The symptoms are variable, but in most cases include psy- of the SLC7A7 gene . chomotor retardation, optic atrophy, ataxia, dystonia, failure to thrive, This work was supported by The Spanish Ministry of Education and Sci- vomiting, seizures, and respiratory failure . Mutations causing Leigh ence (SAF2003-08940-01/02 and BFU2006-14600-C02-01/02/BMC), syndrome have been found in both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA . The European Union (EUGINDAT; LSHM-CT-2003-502852), the Gen- Most of the described mitochondrial mutations were in ND3 and ND5 eralitat de Catalunya (2006 SGR00018 and 2005 SGR00947) . and a few ones were in ND6 and ND4 . In addition, there are single case reports of mutations in synthetic genes such as tRNATrp and P05.117 tRNALys genes . In the present study, we carried out a systematic se- Our methodical process of identification of Malignant quence analysis of mitochondrially encoded complex I subunits: ND2, hyperthermia causal RYR1 mutations ND3, ND4, ND5 and ND6 in 16 Tunisian patients with Leigh syndrome . I. Valášková1,2, E. Flodrová1, Š. Prášilová1, P. Kuglík1,3; We also performed a sequence analysis of the mitochondrial ATPase 1University Hospital, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masa- 6, tRNAVal, tRNALeu(UUR), tRNATrp and tRNALys genes in these patients . ryk University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, Mitochondrial DNA sequencing of these genes revealed the presence 3Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Dpt. of Experimental Biology, Brno, of the T8993G mutation in the ATPase 6 gene in 1 patient belonging to Czech Republic. a Tunisian family with Maternally Inherited Leigh Syndrome (MILS) . In Our work is focused on performing of an efective and relative inex- this family, we also found 3 new mutations responsible for aminoacid pansive molecular genetic diagnostic assay of malignit hyperthermia changes in a highly conserved region of the MT-ATP 6 protein . In ad- (MH), life-threatening and frequently fatal disorder triggered by com- dition, we detected 60 known polymorphisms, 19 new nucleotide vari- monly used anesthetics . Susceptibility to MH (MHS), dominantly inher- ants and 2 novel mutations in 2 patients with Leigh syndrome in the ited predisposition to MH, is diagnosed by using an invasive diagnostic ND2 and in the ATPase 8 gene . test on excised muscle bundles, the in vitro contracture test (IVCT) . An alternative diagnostic test to IVCT is mutation analysis of the ryanodine P05.115 receptor (RYR1) gene . RYR1 is an essential component of the calcium A novel mutation of the lipoprotein lipase gene associated with homeostasis of muscles in mammals . Defects in the RYR1 gene in childhood hypertriglyceridaemia humans (19q13 .1) are associated with MH . Until now, 29 RYR1 mu- S. Kalkan1, A. Alpman2, E. A. Arikan2, H. Akin2, M. Coker1, F. Ozkinay2; tations causing MH have been listed by European MH Group . A de- 1Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Meta- tection of MH causative RYR1 mutations can be used as predictive bolic Disorders, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of genetic testing. Our aim is to develop sufficient, effective and fast mu- Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. tation-detection procedures aimed at direct detection of MH causative Familial LPL deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that RYR1 mutations . To date we established molecular diagnostic assays affects about 1/1 .000 .000 children . Patients with classical lipoprotein to detect RYR1 mutations using screening metods . Sequencing theMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  entire RYR1 complementary DNA (cDNA) and melting point analysis mutation . This rate can be raised by subsequent sequencing analysis of fluorscently labelled probes after high speed PCR amplification on of the genes TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 . real-time enabled us to confirm MH diagnosis on molecular level in 50 We tested 45 patients without identified mutation in the three genes MHS individuals . Recently we establish High-resolution melting (HRM) by use of MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) and as a method that allows RYR1 mutation scanning and genotyping . We investigated whether large deletions in the FBN1 gene would increase expect that our methodical process of identification of MH causal mu- the mutation detection rate sufficiently for incorporation of MLPA in tations in MHS patients and subsequent performing noninvasive pre- the routine diagnostics of Marfan syndrome. The patients fulfilled or dictive genetic testing in their family members decrease number of partially fulfilled the diagnostic criteria (Ghent nosology). individuals which would have to undergo the invasive IVCT . We identified three large deletions in the 3’ region of the FBN1 gene; ranging from exon 50 to 54, exon 55 to 58 and exon 58 to 63 (the last P05.118 one was previously described by Singh et al ., J . Mol . Cell . Cardiol . mutation screening of FBN1 and tGFBR2 genes in patients with 2007) . A fourth deletion comprised the complete FBN1 gene . Break- marfan and marfan-like syndromes from Russia: 4 mutations points of the deletions were determined by long-range PCR tech- and 11 polymorphisms have been found niques . Implications for the resulting protein product, as well as the R. Valiev, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; phenotypes of the patients, will be discussed . Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. We estimated a deletion detection rate of 9% in this pre-screened pa- Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited autosomal dominant con- tient group, corresponding to an overall rate of 3% among all patients nective tissue disorder . Abnormalities appear in skeletal, ocular and with MFS . These data imply an inclusion of MLPA analysis in the rou- cardiovascular systems . The main cause of MFS is mutations in the tine diagnostics of Marfan syndrome . fibrillin1 gene (FBN1). Recently, the transforming growth factor beta receptor 2 gene (TGFBR2) has been shown to be associated with a P05.121 second type of this disorder with typically mild or absent ocular in- Alternative splicing variants of mcPH1 with distinct functions volvement (MFS type 2) as well as with classical MFS . We analyzed I. Gavvovidis1, M. Trimborn2, L. Weissflog1, H. Hanenberg3, H. Neitzel4, D. 30 exons of FBN1 gene and 4 exons of TGFBR2 gene in 80 patients Schindler1; with MS and marfan-like syndromes from different regions of Russia . 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany, SSCP analysis revealed different abnormal migrating patterns . We 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, identified two missense mutations (G1176Y in 28 exon and C2489Y in 3Department of Pediatric Oncology Hematology and Immunology, Childrens 60 exon) which affects cbEGF-like motifs of fibrillin-1 protein in two pa- Hospital, Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf, Germany, 4Institute of Human tients with classical MFS symptoms . We also found 9 polymorphisms Genetics, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany. both in coding and non coding regions of FBN1 gene, five of them are Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is an autosomal recessive disorder not previously described . One novel mutation (c .670C>T; T223M) has characterized by pronounced reduction of brain size and variable men- been found in TGFBR2 gene in two unrelated patients with marfan-like tal retardation without additional neurological deficits. Four underlying syndrome who did not fulfill Ghent nosology and who did not have genes have been identified to date. Hallmark of patients with mutations mutations in FBN1 gene . Mutation T223M affects highly conserved in the MCPH1 gene (MIM# 606858; MIM# 607117) is a cellular pheno- serine/threonine protein kinases catalytic domain that leads to change type of premature chromosome condensation, PCC, in the G2 phase phospho transferring status of TGFBR2 protein . In addition two novel and delayed decondensation in G1 . MCPH1 is located on human chro- polymorphisms have been found in intronic regions of TGFBR2 gene . mosome 8p23 .1, consists of 14 exons, and encodes the protein micro- Mutation screening of FBN1 and TGFBR2 genes continues . cephalin containing one N-terminal and two C-terminal BRCT-domains as well as an NLS sequence . P05.119 RT-PCR showed alternatively spliced variants of MCPH1-mRNA . In Novel mutations of FBN in czech population addition to the full length MCPH1 (MCPH1-L), we detected a variant E. Prusová, A. Bóday, P. Riedlová, J. Fiser, S. Tavandzis, M. Kučerová, M. skipping exon 8 (MCPH1-S) and another without exons 9-14 (MCPH1- Radina; B) . The resulting polypeptides are lacking the NLS or the two C-termi- JG Mendel Cancer Centre, Nový Jičín, Czech Republic. nal BRCT-domains, respectively . Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a heritable autosomal dominant disorder of Expression of any of the three variants as GFP-fusion proteins by connective tissue with prevalence of between 1 in 5-10 000 . Approxi- retroviral transfer resulted in complementation of the PCC phenotype mately 25% of MFS patients are sporadic cases due to new mutations . in MCPH1-deficient cells. In contrast, a construct containing MCPH1 MFS is noteworthy for its clinical variability . Major features of the MFS without the N-terminal BRCT-domain (MCPH1Δ1-7) did not comple- include cardiovascular disorders (dilatation and dissection of ascend- ment the PCC phenotype, suggesting a role of this domain in regulat- ing aorta), eye disorders - ectopia lentis, defects of skeletal system ing chromosome condensation, presumably through interaction with - pectus carinatum, pectus axcavatum and/or other diagnostics criteria condensin II . as arachnodactyly . The fluorescent signals confirmed nuclear localization of all three MFS is caused by mutations in fibrillin 1 gene (FBN1) resulting in de- variants . For MCPH1-S a GFP-signal was detected in the cytoplasm fective glycoprotein fibrillin-1. FBN1 is located on chromosome 15 at as well, which appeared to co-localize with the centrosomes, whilst locus q15-q21 .1 . Recently, there are showed that two other genes MCPH1-L and MCPH1-B re-localized to chromatin during anaphase . FBN2 (5q23-q31) and TGFBR2 (3p22) influence MFS. In addition, variants containing C-terminal BRCT domains re-localized Since 2006 we have done a molecular analysis for MFS diagnosis in to gamma-H2AX foci indicating participation of these variants in DNA- Czech Republic . The molecular analysis includes mlpa (multiplex liga- damage responses . tion-dependent probe amplification), separation of PCR products by SSCP (single-strand conformation polymorphism) and sequencing . P05.122 We have performed mutation detection on 150 patients with suspected investigation of six mental retardation loci (mcPH1, mcPH2, MFS . There were detected 20 novel mutations . mcPH3, mcPH4, mcPH5, and mcPH6) associated with microcephaly in northeast & southeast of Iran P05.120 H. Darvish1, G. Bahrami Monajemi1, F. Rakhshani2, A. Zadeh-Vakili2, A. Nagha- Large deletions account for a significant fraction of mutations in vi2, M. Mohseni1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, G. Mollashahi Sanatgar2, J. Oveisi2, marfan syndrome S. Banihashemi1, F. Behjati1, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1; B. M. Rhode, L. Föhse, M. Stuhrmann, J. Schmidtke, M. Arslan-Kirchner; 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University of medical science, Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disorder Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran. of connective tissue caused by mutations in the FBN1 gene . Cardinal Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly is defined as a reduction in manifestations include proximal aortic aneurysm, ectopia lentis, and head circumference . Six out of ten Non-Syndromic Autosomal Reces- involvement of the skeletal system . About 60 to 90% of the cases with sive Mental Retardation (NS-ARMR) loci associated with microcephaly clinically diagnosed Marfan syndrome can be explained by a FBN1 (MCPH1-MCPH6) and belong to the family of MCPH (autosomal re-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  cessive primary microcephaly). So far four genes have been identified: in all samples analyzed suggesting that these miRNAs are involved in MCPH1, encoding Microcephalin; MCPH3, encoding CDK5RAP2; a common underlying regulatory pathway among all diseases, other MCPH5, encoding ASPM, and MCPH6, encoding CENPJ . MCPH5 miRNAs were identified to be dysregulated only in one given disease and MCPH1 are the most common loci based on MCPH heterogeneity and not in any of the others thus pointing to their involvement in a studies in Pakistani and Indian populations . The objective of this study unique regulatory mechanism . was to investigate prevalence of ARMR associated with microcephaly The subsequent identification of potential target genes and the un- in Iranian families from northeast & southeast of Iran . A total of 20 con- raveling of biological signaling pathways involved in this regulatory sanguineous families with two or more affected individuals with ARMR level in these disorders, point to an additional dimension of regulation inheritance pattern have been collected after obtaining consent form . of muscle function mediated by miRNAs . Together with the tight post Clinical examination and exclusion of chromosomal abnormalities of transcriptional regulation at the mRNA level identified in Duchenne and the families were completed and followed by homozygosity mapping Miyoshi myopathy and specific mRNA:miRNA predicted interactions, using STRs (Short Tandem Repeats) markers for six mentioned MCPH some of which are directly involved in compensatory secondary re- loci . Sequencing was performed for the linked families . Nine out of sponse functions and others in muscle regeneration, these findings twenty families were linked to four of these loci as follows: Five were suggest an important role of miRNAs in the pathology of muscular linked to MCPH5 (25%), and MCPH1, MCPH2 were linked to one fam- dystrophy . ily each (5%), and two were linked to MCPH6 (10%) . We have been able to identify four novel mutations in four families of the MCPH5 . Ac- P05.125 cording to our findings MCPH5 seems to be the most prevalent loci in multiple sclerosis Disease and mitochondria Iranian families with mental retardation and microcephaly . Sequencing M. Houshmand; for the other linked families is currently underway . NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a multifocal demyelinating central nervous P05.123 system disorder . To assess relationship between mtDNA haplogroups microRNA expression and post-transcriptional target genes and MS, we have sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I in 54 MS patients and analysis from one pair of monozygotic twins discordant for 100 control subjects . In this study, kinetic analysis of mitochondrial trisomy 21: understanding phenotypic variability in Ds patients respiratory chain complex I enzyme was performed on intact mito- C. Borel, S. Deutsch, C. Gehrig, M. Gagnebin, S. E. Antonarakis; chondria isolated from fresh skeletal muscle in MS patients (n =10) Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medi- and control subjects (n =11) . The frequencies of the Asian (M, BM) cal School, CH, GENEVA, Switzerland. and European (N, J, K) mtDNA haplogroups in five major regions of The understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of trisomy 21 (T21) Iran was investigated . Unexpectedly, the frequencies of the Asian hap- is remarkably poor since it is not clear how the extra copy of HSA21 logroups M and BM were low in Iran (2 .34% for haplogroup M; 17 .6% leads to a wide range of phenotypes . We investigated a new class for haplogroup BM and 80 .06% for haplogroup N) . of functional sequences: microRNAs (miRNAs), that act primarily as We have found that haplogroups A and K are significantly more abun- post-transcriptional repressors of target genes through 3’UTR interac- dant in MS patients (P=0 .042 for haplogroup A and P=0 .0005 for hap- tions. We studied microRNA gene variation on primary fibroblasts and logroup K). Our findings showed that complex I activities were signifi- heart tissue from one pair of monozygotic twins discordant for T21 . cantly reduced ( P=0 .007) in patients compared with control . However, Expression was assayed using Taqman qRT-PCR on 365 mature miR- we could not find deletion in mtDNA of patients with MS. Our results NAs, 4 of which are encoded by HSA21 . Most of deregulated microR- revealed that 15 (75%) out of 20 MS patients had point mutations . NAs are tissue specific. Around 12% (fibroblasts) and 25% (heart) of This study suggested that point mutation occurred in mtDNA might be microRNAs show a statistically significant difference between the T21 involved in pathogenesis of MS . Our data suggest that Iranian tribes and normal twin, with an average up-regulation of 1 .6fold and down- probably played a remarkable role in the formation of these ethnic regulation of 0 .6fold . Expression levels revealed that HSA21-miR-155 groups . It gives the indication that the haplogroup J may be older than and HSA21-miR-99a are up-regulated about 2fold in fibroblasts and 6000-10000 years, and probably developed in Iran, and then expand- heart tissue, respectively . We have also examined transcripts that are ed to different regions in Europe and Northwest Asia . post-transcriptionally deregulated in T21 and potential target genes of those deregulated microRNAs . To do so, we separated RNA mol- P05.126 ecules of primary fibroblasts from the same pair of twin in a sucrose the coexistence of an East-Asian mitochondrial anthropological gradient according to their association with ribosomes . Pools of frac- marker and the c8270t, A8332c, and A8347c mtDNA mutations tions corresponding to the heavy ribosomal fraction (translated RNA) in a Hungarian family with dystonia and juvenile stroke and total RNA were hybridized to a gene expression microarray . We syndrome identified 45 and 63 transcripts with a post-transcriptional up-regula- A. Gal1, K. Pentelenyi1, V. Remenyi1, B. Csanyi2, G. Tomory2, I. Rasko2, M. J. tion and downregulation in the T21 twin, respectively . To complete this Molnar1,3; study, we are currently looking for predicted miRNA target genes and 1Department of Neurology, Semmelweis University, Center of Molecular Neurol- correlated miRNA expression with the expression of its target genes . ogy, Budapest, Hungary, 2Biological Research Center, Szeged, Hungary, 3Mon- treal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. P05.124 The high variability of the mitochondrial genome contributes to the Distinctive patterns of miRNA expression in human muscular phenotype of the mtDNA-related disorders . MtDNA mutations have disorders been associated with a variety of clinical manifestations . The 9-bp I. Eisenberg1,2, A. Eran1, H. G. Lidov1, P. B. Kang1, I. S. Kohane1, L. M. Kun- deletion between mtDNA 8271-8280 was originally thought to be an kel1,2; anthropological marker for peoples of East-Asian origin . 1Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 2Howard Hughes Medi- The proband was investigated for marked dystonic features . The clini- cal Institute, Boston, MA, United States. cal symptoms started after a long lasting episode of fever and elevated The muscular disorders are a heterogeneous group of inherited dis- serum ammonia and lactate level . His brother had transient hyperkine- eases characterized by muscle wasting and progressive weakness, sis, right hemiparesis . Their mother had in her childhood a stroke with resulting in significant morbidity and disability. Although considerable aphasia and right hemiparesis . Presently she has moderate truncal progress has been made in the understanding of these disorders, the ataxia, hypoacusis and cognitive dysfunction . underlying molecular pathways remain poorly understood . In light of The mtDNA analysis of the proband found a 9bp deletion “CCCCCTCA” their involvement in modulating cellular phenotypes we hypothesized in the mtDNA at the position nt8271-8280, and one C8270T substitu- that miRNAs might be involved in the regulation of the pathological tion between COII and tRNALys genes in the non-coding hypervariable pathways leading to muscle dysfunction . We describe a comprehen- segment, and two SNPs (A8332G and A8347C) in the tRNALys gene . sive miRNA expression profile aiming to identify new elements involved The C8270T SNP is a pathogenic mutation, the A8332G and A8347C in the regulatory networks of muscle and the signature pattern of 185 SNPs are not described in the literature . None of the three SNP was miRNAs associated with ten common myopathological conditions in found in our 100 control cases . The affected Hungarian family belongs human. While five miRNAs were found to be consistently dysregulated to an ancient B mitochondrial haplogroup .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Conclusion: The B haplogoup and the 9 bp small deletion indicate the could be result in interaction of nuclear protein with mtDNA genome . east-Asian origin of this family which could be explained by the Hun- garian history . The 9 bp deletion may serve as a susceptibility factor for P05.129 further mtDNA alterations . We assume that the clinical symptoms are screening for mELAs mutations in italian patients having stroke- related to the pathogenic C8270T mutation and the coexistences of the like episodes A8347C and A8332G mutations may modify the clinical symptoms . V. Andreoli1, F. Trecroci1, A. Nucera2, A. La Russa1, M. Liguori1, I. Manna1, P. Spadafora1, M. Caracciolo1, G. Di Palma1, R. Cittadella1; P05.127 1Institute of Neurological Sciences-National Research Council, Pianolago di mitochondrial nonsyndromic hearing impairment: the spanish Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Stroke Unit- Neurology, Santa Maria Nuova Hospital, exception? Reggio Emilia, Italy. D. Feldmann1, L. Jonard1, A. F. Roux2, C. Lemarechal3, K. Olszewski1, C. Fran- Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are a multisystemic group of dis- cannet4, R. Couderc1, F. Denoyelle1, S. Marlin1; orders that are characterised by a wide range of clinical, biochemical, 1AP-HP, Paris cedex 12, France, 2génétique moléculaire IURC, Montpellier, and genetic mitochondrial defects . Among this group of disorders, the France, 3Génétique Inserm U613, Brest, France, 4génétique médicale, Cler- Mitochondrial myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis with Stroke- mont-Ferrand, France. like episodes (MELAS) syndrome is one of the most frequently occur- Nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing impairment (NSHI) can be ring maternally inherited mitochondrial disorders . The age of onset is caused by few mitochondrial mutations . Among these mtDNA muta- highly variable and it is very rare in patients over the age of 40 . Muta- tions, A1555G mutation in the 12S rRNA gene has been worldly re- tions in tRNA, especially A3243G in the MTTL1 (tRNALeu) gene, are ported and is associated with NSHI maternally transmitted or with ami- accounted for more than 80% of the cases and other mtDNA mutations noglycoside-induced NSHI . A high frequency of A1555G was observed such as T3271C have also been described . We analyzed 55 Italian in Spain . patients clinically exhibiting stroke-like episodes, migraine, ataxia and From a large cohort of NSHI patients studied in the National Refer- dementia for the two primary mutations mentioned above in the MT- ence Center for Genetic Deafness in Paris, France, we selected 156 TL1 gene. This molecular investigation was carried out using PCR- unrelated patients with NSHI maternally inherited and 124 sporadic RFLP with the restriction endonuclease Apa I and Afl II respectively . NSHI exposed to aminoglycosides before hearing loss onset . A1555G None of the patients or the 25 controls subjects, matched for ethnic was studied by PCR-restriction enzyme analysis and confirmed by se- background, gender and age, were found to carry these mutations quencing . Absence of GJB2 mutations and GJB6 deletions was veri- (A3243G and T3271C) in homoplasmic/heteroplasmic form . However, fied. after direct sequencing of the MT-TL1 gene and a part of the MT-ND1 A1555G mutation was observed in 7 of the 156 NSHI familial cases gene, we no detected mt-mutations in the tested patients and controls (4,5%) and in 0 of the 124 sporadic cases . The 7 families with A1555G and we confirmed that MELAS is an extremely rare disease . Moreover, originated respectively from China, Martinique, Arab/Israel, Portugal, we also found a A3480G synonymous variation in the MT-ND1 in a Iran, Madagascar and Spain . Homoplasmic A1555G mutation was de- 51- year-old man, whose medical history was significant for ischemic tected in all the descendants of the oldest studied mother . The HI was stroke of undetermined origin and increase in lactate level in blood . present in 51 of the 102 maternal relatives . The calculated penetrance of A1555G in this study is 50% . The HI was very heterogeneous with P05.130 an onset ranging from 0 to 30 years and a severity varying from mild two novel mitochondrial DNA mutations in muscle tissue of a to profound . patient with limb-girdle myopathy This study shows that the frequency of A1555G in NSHI maternally S. Seneca1, A. Meulemans2, B. De Paepe3, J. De Bleecker4, J. Smet3, L. De inherited is lower in France than in Spain (4,5% versus 61%) and in Meirleir5, W. Lissens1, R. Van Coster3, I. Liebaers1; sporadic cases (0 versus 3%) . This reported variability could be due to 1Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of the different use of aminoglycoside antibiotics in the two countries or Pediatrics, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology & Pediatric Neu- to genetics factors . rology and Metabolism, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 5Department of Pediat- P05.128 rics & Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. mitochondrial AtPase 6 gene as a hot spot for Patients with an oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) disorder of- Neurodegenerative disorders? ten present with complex clinical features, including neurological and M. Banoei, M. Houshmand; muscular dysfunction . Mutations underlying these diseases are lo- National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic cated in the mitochondrial or nuclear genome . Here, we report on a Republic of Iran. forty-eight-year-old woman suffering from mild limb girdle myopathy . The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) may play an essential role in the The enzymatic activities of the OXPHOS enzymes in skeletal muscle pathogenesis of the respiratory chain complex activities in neurode- tissue of the patient were within the control ranges . However, activity generative disorders such as Huntington’s disease (HD), Spinocer- staining following BN-PAGE showed a decreased complex III activity ebellar Ataxias (SCA), and Multiple Sclerosis (MS), Ataxia-Telangiec- and the presence of complex V subcomplexes . Immunocytochemistry tasia (AT), Friedreish’s Ataxia (FA) and Duchene Muscular Dystrophy demonstrated a mosaic staining pattern in a minority (about 20%) of (DMD) as neuromuscular disease . Dysfunction of the mitochondrial the muscle fibers for complex I (subunit 20kd) and complex IV (sub- Respiratory Chain (RC) has been shown in patients with neurological unit I). Molecular analyses identified two novel heteroplasmic mito- disorders . the tRNA genes mutations are one of hot spots that cause chondrial DNA nucleotide aberrations in muscle tissue : an insertion, mitochondrial disorders . m .5888insA in the mt-tRNATyr gene and an alteration, m .14639A>G, To determine mtDNA damage, we investigated deletions based in four changing a leucine into a serine residue in the ND6 gene . Less than areas of mitochondrial DNA, in a group of 120 patients clinically di- 1% of both mutant alterations were present in the patient‘s fibroblasts, agnosed with one of mentioned neurological disorders . We screened while they were undetectable in her blood and in blood and fibroblasts for tRNALeu , tRNALys , COII, ATPase6/8 and NDI genes of mtDNA of from her mother . patients with HD, SCA, MS, AT, FA and DMD . Single muscle fiber analyses clearly demonstrated that COX-deficient Results showed that ATPase 6 gene is a hot spot region rather than fibers, as compared to COX-positive fibers, harbored a significantly other regions . Several new nucleotide variations resulting in amino higher level of both mtDNA mutations . These results, together with acid changes were observed in patients that altered protein structure previously defined canonical criteria determining the pathogenic char- regarding to essential changes in amino acids . acter of mtDNA analyses, suggest that both nucleotide changes are The secondary mitochondrial respiratory chain defects encountered in pathogenic mutations . these disorders can also be explained by mitochondrial that degener- ate either as part of a more widespread cellular insult, or as a conse- quence of a different specific defect. Most mitochondrial proteins have to be imported from the cytoplasm and directed to the mitochondria . So this study suggests that the high rate of mutations in ATPase 6Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.131 P05.133 A novel splicing mutation in the HNF1a gene in an italian family interaction between mtHFR polymorphisms and development of with mODY3 disease myopathyc process (hypothesis approbation) A. Cappelli1,2, S. Silvestri3, P. Staffolani1, A. Consoli4, L. Pianese1; V. C. Sacara1, E. V. Scvortova2; 1Laboratorio Medicina Molecolare, ASUR ZT13, Ascoli Piceno, Italy, 2School of 1Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Advanced Studies: Environmental Sciences and Public Health, Camerino, Italy, Moldova, 2Moldavian State University, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. 3Scuola di Specializzazione in Biochimica Clinica, Camerino, Italy, 4Università Background:Polymorphisms of the MTHFR gene can influence the degli Studi “G. d’Annunzio”, Chieti, Italy. methionine metabolic pathway and folate metabolism . The methyla- Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form tion process is essential for the regulation of gene expression control- of diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, ling the development and function of the muscles . We noted that DMD early age of onset and a primary insulin secretion defect . More than patients with the same deletion in the dystrophine gene had different 200 different mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a HNF1a clinical features and severity of pathology process . The main concep- gene have been shown to cause a common type of MODY, called tion of our hypothesis is that exist an interaction between MTHFR poly- MODY3 . Mutations span the entire gene and most types of mutations morphisms and development of myopathyc process . have been described; e .g . insertion/deletion mutations, missense mu- Methods:We analyzed DNA from a case-control study in the RM of 50 tations, nonsense mutations and splice site mutations . Recently, par- DMD probands and 114controls . MTHFR variant alleles were deter- tial and whole gene deletion mutations also were described . mined by a PCR-RFLP . Control group data is taken from publication In the present study we screened for mutation the HNF1a gene in a Skibola et al.,1999 . The genotyping protocol for the detection of the proband which fulfilled the criteria for MODY3, using direct sequence. MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms were adapted from MG- The examination was extended to the proband’s family: an affected Center, Moscow (prof . Polyakov A .) .Statistic analyses were performed father and unaffected mother and sister . by using SISA . Here we report the identification of a novel HNF1a mutation at con- Results:We found the MTHFR C677C allele present among 3(6%)DMD served splice acceptor site of exon 5 (IVS4nt-1 G>T) that cosegregat- and 61(53 .5%) controls (X2=32,9,P=0,00), the C677T genotype among ed with diabetes in the family . Using a neural network based program, 27(54%)DMD, 39(34 .2%) controls (X2=5,66,P=0,02), and the T677T this mutation might be expected to result in the skipping of the exon allele 20(40%)DMD, 14(12 .3%) controls (X2=16,25,P=0,00) . For MTH- immediately 3′ to the mutation and the utilization of the next available FR 1298, the A1298A genotype was observed in 33(66%) of DMD, AG site for exon 6 . Alternatively, a cryptic AG splice acceptor site in 49(43 .0%) of the controls (X2=7,37,P=0,00), the A1298C allelic variant intron 5, at -75 bp 5′ to the natural site, could be recruited resulting was observed in 11(22%) DMD, 54(47 .4%) controls (X2=9,35,P=0,00), in inclusion of some intronic sequence . However, truncation of the and the rarer C1298C variant was observed among 6(12%) case and protein results in both cases . Examination of mutant mRNA transcript 11(9 .6%) controls (X2=0,21,P=0,65) . will be necessary in order to assess the precise consequence of this Conclusions:According to our data were observed statistically signifi- mutation . cant differences between DMD and control MTHFR genotypes, except C1298C . The MTHFR T677T genotype was higher among DMD pa- P05.132 tients as we know this mutation leads to reduced MTHFR activity and contribution of the dHPLc to the diagnosis of VHL somatic influence on myopathyc process. mosaicism S. Lefebvre1, C. Gressier1, P. Delobre1, N. Burnichon2,3, S. Pinson1, A. Gime- P05.134 nez-Roqueplo2,3, R. Salomon4, S. Richard5,6, A. Calender1, S. Giraud1; mutational analysis of the mtHFR gene in four patients with 1Hospices civils de Lyon, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Service de génétique, Lyon, homocystinuria due to severe MTHFR deficiency France, 2Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges R. Urreizti1,2, U. Fanhoe1, A. Langkilde1, C. Esteves1, M. Cozar1,2, M. Vilas- Pompidou , Département de génétique, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Des- eca3,2, R. Artuch3,2, A. Baldellou4, L. Vilarinho5, B. Fowler6, A. Ribes7,2, D. R. cartes, Faculté de médecine, Paris, France, 4Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Grinberg1,2, S. Balcells1,2; Paris, Hôpital Necker, Service de Néphrologie pédiatrique, Paris, France, 5Fa- 1Dpt de Genetica, IBUB, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro culté de médecine Paris-Sud, Service de génétique oncologique EPHE, Paris, de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), France, 6Institut Gustave Roussy, UMR8125, Villejuif, France. ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department de Bioquimica Clinica, Hospital Sant Detection and characterization of somatic mosaicism are difficult be- Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 4Unidad de Enfermedades Metabolicas, Hospi- cause of the low frequency of mutant alleles . We report here the diag- tal Infantil Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 5Instituto de Genetica Medica Jacin- nosis of two cases of VHL somatic mosaicism identified by dHPLC. to Magalhaes, Porto, Portugal, 6Metabolic Unit, University Children’s Hospital, The Von Hippel Lindau disease (VHL) is an autosomic dominant inher- Basel, Switzerland, 7Divisio d’Errors Congenits del Metabolisme (IBC), Departa- ited syndrome, predisposing to the development of various tumours, ment de Bioquimica i Genetica Molecular, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. notably retina hemangioblastomas and phaeochromocytomas . Analy- Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) catalyzes the reduc- sis for constitutional change of the VHL gene is realized by sequenc- tion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, ing and QMPSF . For two patients addressed for VHL suspicion, the which acts as a methyl donor in the remethylation of homocysteine sequencing did not show mutation . However for each patient, on two to methionine . Disruption of MTHFR activity results in severe hyper- different frequent change sites, second peaks (respectively c .482G>A homocysteinemia and causes vascular and neurological disorders and c .500G>C) were discriminated but their heights were small (1/5 and developmental delay . Four patients with severe hyperhomocys- of the normal peak) and difficult to differentiate from the usual back- teinemia and hypomethioninemia were examined with respect to their ground noise . symptoms, their MTHFR enzyme activity and their genotypes at the We analyzed these two patients by dHPLC . For each patient, aberrant MTHFR gene . We found three novel mutations: two missense muta- profile was observed, similar but reduced relative to profile with known tions c .664G>T (p .V218L) and c .1316T>C (p .F435S), and a one bp mutation at the same site . deletion c .1768delC (p .L590C fs X70) . We also found c .1420G>T With dHPLC collector, we collected and sequenced separately the (p .E470X), a previously reported nonsense mutation . Four new geno- various peaks . We could clearly observe a superposition of two nu- types were identified: Patient 24 was homozygous for p.V218L and cleotides in equivalent heights, which allowed us to confirm the VHL the common polymorphism p .A222V (c .667C>T); patient 73 was ho- somatic mosaicism . mozygous for p .E470X; patient 86 was homozygous for p .F435S and These two patients need follow-up like other VHL patients even if they the common polymorphism p .E429A (c .1298A>C); and patient 95 was have not presented all the characteristic attacks of this syndrome . homozygous for c .1768delC . Patient 24 presented an MTHFR enzyme We began a retrospective work by dHPLC on the patients addressed activity below 7% of control level, while patients 73 and 95 had MTHFR for a suspicion of VHL disease, with early or multiple attacks and with- enzyme activities below 1% . All patients presented symptoms of se- out identified mutation. vere central nervous system disease and microcephaly . Two of them suffered a fatal stroke (patient 73 at 18 months and patient 86 at age 14 years) . Patient 24 was the mildest, with a diagnosis at age 18 years . Patient 95 could be diagnosed at age 11 months and is improving uponMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  treatment with betaine . Genotype-phenotype analysis points to less In conclusion, LMNB1 duplication appears to be associated only to a severe outcomes for the patients with missense changes as opposed subset of the adult-onset, autosomal dominant leukoencephalopathies, to the ones whose mutations consisted on gross derangements of the sharing the following features: onset with autonomic dysfunction, dif- MTHFR protein . fuse T2-hyperintensity of supra- and infra-tentorial white matter, spar- ing of U-fibers and optic radiations. The more variable phenotypes in P05.135 the seven families lacking LMNB1 defects, suggests that other genes Mutational spectrum of KRT5 and KRT14 genes in patients with might be involved in the autosomal dominant leukoencephalopathies . epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBs) H. H. Lemmink1, M. C. Bolling2, G. Janssen1, K. Kooi1, G. Matthijs3, Y. J. Vos1, P05.137 M. F. Jonkman2; Investigation of inflammatory gene expression profile in acute 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre, Groningen, The Nether- myocardial infarction lands, 2Center for Blistering Diseases, Dermatology, University Medical Centre, L. Barbarii1, R. Stanescu Cioranu2, D. Iancu1, C. Iancu1, A. Constantinescu1, E. Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. Neagu1, C. Constantinescu1, G. Girbea1, D. Dermengiu1, C. Macarie2; Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a hereditary skin blistering dis- 1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Institute of order caused by mutations in the genes for keratin 5 (KRT5) or keratin Cardiovascular Diseases “C.C.Iliescu”, Bucharest, Romania. 14 (KRT14). Mutations disrupt intermediate filament assembly in epi- The inflammatory reaction is a key factor influencing the time course dermal basal cells mostly resulting in autosomal dominant EBS . We of a coronary artery disease and plays a significant role in the clinical screened 72 unrelated EBS patients, the majority of which is of Dutch outcome of the patients with acute myocardial infarction (MI) . Know- origin . Five patients were from Belgium and one patient was from ing the profile of inflammatory molecules involved in the myocardial Slovenia . A total of 20 different heterozygous KRT5 and 15 different injury could contribute to the design of new appropriate therapeutic heterozygous KRT14 gene mutations were identified in 50 patients. approaches . Our study aimed to identify the cytokines’ type and level Only one patient carried one missense KRT5 mutation in addition to produced by the circulating leukocytes by looking for the RNA expres- one missense KRT14 mutation . Each of three mutations, Arg125Cys sion level of the corresponding genes . RNA samples were isolated and Arg388Cys in KRT14 and Arg187Pro in KRT5, were detected from blood samples retrieved at different intervals after a MI and ana- in three or more patients . Approximately 80% of the total number of lyzed to quantify the expression of 40 proinflammatory genes using KRT5 and KRT14 mutations were missense mutations . In patients with the MLPA method . the severe EBS type Dowling-Meara (EBS-DM) KRT5 mutations were Our results show an intense overexpression for IL1B, IL1RN, MIF as predominantly located at the highly conserved C-terminal 2B domain . well as for the NFKB transcription factor, with a peak at 24 h after MI Mutations located at the N-terminal H1 and 1A rod domain of the KRT5 and a slow decrease towards the 30th day . Patients associating diabe- protein were detected in patients with the milder EBS type Weber- tes mellitus had an excessive inflammatory response with a slower de- Cockayne (EBS-WC) . In contrast, KRT14 gene mutations located at crease, corresponding to previously reported data . Our study method the N-terminal H1 and 1A domain were mostly present in patients with was able to reliably illustrate the inflammatory profile associated with EBS-DM and KRT14 mutations at the C-terminal 2B domain preferably the MI event . Selected cytokines will be further investigated by RT real- in patients with the EBS-WC phenotype . We conclude that there is a time PCR in order to accurately identify their level and to reveal their reverse correlation between mutations located at the N- and C-termi- contribution to the pathological changes in MI . nal end of the KRT5 and KRT14 proteins and their subsequent asso- ciation with either severe Dowling-Meara or milder Weber-Cockayne P05.138 EBS phenotypes . the OLR splice variant “LOXiN” as a protective genomic biomarker for myocardial infarction. P05.136 L. Vecchione1, I. Filesi2, R. Mango1, I. M. Predazzi1, F. Baldini2, F. Amati1, S. A novel family with lamin B1 duplication associated with adult- Biocca2, F. Romeo3,4, G. Novelli1,4; onset leukoencephalopathy 1Department of Biopathology,Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Department A. Brussino1, G. Vaula2, C. Cagnoli1, A. Mauro3, L. Pradotto4, D. Daniele5, E. Di of Neuroscience, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Internal Gregorio1, M. Barberis1, C. Arduino1, S. Squadrone6, M. Abete6, N. Migone1, O. Medicine Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 4Department of Cardiovascular Calabrese7, A. Brusco1; Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United 1Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry - SCDU Medical Genetics, States. Torino, Italy, 2SCDU Neurologia II, Az. Osp. San Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, The human lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX- 3Department of Neurosciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 4Department 1), encoded by the OLR1 gene, is a scavenger receptor that has been of Neurology, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Piancavallo (VB), Italy, 5SCDU implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis . LOX-1 activation Neuroradiology, Az. Osp. San Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, 6C.Re.A.A., Isti- is an important mechanism that contributes to plaque instability and tuto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale del Piemonte, Liguria e Valle d’ Aosta, Torino, subsequent development of acute coronary syndromes . Association Italy, 7Department of Experimental Medicine and Diagnostics, Medical Genetics studies have implicated OLR1 gene variants in myocardial infarction Unit, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (MI) susceptibility/protection. We identified a new functional splicing Hereditary leukoencephalopathies are rare disorders characterized isoform of the OLR1 gene, named LOXIN lacking the extracellular lec- by progressive white matter damage in the brain, with or without in- tin binding domain . In vivo and in vitro studies revealed that this iso- volvement of the peripheral nervous system . The inheritance is usually form is protective against myocardial infarction . This effect is mediated recessive, autosomal or X-linked . The autosomal dominant varieties by a dominant-negative mechanism on LOX-1 function through the include Alexander disease, CADASIL, and the phenotype recently formation of non-functional LOX-1/LOXIN hetero-oligomers . Genomic described in four families with adult-onset (40-50 yrs) and initial au- and expression studies performed in mice and in non-human primates tonomic dysfunctions due to duplication of the LMNB1 gene (Padiath demonstrate the absence of LOXIN in these species . This suggests et al, 2006) . that LOXIN might be a recently selected allele. All these results confirm To better define the prevalence of lamin B1 gene defects, we selected and extend the importance of OLR1 gene in the pathogenesis of myo- eight unrelated Italian probands with hereditary, adult-onset diffuse cardial infarction making LOXIN an attractive new target for prevention leukoencephalopathy . Seven showed pyramidal/cerebellar symptoms; and treatment of acute coronary syndromes . six were compatible with an autosomal dominant transmission . LMNB1 full gene deletion/duplication and point mutations were tested by Taq- P05.139 man real-time PCR and direct sequencing . Brain-region specific copper metabolism in rats with copper One proband carried a 140-190 Kb duplication involving the entire deficiency induced by Ag-ions LMNB1, the AX748201 transcript and the 3’ end of MARCH3 . Clini- P. Babich, N. Platonova, N. Tsymbalenko, L. Puchkova; cal and neuroimaging data of this proband and an affected relative Research Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed- overlapped with the features of the LMNB1 duplication described by eration. Padiath et al. No LMNB1 gene defects were identified in the remaining Copper is an essential trace element that plays a vital role as a cata- seven probands . lytic co-factor for a variety of cuproenzymes . Simultaneously, copperMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 is toxic to cells, not least due to its ability to catalyze, via the so-called its Wnt/beta-catenin pathway . We then studied the effects of seven re- Fenton reaction, the generation of aggressive free radicals . Therefore, cessive and dominant mutations identified in Edar gene on both path- every organism has mechanisms to control cellular uptake, distribu- ways . Dominant mutations totally impaired NF-kappaB activation and tion, detoxification and elimination of copper. Genetic defects in any of Wnt/beta-catenin downregulation, while recessive ones only disrupted these mechanisms as well as ecological abnormalities of copper bal- the Edar effect on both pathways . ance result in neurodegenerative diseases . The systems that maintain We first demonstrated that Wnt/beta-catenin inhibition by Edar is de- copper homeostasis in mammalian brain are investigated poorly . pendent of NF-kappaB activation using a dominant negative form of This work was done using Wistar rats received 50 mg AgCl per kg of IkappaBalpha inhibitor . We then proved by Western Blot analysis and body weight, daily, in four weeks . This model is characterized with cop- immunofluorescence that beta-catenin was neither degraded nor delo- per-deficit in blood serum and normal copper metabolism in liver. calized after NF-kappaB activation by Edar . Furthermore, beta-catenin/ Concentration of copper, zinc, iron, and silver was determined in cor- TCF4 interaction, necessary for Wnt/beta-catenin transcriptional activ- tex, cerebellum, hippocamp, hypothalamus, amygdaloid body, hy- ity, was not disrupted upon Edar transfection and NF-kappaB subunits pophysis by atomic-absorptive spectrometry . Copper-transporting pro- p65 and p50 did not interact with beta-catenin in these conditions . teins (CTR1, ATP7A/B, APP) and cuproenzymes (ceruloplasmin (Cp), GPI-Cp, SOD1, COX (Cox4i1)) mRNA levels were determined with P05.142 semiquantitative RT-PCR . Protein amounts were valued by Western- Nijmegen breakage syndrome in Ukraine: molecular and blot . Furthermore Cp and SOD1 enzymatic activity were measured . cytogenetic studies It was shown that Ag-ions are selectively accumulated by hypophysis . H. Makukh1, L. Chorna1, B. Tretjak1, H. Bezkorovaina1, G. Akopian1, L. Hypophysis accumulates Fe and Zn as well . Cu level is decreased Kostyuchenko2, N. Markevush1; in hypothalamus only . At the same time copper-transporting genes 1State institution “Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical expression is going lower in all brain regions . The same is right for Science of Ukraine”, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Lviv Specialized Children’s Clinic, Lviv, secretory cuproenzymes (Cp, GPI-Cp) . While level of intracellular cu- Ukraine. proenzymes (SOD1, COX) doesn’t change. Effect of copper deficit in Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is considered as a rare autoso- blood on copper metabolism in brain regions is discussed . mal recessive disease, but its actual prevalence is not known . 95% of NBS patients are of Slavic descent and 90% of them are homozygous P05.140 for a founder 657del5 mutation in the NBN gene . In 1999-2007 a total Differential expression of neurokinin B and hemokinin 1 in of 26 patients were diagnosed with NBS in Ukraine, 23 of which resid- human immune cells ing in Western Ukraine region . T. E. Klassert1, F. Pinto2, M. Hernández1, M. L. Candenas2, M. López1, M. C. We performed 208 molecular-genetic tests of the 657del5 mutation Hernández3, J. Abreu3, T. A. Almeida1; NBN gene among the group of patients with microcephaly and identi- 1Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales de Canarias, La Laguna, fied 24 homozygous for 657del5 mutation. It had been performed 4 Spain, 2Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas, CSIC, Sevilla, Spain, 3Departa- prenatal NBS diagnostics and we identified two homozygous and two mento de Neumología, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, La Laguna, Spain. heterozygous fetus for 657del5 mutation . Substance P (SP), neurokinin A (NKA), neurokinin B (NKB) and the We detected the specific chromosomal rearrangements in lympho- recently identified hemokinin-1 (HK-1) are members of a family of cyte cell culture of NBS patients: 3% of the cases - inv(7)(p13q35), structurally related peptides known as tachykinins . They are mainly 2% - t(7;14)(q35;q11), t(7;7)(p13;q35), del(7)(q35), del(14)(q11), 1% synthesized in the central and peripheral nervous system, but are also - t(7;14)(p13;q11) . An additional marker chromosome (10% of the present in peripheral non-neuronal cells . cells with translocations) and nonspecific chromosomal abnormalities In humans, substance P (SP) is the most extensively studied tachyki- (mostly 1, 3, 8 and 9) were found too . nin and is present, along with the NK-1 receptor, in several inflammato- As the expression of IL-10 may influence the development and pro- ry and immune cells . In these cells, SP has shown to play an important gression of tumor we studied the distribution of three biallelic poly- role in the regulation of immune functions and inflammatory responses. morphisms at positions -1082, -819 and -592 of the promoter region Up to day, there are no studies about the expression pattern of NKB of IL-10 gene . The haplotype IL-10 GCC (37%) was found to be the and HK-1 in inflammatory and immune cells in humans. In the pres- most frequent . ent study we have detected for the first time NKB and HK-1 mRNA in human lymphocytes, monocytes, neutrophils and eosinophils . In addi- P05.143 tion, and using immunocytochemistry with two different antibodies, we Genetic heterogeneity of nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform have detected the presence of NKB protein in all these cellular types . erythroderma These findings reinforce the suggestion that tachykinins play a central N. N. Vasserman, V. A. Galkina, O. N. Makienko, E. G. Okuneva, G. E. Ruden- role in the pathophysiology of the inflammatory process. skaya; Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. P05.141 Nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NCIE, MIM Crosstalk between NF-kappaB and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways 242100) is a severe autosomal recessive disorder . About 90% of af- and anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia fected newborns present as “collodion babies” . Many patients die in C. Cluzeau1, E. Bal1, P. Guigue1, N. Chassaing2, S. Hadj-Rabia1,3, C. Bode- neonatal period from disorders of thermoregulation and infections . In mer1,3, P. Calvas2, M. Vincent2, A. Munnich1, A. Smahi1; survivors, though, skin lesions improve with age, few patients have 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Service de genetique medicale, Toulouse, neurological symptoms, while others live with little or no problems . France, 3Service de dermatologie, Paris, France. NCIE is genetically heterogeneous . To date, TGM1, ALOX12B, AL- Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) is an ectodermal differentiation OXE3, ABCA12, CYP4F22 responsible genes were identified, and disorder characterized by sparse hair, abnormal or missing teeth and mutations in the latter two are rare . inability to sweat . X-linked EDA, caused by mutations in EDA gene We performed DNA diagnostics in five NCIE families of which muta- encoding ectodysplasine, a member of the TNF family, is the most tions were found in four: one of Azerbaijan and three of Russian eth- frequent form . The autosomal dominant and recessive EDA forms, nicity . (1) In a consanguineous Azerbaijan family two affected children clinically identical to X-linked forms, may result from mutations in two died within first days, their DNA samples were unavailable. In parents loci : ED3, encoding Edar, ectodysplasin receptor and ED2, encod- a novel TCM1 mutation Arg142His was detected . On prenatal DNA ing Edaradd, Edar adapter molecule necessary in signal transduction . diagnostics the mutation was not found in the fetus, thus the progno- Edar is activated by ectodysplasine and uses Edaradd as an adapter sis was favourable . (2) The couple abandoned the affected baby and to activate NF-kappaB signaling pathway . Wnt/beta-catenin pathway had no information about him . Parents were found heterozygous for plays a central role during embryonic development and is widely in- novel ALOX12B mutations: Ala597Glu and Tyr97Stop . Prenatal DNA volved in carcinogenesis . This pathway has been recently involved in diagnostics revealed unfavourable prognosis since the fetus inherited skin appendages formation . A crosstalk between NF-kappaB and Wnt/ mutations from both parents . (3) In a family with a deceased new- beta-catenin pathway was described . born child a novel ALOX12 mutation Asn594His was identified in the We confirmed by transactivation experiments that Edar receptor inhib- father and a previously recorded Tyr521Cys in the mother . (4) In aMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  non-consanguineous family the 5-year-old patient was examined . The P05.146 girl survived infancy problems and by 5 years had only mild ichthyosi- LmX1B mutational analysis in two Nail-patella syndrome form skin lesions . Homozygosity for ALOX12 mutation Ala597Glu was patients: evidence for the presence of mosaicism detected . M. Marini1, A. Baban1, D. Maria Teresa1, H. Gaspar2, I. Mammi3, M. Lerone4, R. Ravazzolo1, R. Bocciardi1; P05.144 1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, Genoa, Italy, 2Istitute for Medical investigation of cYFiP1 and cYFiP2 genes in patients with Genetic, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3ULSS 13 Regione Veneto autosomal recessive non-syndromic mental retardation Consultorio genetico, Dolo, Italy, 4Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, G. G. Guven1, H. Kayserili2, A. Uzumcu2, H. Eris2, B. Karaman2, S. Basaran2, O. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy. Uyguner2; Nail-patella syndrome (NPS, MIM#161200) is a rare autosomal domi- 1Istanbul Medical Faculty , Child Health, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Medical Fac- nat disorder characterized by hypoplastic or absent patellae, dystro- ulty, Child Health, Istanbul, Turkey. phic nails, dysplasia of Autosomal recessive inheritance of non-syndromic mental retardation the elbows and iliac horn, and, less frequently, ocular damage . (ARNSMR) may account for approximately 25 % of all patients with In the 40% of cases a glomerular defect is involved and inter- and non-syndromic mental retardation (NSMR) . Up-to-date, 12 chromo- intra-familial expression variability is reported . somal loci have been mapped and only four genes have been identi- Mutations in the human LMX1B gene have been demonstrated to be fied to cause ARNSMR. CYFIP1 (15q11) and CYFIP2 (5q33.3) genes, responsible for NPS in 90% of cases . belonging to CYFIP family by sequence similarity, interests the scien- In this study we present evidence of somatic mosaicism in two cases tist if any role in mental retardation due to their interactions with FMR1 of NPS . protein . Suggested function of CYFIP1 in axonal growth and brain The first case is a patient carrying the c.599G>A substitution in exon specific editing of CYFIP2 was of our further interest to investigate 4 these genes in our highly selected ARNSMR families . 20 consanguine- (Arg200Gln) . This mutation was also detectable in the healthy father ous families with one or more affected individuals were included into as a low height A peak superimposed to G . On the contrary, in the our study after through clinical check up to exclude any known syn- patient the two peaks appeared at equal height, as expected in a het- dromes and/or chromosomal or sub-telomeric abnormalities followed erozygote . The second patient is heterozygous for the c .592C>T sub- by search from fragile-X point of view . Our strategy was to perform ho- stitition in exon 4 (Arg198Stop) . Also in this case the hypothesis of mozygosity mapping to CYFIP1 and CYFIP2 genes and sequence the mosaicism in the healthy father was raised by the presence of the C informatively homozygous families . Four in/delSNPs for CYFIP1 gene and T peaks with significantly different height. These analyses were re- and four in/del SNPs plus 2 STRs for CYFIP2 gene were selected to peated in several independent reactions with fully comparable results . be used for linkage . Presently our investigation is continuing and our The presence of the mutated alleles in the two fathers was confirmed results will be presented at our poster session . by subcloning the PCR products: as expected in the hypothesis of mo- saicism, the wild-type allele-bearing colonies were significantly more P05.145 represented than the colonies with the mutated one . NPHS recurrent and novel mutations in children from Greece To our knowledge these are the first reported cases of inheritance of a and cyprus with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome mutated LMX1B allele in NPS patients from a mosaic parent . K. Voskarides1, C. Makariou1, G. Papagregoriou1, N. Stergiou2, N. Printza3, E. Alexopoulos4, A. Elia5, F. Papachristou3, A. Pierides6, E. Georgaki2, C. Deltas1,7; P05.147 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Agia Sophia Childrens Hospital, Ath- screening for melanocortin-4 receptor mutations in a cohort of ens, Greece, 3Hippokration Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thes- Dutch obese children saloniki, Greece, 4Aristotle University of Thessalloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, L. van den Berg1, F. Blom1, H. Delemarre-van de Waal2, P. Heutink3; 5Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Hippokration Private 1departments of Paediatrics and Clinical Genetics, section Medical Genom- Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 7The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, ics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2department Nicosia, Cyprus. of Paediatrics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The idiopathic nephrotic syndrome occurs mainly in children, most of 3section Medical Genomics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The whom respond well to steroid therapy, however 15-20% of these chil- Netherlands. dren are steroid-resistant, frequently progressing to end-stage renal The most common monogenic form of obesity is caused by mutations failure . Mutations in the NPHS2 gene, encoding podocin, are an impor- in the gene encoding the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) . This recep- tant cause of infantile sporadic Steroid Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome tor integrates orexigenic and anorexigenic signals in the hypothalamus (SRNS) occurring in 2 .8-28% of the cases, depending on the studied to regulate food intake and energy expenditure . We have screened the population . To a lesser extend, mutations in the WT1 gene are also coding sequence and the minimal promoter region of MC4R of 221 ran- found in patients with SRNS. For the first time in Hellenic population, dom patients from our VUmc center for childhood obesity . We found 18 we performed mutational analysis of the NPHS2 (including promoter variants in these patients, four of which were not described previously . region) and WT1 (exons 8 and 9) genes, studying 18 children from Two of the new variants (-1101C>T and -312T>C) are not expected to Greece and 6 from Cyprus with SRNS . For our investigation we used be pathogenic because they are not evolutionary conserved in mam- a screening method based on the SURVEYOR endonuclease diges- mals and because they are not located in predicted regulatory regions tion, which identifies and cleaves at mismatched base pairs in hetero- of the gene. The new variant -705A>T may influence gene expression duplexes, followed by direct PCR-DNA sequencing . No mutation or because it is located in a regulatory element . This variant was found polymorphism was identified in exons 8 and 9 of WT1 . In the NPHS2 in a 3-year-old girl with a body mass index standard deviation score gene, we identified two known mutations (418delG, R229Q) and one (BMI-SDS) of 3 .4 . The new variant 910C>T results in a leucine > phe- novel mutation (L305P), in two out of the 24 children (8 .3%), in addition nylalanine change . It was found in a 17-year-old girl with a BMI-SDS to nine known polymorphisms . Amino acid residue L305 is at the C- of 3 .4 . Of the 14 known variants that we found, two have been shown terminal of the protein and is highly conserved evolutionarily, possibly to have functional effects by others (Tyr35STOP and G231S) . In con- because of the functional association of this domain with nephrin and clusion, we detected two pathogenic mutations and several possible CD2AP . Although the studied cohort was small, our investigation sup- pathogenic mutations in 221 random patients of our obesity clinic . We ports the usefulness of the availability of a molecular diagnostic facility will extend our research by screening additional patients, studying co- for SRNS cases, in a routine clinical setting, as it assists in the correct segregation of mutations and obesity in families, studying phenotypic management of such children . characteristics of MC4R mutation carriers, and functional studies of new mutations .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.148 Germany, 5Medical School, Division of Pathology and Neuroscience, Dundee, Exon resequencing, mutation detection, and copy number United Kingdom. analysis in syndromic oesophageal atresia Opitz BBB/G syndrome (OS) is a heterogenous malformation syn- M. Storer1, E. Howard1, V. Martin2, G. LeFebvre1, A. Coffey1, C. J. Shaw- drome mainly characterised by hypertelorism and hypospadias . In Smith1; addition, patients may present with several other defects of the ven- 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Institute of tral midline such as cleft lip and palate and congenital heart defects . Child Health, London, United Kingdom. The syndrome-causing gene encodes the X-linked E3 ubiquitin ligase Oesophageal atresia and/or tracheo-oesophageal fistula are common MID1 that mediates ubiquitin-specific modification and degradation of malformations occurring in approximately 1 in 3500 births . In around the catalytic subunit of the translation regulator protein phosphatase half of cases (syndromic oesophageal atresia, overlapping with the 2A (PP2A) . Here, we show that the MID1 protein also associates with VACTERL association), there are associated anomalies, cardiac mal- elongation factor 1α (EF-1α) and several other proteins involved in formations being the most common . Recently, three separate genes mRNA transport and translation, including RACK1, Annexin A2, Nu- with a role in syndromic oesophageal atresia have been identified: cleophosmin and proteins of the small ribosomal subunits . Mutant those for Feingold syndrome (N-MYC), anophthalmia-oesophageal- MID1 proteins as found in OS patients lose the ability to interact with genital (AEG) syndrome (SOX2), and CHARGE syndrome (CHD7) . It EF-1α. The composition of the MID1 protein complex was determined is likely that other genes play a role in foregut development, and dos- by several independent methods: (1) yeast two-hybrid screening, (2) age sensitive chromosomal loci presumably harbouring these as yet immunofluorescence, (3) a biochemical approach involving affinity unidentified genes have recently been highlighted (refs 1 and 2). purification of the complex, (4) co-fractionation in a microtubule as- We are collecting DNA samples from patients with syndromic forms of sembly assay and (5) immunoprecipitation . Moreover, we show that oesophageal atresia and the VACTERL association . We are analyzing the cytoskeleton-bound MID1/translation factor complex specifically these samples by exon resequencing in the CHD7, N-MYC, SALL1 associates with G- and U-rich RNAs and incorporates MID1 mRNA, and SOX2 genes (additional genes, including FANCB and FANCC are thus forming a microtubule-associated ribonucleoprotein (RNP) com- currently being added to the panel); and by high resolution array-based plex . Our data suggest a novel function of the OS gene product in comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) . To date, we have ana- directing translational control to the cytoskeleton . The dysfunction of lyzed 50 samples . No de novo copy number changes have as yet been this mechanism would lead to malfunction of microtubule-associated identified. A de novo frame shift mutation has been detected in CHD7 protein translation and to the development of OS . in a single patient with some features of CHARGE syndrome . By adopting this comprehensive approach to the analysis of a single P05.151 malformation, we hope to identify other genes involved in human fore- Large genomic rearrangements of the OFD gene account for gut development and to continue to provide a research-based service 20 % of patients with Oral-Facial-Digital type 1 syndrome and to the Clinical Genetics community for this patient group . negative DNA sequencing analysis 1 . Shaw-Smith C. J Med Genet . 2006: 43(7):545-54 . C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, B. Franco3, P. Saugier-Veber4, N. Gigot5, B. Aral5, A. 2 . Felix JF, et al Eur J Med Genet . 2007: 50(3):163-75 Donzel5, L. Van Maldergem6, E. Bieth7, V. Layet8, M. Mathieu9, A. Teebi10, T. Morisawa11, M. Matsuo11, L. Burglen12, V. Cormier-Daire13, A. Masurel-Paulet1,2, P05.149 E. Gautier14, F. Huet15, J. Teyssier5, M. Tosi4, T. Frebourg4, L. Faivre1,2; mutational spectrum of the Oral-facial-digital type i syndrome: a 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Centre de Références Maladies Rares study on a large collection of patients - Anomalies du Développement Embryonnaire et syndromes malformatifs- de B. Franco1,2, C. Prattichizzo1, M. Macca1,2, V. Novelli1, G. Giorgio1, A. Barra1, la Région Grand Est, CHU, Dijon, France, 3Laboratorio di Ricerca, Telethon OFDI collaborative group; Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Napoli, Italy, 4Laboratoire de géné- 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine-TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Department tique moléculaire, Service de génétique, Faculté de médecine et de pharmacie, of Pediatrics, University Federico II, Naples, Italy. Rouen, France, 5Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital du Bocage, Oral-facial-digital type I (OFDI; MIM 311200) syndrome is a male-lethal CHU, Dijon, France, 6Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Loverval, Belgium, X-linked dominant developmental disorder belonging to the heteroge- 7Laboratoire de Génétique, CHU Purpan, Toulouse, France, 8Unité de Cytogé- neous group of Oral-facial-digital syndrome (OFDS) . OFDI is charac- nétique et Génétique médicale, CH, Le Havre, France, 9Centre de référence terized by malformations of the face, oral cavity and digits . CNS ab- - Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs – de la région Nord, normalities and cystic kidney disease can also be part of this condition . Département de pédiatrie - Unité de génétique clinique, CHU Hôpital Nord, This rare genetic disorder is due to mutations in the OFD1 gene that Amiens, France, 10Division of clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital of encodes a centrosome/basal body protein necessary for primary cili- Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 11Department of Pediatrics, Kobe Uni- um assembly and for left-right axis determination, thus ascribing OFDI versity Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan, 12Centre de référence des to the growing number of disorders associated to ciliary dysfunction . malformations et maladies congénitales du cervelet, Service de génétique et We now report a mutation analysis study in a cohort of 100 unrelated d’embryologie médicales, CHU Hôpital d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau, APHP, affected individuals collected worldwide . Putative disease-causing mu- Paris, France, 13Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, tations were identified in 81 patients (81%). We describe 67 different APHP, Paris, France, 14CIC-EC, Hôpital Le Bocage, CHU, Dijon, France, 15Ser- mutations, 64 of which represent novel mutations, including 36 frame- vice de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, Dijon, France. shift, 9 missense, 11 splice-site and 11 nonsense mutations . Most of Among the oral-facial-digital syndromes, the oral-facial-digital type them concentrate in exons 3, 8, 9, 12, 13 and 16, suggesting that these 1 syndrome (OFD 1) is characterised by X-linked dominant mode of exons may represent mutational hotspots . Phenotypic characterization inheritance . Clinical features include facial dysmorphism with oral, of the patients provided a better definition of the clinical features of tooth and distal abnormalities, polycystic kidney disease and central OFD type I syndrome . Our results indicate that renal cystic disease is nervous system malformations . A high clinical overlap exists between present in 60% of cases with >18 years of age . Genotype-phenotype the different types of OFD syndrome . OFD1 DNA sequencing analysis correlation did not reveal significant associations apart for the high- remains negative in 30 to 50% of cases . We hypothesized that large arched/cleft palate most frequently associated to missense and splice- genomic rearrangements could account for the majority of these unex- site mutations . Our results contribute to further expand our knowledge plained cases . A series of 25 index cases (29 patients) with OFD1 phe- on the molecular basis of OFD type I syndrome . notype and normal OFD1 DNA sequencing analysis were screened for OFD1 rearrangements by QMPSF and relative quantitative real-time P05.150 PCR analyses . Five large deletions (exons 1-8, exons 1-14, exons 10- the Opitz syndrome gene product miD1 assembles a 11, exon 17 and exons 13-23) were identified in five index cases, ac- microtubule-associated ribonucleoprotein complex counting for 20 % of negative mutation patients after DNA sequencing . B. Aranda Orgilles1, A. Trockenbacher2, J. Winter3, J. Aigner1, A. Köhler2, E. Among the remaining negative index cases, a family history compati- Jastrzebska1, J. Stahl4, R. Schneider2,3, S. Schweiger1,5; ble with dominant X-linked inheritance was found in one case only . Us- 1Max Planck institute for molecular genetics, berlin, Germany, 2Institute of ing DNA sequencing, QMPSF and relative quantitative real-time PCR Biochemistry, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Max Planck Institute for molecular genet- analyses, the OFD1 alteration detection level remains incomplete . ics, Berlin, Germany, 4Max-Delbrueck Center of Molecular Medicine, berlin, However, it is likely that sporadic patients without OFD1 alterationsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  are affected by another OFD syndrome . Given the percentage of large tion with PD . We believe that this approach will allow us to identify spe- genomic rearrangements, we suggest that routine molecular screen- cific miRNAs and miRNA target genes playing a role in idiopathic PD. ing of OFD1 gene should include first DNA direct sequencing analysis. QMPSF and relative quantitative real-time PCR analyses could be per- P05.154 formed in mutation negative patients, especially in severe cases highly mutation screening of exon 3 of Parkin gene in a young cohort suggestive of OFD1 with a prenatal diagnosis request . of iranian PD patients S. S. Banihosseini1,2, M. H. Kazemi3, S. Shojaee4, A. Alavi5, G. Shahidi6, F. P05.152 Sina6, B. Zamani6, H. Sadeghi7, K. Parsa7, E. Elahi5; PINK1 mutations and the risk of Parkinson’s disease in family 1Students’ Scientific Research Center (SSRC), Medical Sciences, University members of southern italy of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian National Elite Foundation, V. Scornaienchi1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, D. Civitelli1, S. Carrideo1, F. Annesi1, P. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3School of Medicine,Medical Sciences, Univer- Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, E. V. De Marco1, G. Provenzano1, V. Greco1, G. Nico- sity of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Biotechnology, letti1, G. Squillace1, P. Ragonese2, M. D’Amelio2, G. Savettieri2, G. Annesi1; College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Piano Lago di 5School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Mangone, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Republic of Iran, 6Iran University of Medical Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Palermo, Italy. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Neurosurgery Department, Shahid Beheshti Mutations in PINK1 gene are associated with both familial recessive University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and sporadic early-onset parkinsonism (EOP) . The PINK1 gene codes Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most prevalent neurodegen- for a protein (PTEN-induced kinase1) with a catalytic serine/threonine erative disorder, and the most common movement disorder affecting kinase domain . Several groups have demonstrated that PINK1 protein more than 1% of individuals over 60 years old in Western populations . can be localized to mitochondria in vitro . Moreover, functional stud- This is the first genetic study on Iranian PD patients. Mutations in the ies have shown that PINK1 protein may have a neuroprotective role Parkin gene are often observed in patients affected with early onset as wild-type PINK1 protects cells against proteasomal inhibition . This PD, particularly familial forms of early onset PD . In this study, we protective effect is abrogated by mutations in the PINK1 gene . Herein screened exon 3 of the gene by direct sequencing in a young cohort of we investigated a possible association of PINK1 gene mutations in Iranian PD patients . The cohort consisted of 96 patients, with a mean southern Italian families with monogenic parkinsonism . age of onset of 41 .8 yrs . (range 10-75 years) . The variation c .C245A, Fourteen families with PD were investigated for the presence of PINK1 which causes substitution of alanine by glutamic acid at residue 82 mutations; five had EOP (mean age at onset 36 years) and 9 had fa- (A82E) of the coded protein, was observed in three unrelated patients milial late-onset disease (LOP, mean age at onset 65 years) . Genomic in the heterozygous state . This missense causing variation has previ- DNA was extracted from blood. PINK1 exons were amplified by PCR ously been reported in control individuals and is unlikely to be associ- and sequenced . ated with disease . One patient seemed to carry a homozygous dele- We characterized a novel homozygous mutation (889delG, tion mutation encompassing exon 3, as this exon failed to be amplified D297fsX318) in the exon 4 of PINK1 gene in two brothers with EOP in repeated PCR attempts . Age of onset of PD in the patient carrying from a Sicilian consanguineous family . This mutation causes a frame- the putative deletion mutation was 28 years . shift in translation and a premature termination of PINK1 protein lead- ing to the loss of most of its kinase catalytic domain . No other family P05.155 members carried the homozygous deletion in the exon 4 . We did not Novel missense mutation in exon 44 of LRRK observed in find this mutation in 200 chromosomes from healthy Sicilian individu- patients affected with Parkinson’s Disease als . F. Ghazavi1, S. Shojaee2, N. Farboodi1, Z. Fazlali1, G. Shahidi3, F. Sina3, B. In conclusion, PINK1 mutations are uncommon in our southern Italian Zamani3, H. Sadeghi4, K. Parsa4, E. Elahi5; families with EOP and LOP. The present study confirms that PINK1 1School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic mutations are a cause, even if rare, of EOP in the examined popula- Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biotechnology, College of Science, University tion . of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iran University of Medical Sci- ences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Neurosurgery P05.153 department, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic miRNAs in Parkinson Disease Republic of Iran, 5Center of Excellence in Biomathematics, School of Math- M. Martins1, A. Rosa1, B. V. Fonseca1, S. Violante1, L. C. Guedes2, T. Mestre2, ematics, Statistics and Computer Science, College of Science, University of M. Coelho2, M. M. Rosa2, J. M. Vance3, J. J. Ferreira2, S. A. Oliveira1; Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 2Instituto de Medicina Mo- Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen- lecular, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Miami Institute for Human Genomics, Miami, FL, erative disease . The pathologic characteristics of PD include degen- United States. eration of neurons of the substantia nigra in the brain . PD is consid- Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most prevalent age-associ- ered a complex disease, and both genetic and environmental factors ated neurodegenerative disorder, affecting over one million individuals are relevant to its etiology . Several genes associated with PD have worldwide . The main pathological hallmark of PD is the loss of do- been identified by linkage analysis in multi-case families.LRRK2 is the paminergic neurons within the substantia nigra, leading to insufficient gene most recently identified and, among identified genes, it seems to formation and action of dopamine in the basal ganglia circuitry . The be the gene most often mutated in the dominant form of PD . LRRK2 cardinal clinical signs are muscle rigidity, resting tremor, bradykinesia codes leucine-rich repeat kinase, a huge protein containing 2527 and, in more advanced cases, postural instability . amino acids . The protein has several functional domains, but its role miRNAS are abundant in the brain and are essential for efficient brain in PD is unknown. We sequenced exons 32 and 44 and flanking re- function . Increasing evidence implicates miRNA dysfunction in PD gions of LRRK2 in the DNA of 60 unrelated Iranian PD patients . One pathogenesis . Although much has been learned in recent years about variation was observed in exon 32 (c .C4624T causing P1542S) and the genetic aetiology of familial PD, far less is known about the molec- another in intron 32 (IVS32+347) . These variations are thought not to ular mechanisms underlying the vast majority of cases, which are the be associated with disease. We also found five variations in exon 44, focus of our study . To identify novel susceptibility genes for idiopathic four of which are intronic and have been previously reported. The fifth PD, we are using the “genomic convergence” approach with microR- variation was G6523C, which was found in the heterozygous state in NA profiling. This strategy converges data from whole-genome link- one patient and causes the substitution of aspartic acid 2175 by histi- age studies with expression profiling experiments to determine which dine (D2175H) . This substitution occurs at the N-terminal of the WD40 candidate genes to test in family-based association studies . We are domain of LRRK2 which is thought to be a protein-protein interaction currently conducting microRNA expression profiles in peripheral blood domain . The variation was not observed in 218 controls and in 110 mononuclear cells of 20 PD patients and 20 controls using microarrays additional patients as assessed by ARMS-PCR . Further analysis is spotted with probes for 452 human microRNAs . The microRNAs dif- needed to confirm the pathogenic effect of this mutation. ferentially expressed and respective target genes mapping to linkage peaks will later be tested for allelic, haplotypic and genotypic associa-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.156 PKD2) . This protein has recently been localized to the primary cilium Identification of two novel mutations in LRRK among iranian where its channel function seems to be involved in a mechanosensory Parkinson’s Disease patients phenomenon . However, its biological function is not totally understood, Z. Fazlali1,2, S. Shojaee3, N. Farboodi1, F. Ghazavi1, G. Shahidi4, F. Sina4, B. especially in tubule formation . We describe a mouse model for human Zamani4, H. Sadeghi5, K. Parsa5, E. Elahi1,6; PC-2 overexpression, obtained by inserting a human BAC containing 1School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic the PKD2 gene . Three lines were generated, expressing different levels Republic of Iran, 2Iranian National Elite Foundation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of of PKD2 . One line, PKD2-Y, has been explored in more details and we Iran, 3Department of Biotechnology, College of Science, University of Tehran,, will present physiological and molecular exploration of this transgenic Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Iran University of Medical Sciences, Hazrat animals . Our data demonstrate that transgenic animals older than 12 Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Neurosurgery, Shahid months present tubulopathy with proteinuria and failure to concentrate Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, urine . The kidney cortex has been found disorganized . Moreover, we 6Center of Excellence in Biomathematics, School of Mathematics, Statistics and observe that extracellular matrix protein expression is downregulated Computer Science, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic in these animals . Overexpression of human PKD2 leads to anomalies Republic of Iran. in tubular function, probably due to abnormalities in tubule organo- Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is one of the most common progressive genesis. Surprisingly, PKD2-Y FISH analysis showed that a significant neurodegenerative disorders . It is characterized by selective loss of ni- number of metaphases presented with more than a single Y chromo- grostriatal dopaminergic neurons . Five genes associated with PD have some . Transgenic nucleus size is larger compared to non-transgenic been identified by linkage analysis of affected families: α-synuclein, cells suggesting problems during cell division . Likewise we show that parkin, DJ-1, PINK-1 and LRRK2 . Mutations in the Leucine-rich repeat fibroblasts from transgenic mouse present with mitotic instability. It re- kinase 2 (LRKK2) gene have been most often observed in autosomal mains to be determined what is the relationship between PC-2 and dominantly inherited PD, a form of the disease which has pathologi- cell division . cal features most closely resembling those seen in idiopathic forms of PD . Among the approximately 80 exonic variations so far observed P05.159 in LRRK2, less than 10 are definitively thought to cause PD. In this Gene expression in 2-3 somite stage Wt and Pkd2 mutant study, we sequenced exons 36 and 37 of LRRK2 in 60 PD Iranian PD mouse embryos patients . Two novel heterozygous variations, c .G5174A in exon 36 and P. Pennekamp, M. Dahmer, G. Randau, N. Koo, B. Dworniczak; c .C5467A in exon 37 were observed . Each variation was observed in University Clinics Muenster, Muenster, Germany. only one patient. The first causes substitution of arginine by glutamine The development of an invariant left-right (LR) asymmetry of the vis- at position 1725 (R1725Q), and the second causes substitution of glu- ceral organs is a fundamental feature of vertebrate embryogenesis . tamine by lysine at position 1823 (Q1823K) .Both affected residues are Failure to establish the normal organ position (situs solitus) may result located in the COR (carboxy-terminal of Ras) domain, where at least in a mirror-image reversal (situs inversus), in left or right isomerism one pathogenic mutation has been previously identified. To assess or in heterotaxia (situs ambiguous) . While the complete situs inver- the presence of c .G5174A and c .C5467A in other PD patients and in sus does not have adverse impact on the organisms, heterotaxia fre- controls, an ARMS-PCR assay was set up for each of the variations . quently is accompanied by fatal malformations and complex cardiac Neither variation was observed among 230 healthy controls and 115 and cardiovascular defects . Increasing evidence based on research additional unrelated PD patients . Although these observations suggest on genetically modified animals including our Pkd2 knockout mouse that both variations may be disease associated mutations, this conclu- suggest, that the disturbance of proper LR axis development and thus sion is presently not conclusive . misalignment of the developing heart tube is one of the major causes for the development of congenital heart disease (CHD) resulting in P05.157 early prenatal death in most cases and it is very likely that the same A Yeast Two hybrid screen for LRRK2 mechanisms are responsible in large part for early abortions in the first S. Jain1,2, E. Greggio2, A. Kaganovich2, P. Heutink1, M. Cookson2; trimester of pregnancy in humans . 1CNCR, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2NIA, Bethesda, MD, United States. To identify and to characterize novel genes and mechanisms which Mutations in Lrrk2 cause autosomal dominant Parkinson’s Disease . influence LR axis development in vertebrates and thus might be in- LRRK2 (DARDARIN) belongs to a newly identified family of proteins volved in the development of congenital cardiac defects we performed referred to as ROCO proteins that contain two conserved domains (i) a gene expression analysis of right and left body halves of 2-3 somite a ROC (Ras in complex proteins) domain that and ii) a COR domain stage male WT and Pkd2 mutant mouse embryos using Affymetrix (C-terminal of ROC) . In addition LRRK2 also contains a WD40 and Gene Chips. We identified and validated by in situ hybridization (ISH) a leucine rich repeat domain, as well as a predicted tyrosine kinase analyses several genes which are either already known or highly sug- catalytic domain . A yeast two hybrid was performed to help elucidate gestive to influence LR axis development. Data obtained during this the function of LRRK2 . analysis will be presented . LRRK2 was found to interact with fasciculation and elongation factor zeta 2 (FEZ2), a mammalian orthologue of the Caenorhabditis elegans P05.160 UNC-76 protein, which is involved in the axonal outgrowth and synap- Genetic mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of premature tic organization . FEZ2 is ubiquitously expressed in mammalian tissues ovarian failure: study of FMR, cryptic anomalies (especially with the majority of information about its function being inferred from small deletions) in the Xq27-Xqter region and other causative studies of its homolog, FEZ1 . FEZ1 appears to be involved in neuri- genes, in 122 women from the Basque country. togenesis upon phosphorylation by PKCζ. Knockout of UNC-76 from M. I. Tejada1, E. Beristain1, C. Martinez-Bouzas1, N. Puente1, N. Viguera1, M. C-elegans leads to locomotion and axonal transport defects . Given the Artigas2, M. A. Ramos-Arroyo2, B. Prieto1, S. González3, J. Peña4, R. Mator- role of FEZ1 in axonal outgrowth and normal synaptic function, FEZ2 ras1,3; and LRRK2 may co-operate in maintaining SN neuritic length and 1Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 2Hospital Virgen del Camino, branching, and makes FEZ2 a good functional interactor for LRRK2 . In Pamplona, Spain, 3IVI-Bilbao, Leioa-Bizkaia, Spain, 4Instituto Ginecológico support of this hypothesis, recent evidence has suggested that LRRK2 Elcano, Bilbao, Spain. plays a role in maintaining neuronal morphology in vitro and in vivo . Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is characterized by secondary amenorrhea, elevated level gonadotropins and sex steroid deficiency P05.158 in women less than 40 years old . It is well known that some of the Pre- Effect of overexpression of PKD2 in a murine model mutation (PM) carrier women of Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) develop E. Ribe1, S. Burtey1, M. Riera1, R. Rance1, E. Passage1, P. Pennekamp2, B. POF. More recently, it has been identified a common region respon- Dworniczak2, M. Fontés1; sible for ovarian development -Xq27-Xqter-, where the FMR1 gene 1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Institute for Human Genetics, Muenster, lies and interestingly, so lie other X-linked genes for MR . Furthermore, Germany. there are other genes in the pathogenesis of POF, the results being Polycystin-2 (PC-2), a cation channel of the Trp family, is involved in that it is heritable in up to 30% .of cases . autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) type 2 (AD- We studied all of these genetic mechanisms in peripheral blood sam-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  ples of three groups of women: 42 known PM females from families on ovarian target tissue (e .g . oocytes or granulosa cells), leading to of FXS, 25 with POF and 17 without; and 80 females with POF, and increased atresia/apoptosis of follicles . To determine the possible in- normal FMR1 . The following genes were analysed: FMR1; BMP15; teraction between premutated FMR1 RNA and ovaric proteins, gel shift GDF9; INHA; NOBOX and FOXE1 polyalanine tract length . Two kits of assay were set up incubating the nuclear extracts of the granulosa MLPA for the X chromosome were also studied . cell line COV434 with premutated FMR1 RNA. A specific interaction Our results revealed 3 new PM carrier women without history of MR between granulosa nuclear proteins and FMR1 premutated RNA were (3/80=3.75%) which confirms that FMR1 gene is the first cause of observed, suggesting that rCGG- repeated binding protein are present POF . Furthermore, we found a microdeletion by MLPA (Xq28-Xqter) in granulosa cells . To identify and characterize rCGG-repeat-binding (1/80=1 .25%) in a woman with POF and a family history of POF . In proteins, pull-down assays will be set up . the group of previously known PM carrier women no differences were found except for the number of CGG repeats that is higher than 100 in P05.163 the group without POF . Novel type of mutation in Pseudohypoparathyroidism type ia As a conclusion, our work demonstrates the need of performing ge- E. Fernández-Rebollo1, R. Barrio2, G. Pérez-Nanclares1, A. Carcavilla2, I. Ga- netic analysis in women with POF . rin1, L. Castaño1, G. Pérez de Nanclares1; 1Endocrinology and Diabetes Research Group, Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo, P05.161 Spain, 2Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain. Acute intermittent porphyria: impact of mutations in the Individuals with AHO and resistance to PTH, TSH, and often, addition- porphobilinogen deaminase gene on the protein structure al hormones are referred to as having PHP-Ia . These patients carry D. Ulbrichova, J. Zeman, P. Martasek; heterozygous inactivating mutations, including translation initiation 1st School of Medicine, Prague 2, Czech Republic. mutations, amino acid substitutions, nonsense mutations, splice site Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an autosomal dominantly inher- mutations and small insertions or deletions, in one of the 13 GNAS ex- ited disorder, classified as acute hepatic porphyria. It is characterized ons encoding the α-subunit of the stimulatory G-protein (Gsα). GNAS by a deficiency of porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD, EC 4.3.1.8), the has been describeb as one of the most complex gene loci as several third enzyme in heme biosynthesis . Expression of the disease is highly different transcript variants have been detected . variable, determined in part by environmental, metabolic and hormonal Objective: We sought to identify the molecular defect in a patient ap- factors . Clinical expression of AIP is associated with an acute neuro- parently suffering from PHP-Ia . logic syndrome, which includes both neuropsychiatric symptoms and Methods and results: The GNAS gene of a 5-yr-old boy with brachy- neurodegenerative changes . Autonomic neuropathy may underlie se- dactily, mental retardation, pseudohypoparathyroidism, and congenital vere abdominal pain, the most typical symptom of acute attack . Por- hypothyroidism was investigated . Sequencing analysis of DNA extract- phobilinogen deaminase is monomeric protein with a single catalytic ed from peripheral blood revealed a heterozygous mutation in exon 2, active site and is organized in three domains approximately equal in consisting in an inversion of de novo origin and maternal inheritance, size . Several crystallographic structures of PBGD from E . coli have that was explained by the analysis of the SNP located in exon 5 . been determined . Molecular studies of cDNA prepared from blood RNA demonstrated To establish the effects of newly found mutations on the protein struc- that both the normal and the mutant variants were stable . The anoma- ture of PBGD, we expressed mutant constructs with the described mu- lous RNAs were generated by new splice-sites in intron 1, that pro- tations in E . coli, and we analyzed their biochemical and enzymatic duced a protein of only 59 aminoacids due to the creation of a prema- properties. All purified enzymes carrying causative mutations had rela- ture stop codon in the processed intron 1 . tive activities dramatically decreased according to the average level Conclusion: This report demonstrates for the first time an inversion at expressed by the normal allele . the GNAS gene responsible of pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia . E . coli and human PBGD amino acid sequences have 35% homology and more than 70 % similarity, and considering this fact, it is possible P05.164 to extrapolate structure/function relationships for human mutations Deficient inhibitors of calcification act as common final pathway leading to simple amino acid substitution based on comparative E . in PXE and the PXE-like syndrome coli/human analyses . These analyses together with the kinetic stud- O. M. Vanakker1, L. Martin2, L. J. Schurgers3, P. J. Coucke1, C. Vermeer3, I. ies of existing mutations can help predict the impact on the enzyme Pasquali-Ronchetti4, A. De Paepe1; function in the living organism and further improve our understanding 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2De- in this field. (Supported by Grants MSM0021620806, 1M6837805002, partment of Dermatology, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 3Depart- GAUK 257540 54007) ment of Biochemistry (VitaK), University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Neth- erlands, 4Biomedical Sciences Department, University of Modena and Reggio P05.162 Emilia, Modena, Italy. molecular characterization of Premature Ovarian Failure Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an autosomal recessive disor- associated with FmR1 premutation der, characterized by oculocutaneous and cardiovascular manifesta- N. Locatelli1, K. Camelin2, B. Bodega1, S. Bione3, D. Toniolo4, C. Santoro2, E. tions, due to mineralization and fragmentation of elastic fibres. The Ginelli1, A. Marozzi1; causal ABCC6 gene encodes a transmembrane transporter; however, 1Dept. of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences - University of Milan, the pathogenetic link with the elastic fiber abnormalities remains un- Milan, Italy, 2Dept. of Medical Sciences - University of Piemonte Orientale, No- known . vara, Italy, 3Institute of Molecular Genetics-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 4Dibit-San Raffa- We recently identified a novel PXE-like syndrome - resembling PXE -, ele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. associated with a vitamin K (VK)-dependent clotting factor deficiency. Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is defined as secondary hypergo- We identified causal mutations in GGCX, encoding a gamma-car- nadotropic (FSH ≥ 40 IU/l) amenorrhea occurring before the age of boxylase . Together with phosphorylation by the Golgi casein kinase, 40, and affects ~1% of females . Women who carry the FMR1 premu- carboxylation represents an important posttranslational modification tation are at an increased risk for ovarian insufficiency. To precisely necessary for activation of VK-dependent proteins, such as matrix gla define the range of FRAXA expansions and its incidence in POF mani- protein (MGP) and osteocalcin (OC), known to be calcification inhibi- festation 209 POF and 200 control women were sized for the CGG tors . Hence, this disorder provides novel possibilities to unravel the tract. We found a significant association (10%, P < 1x10-6) between pathogenetic events causing PXE . POF and FRAXA premutation (range 60-163 repeats), and a signifi- In PXE-like patients, immunohistochemistry on skin tissues and se- cant enrichment (5,7%, P = 0 .006) of POF carriers of intermediate rum ELISA tests revealed increased levels of uncarboxylated (inactive) expansions (range 41-58 repeats) . The results obtained strengthen MGP and OC, as a result of the GGCX mutations . In PXE patients, the correlation between FMR1 expansion and POF . The molecular similar results were obtained . An important difference in PXE patients pathogenesis this association is still unclear . As for FXTAS patients, was however an increase of the phosphorylated fraction of inactive a toxic RNA−mediated gain of function model for POF women carry- MGP, whereas the phosporylated/unphosphorylated MGP ratio in ing the FMR1 premutated allele was hypothesized . The POF condition PXE-like samples was normal . This suggests that in PXE not only the might be a consequence of a toxic effect of FMR1 expanded mRNA carboxylase activity is downregulated but also an upregulation of theMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  Golgi casein kinase occurs . P05.167 We demonstrated that dysfunction of (VK-dependent) calcification in- mitochondrial DNA mutations and recurrent miscarriage hibitors forms a common pathway in the PXE-like syndrome and PXE . M. Kaare1, V. Ulander2, R. Kaaja2, K. Aittomäki1,3; Our findings suggest that ABCC6 dysfunction does not merely lead to 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Obstetrics decreased serum levels of its substrate but causes a chain of intracel- and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3De- lular events involving carboxylation and phosphorylation of calcifica- partment of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, tion inhibitors . Finland. The mitochondrias are involved in ATP production and apoptosis . P05.165 These processes are important in early development and may be dis- Characterization of a novel mutation in the CTSK Gene in a turbed by mutations in mtDNA, thereby leading to spontaneous mis- family with PYcD carriage . Phenotype causing mutations are usually heteroplasmic and J. Toral-Lopez1, L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta2, S. A. Cuevas3; cause a phenotype when the proportion of mutant mtDNA increases 1Centro Medico ISSEMYM, Ecatepec, Mexico, 2Hospital General de Mexico, beyond a threshold . This proportion can shift at cell division/when in- Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Fac Medicina, UNAM, herited and therefore the phenotype often shows remarkable variation Mexico D.F., Mexico. within a family . Accordingly, such a shift can occur from a mother with Pycnodysostosis is an inborn error of metabolism due to the deficient mild or no phenotype to an embryo with significant enrichment of mu- activity of cathepsin K, a lysosomal cysteine protease from the papain tated mtDNA causing fetal demise and possibly recurrent miscarriage family of proteases . The autosomal recessive disorder is consequence (RM) . of the diminished capacity of osteoclasts to degrade organic bone ma- To study the role of mtDNA mutations in RM we screened 48 women trix . Pycnodysostosis is clinically characterized by short stature, os- with RM for mitochondrial mutations using dHPLC, a sensitive method teosclerosis, delayed cranial suture closure, hypoplastic mandibule, which can detect ~5% heteroplasmy . So far, 10 different heteroplasmic acro-osteolysis, hypoplastic clavicle and dental anomalies . The spine variations have been detected . By screening placental samples avail- may be affected with kyphosis, scoliosis or lumbar lordosis . Pathologi- able from 3 women with different variations we have been able to show cal fractures, nonunion of fractures and spondylolisthesis are frequent that the variations have been inherited by the fetus, and are in some complications in pycnodysostosis . The gene of the pycnodysostosis cases present in a higher proportion of mtDNAs in the fetus compared (CTSK) has been mapped on the human chromosome 1q21 . A few to the mother . So far, we have been able to determine the exact se- CTSK gene mutations have been identified in several non-related quence change of three variations . Two changes are previously re- families with pycnodysostosis . In the present study, we analyzed the ported in the Mitomap database as normal variations . One variation CTSK gene in three members of a family with pycnodysostosis and is not reported in the database and is predicted to be a synonymous identified a novel missense mutation. The parents agreed to partici- change in the mtND6 gene. Futher studies are ongoing to define the pate . Whole blood was obtained from each patient as well as from the remaining variations to determine if the variations may be the actual parents and 100 normal controls . Genomic DNA was extracted from cause of miscarriages . whole blood samples . All exons of the CTSK gene were amplified and sequenced from genomic DNA of the patients, parents and controls by P05.168 PCR and DNA sequencing analysis . We found a novel mutation in the Validating the role of REt in the cNs: discovery of novel carboxyl extreme of the cathepsin K . This mutation, and previous data, interactors show that affection of carboxyl-terminus of the enzyme is important in D. Fusco1, M. Vargiolu1, E. Bonora1, L. F. Pennisi1, R. Baumeister2, G. Romeo1; the genesis of pycnodysostosis phenotype . 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Bio3/Bioinformatics and Molecular Genetics, Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. P05.166 RET encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor mainly expressed in neural copy Number Variations and Long-Qt syndrome crest derived and urogenital cells . Two major isoforms of RET are pro- J. Barc1, S. Schmitt1,2, F. Briec1, M. Le Cunff1, C. Vieyres3, C. Le Caignec1,2, F. duced by alternative splicing: RET51 and RET9 . Kyndt1,2, H. Le Marec1,4, V. Probst1,4, J. Schott1,2; Mutations of RET protooncogene have been associated with both neo- 1INSERM U915, l’institut du thorax, Nantes, France, 2Laboratoire de génétique plasia (MEN2A, MEN2B and FMTC) and Hirschsprung disease . CHU, Nantes, France, 3Cabinet de cardiologie, Angoulême, France, 4Clinique The precise role of RET in the maturation of the periferic nervous sys- cardiologique CHU, l’institut du thorax, Nantes, France. tem, in kidney morphogenesis and in spermatogenesis has been esta- Long-QT Syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited cardiac arrhythmia charac- bilished . RET is responsive to signals induced by neurotrophic factors terized by a prolonged QT interval on the surface ECG associated with of the GDNF-family ligands . syncope and sudden death caused by torsades de pointes polymorphic Recent studies have shown that RET binds the neurotrophin NGF . ventricular tachycardia . It is estimated to affect 1 in 5000 individuals . This suggests a functional role of RET in the Central Nervous System LQTS may be caused by mutations in 4 major genes encoding potas- (CNS) . Nonetheless, no signaling pathway involving RET is known in sium channel pore forming (KCNQ1, KCNH2) and auxiliary (KCNE1, the CNS . Hence we developed a strategy aimed at identifying novel in- KCNE2) subunits and in the gene encoding the cardiac sodium chan- teractors that may help us to reconstruct the pathway connecting RET nel SCN5A. Approximately 25% of patients diagnosed with LQTS have and NGF . To accomplish this task, we applied to RET51 the technique no mutation in one of five LQTS genes. Genetic testing detection fail- of the yeast two hybrid split ubiquitin system, that allows detection of ures due to large genomic rearrangements are one explanation . The interacting molecules belonging to the cytoplasm and the membrane . purpose of this study was to determine the relative copy number in A first screening for RET 51 interactors has revealed 10 candidates. the 5 major LQTS genes in 100 mutation-negative LQTS probands . Among these we focused on a neurotrophic factor . Validation of the A MLPA approach was used and aberrant exon copy numbers were interaction was carried out through a co-immunoprecipitation assay in confirmed using Agilent 244K CGH array. HEK293 cells . We either ascertained that this interaction occurs via a This study identified 2 large deletions in KCNH2 gene in 2 probands specific amino acid residue activated after binding of NGF. with QTc intervals of 478 ms and 554 ms. The first patient carries an On the basis of these preliminary results, we are currently testing the estimated 145 Kb deletion including KCNH2, and ABP1 genes. The hypothesis that RET 51 might have a central role in the growth and the second deletion spanning 650 Kb includes KCNH2 exon 4 to 15, ABP1 trophism of CNS cells . and 18 additional genes. Familial investigations identified 3 additional affected individuals carrying the KCNH2 deletion . Both deletions are P05.169 expected to be non functional, decreasing I current in ventricular car- A high-resolution RNA expression atlas of Retinitis Pigmentosa Kr diomyocytes, suggesting haploinsufficiency as the most likely mecha- genes in the human and mouse retinas nism leading to LQTS . D. Trifunovic1, M. Karali1, D. Camposampiero2, D. Ponzin2, V. Marigo3, S. The identification of 2% large deletions in LQTS genes strongly sug- Banfi1; gests screening for copy number variants in mutation negative LQTS 1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Fondazione Banca degli Occhi del Veneto, Venice, Italy, probands . 3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Modena, Italy. There were statistically significant differences in allele and genotype Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is one of the leading causes of visual handi- frequencies of sequence change IVS3+4c>t of RHO gene in affected cap in the world population and is characterized by high genetic het- patients with adRP and in controls . According to our data, this poly- erogeneity . The study of the disease mechanisms and the develop- morphism might be pathogenic . Recently were reported 16 possible ment of efficient therapeutic approaches have mostly relied on the combinations of the exon 3 RDS gene four SNPs and detected four availability of animal models for this condition, so far . Nevertheless, from 16 possible combinations (minihaplotypes): G1147A1166G1250C1291 little information is available about the RNA expression profiles of RP (I), C1147A1166A1250C1291 (II), C1147G1166A1250C1291 (III) and G1147A1166G1250T1291 genes in the human retina . To overcome this lack of information, we (IV) . Sequencing results for variant positions in exon 3 RDS gene in generated an expression atlas of 34 known RP genes in human and adRP patients from Volga-Ural region revealed all four minihaplotypes murine retinas . The atlas can be freely accessed at http://www .tigem . described above and minihaplotype C1147A1166A1250T1291 (V) . Minihaplo- it/RPexp/ . The vast majority of the genes analyzed displayed similar type C1147A1166A1250C1291 (II) was revealed only in patients and it might patterns between human and mouse retina . We observed different be linked with RP . expression patterns for the CNGB1, USH2A and FSCN2 genes with Conclusions: To optimize the DNA diagnostics of retinitis pigmentosa, respect to previously reported profiles. Additionally, we detected differ- it is necessary to analyze patients from various ethnic groups . Our ent expression profiles for the RPGR, CA4, PAP1, RGR and RLBP1 study helps in molecular characterization of RP in Russia . genes in human and mouse retina . The differences observed in the expression patterns of some genes in human and mouse will open P05.172 new perspectives on the function of these genes and on their putative Knock-down of Cox5a in HEK293 cells roles in disease pathogenesis . D. Fornuskova, L. Stiburek, J. Zeman; Faculy of Medicine, Prague 2, Czech Republic. P05.170 Cox5a is one of 13 structural subunits of cytochrome c oxidase (COX), Overexpression of CERKL, a Retinitis Pigmentosa gene, the terminal enzyme of respiratory chain . We used RNA interference protects cells from apoptosis under oxidative stress conditions (RNAi) to down-regulate steady-state level of Cox5a subunit and ana- A. Garanto1,2, M. Tuson1,3, R. Gonzàlez-Duarte1,2, G. Marfany1,4; lyzed impact of its knock-down on COX assembly . 1Dept. de Genètica; Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER. We constructed seven derivatives of pCMV-GIN-ZEO plasmid coding Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 3Sloan-Kettering Institute, New for hairpins aimed at different positions of COX5A mRNA . A Cox5a pro- York, NY, United States, 4IBUB. Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. tein has a long half-life (a level of the protein is 48 hours post-nucleo- Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a highly heterogeneous genetic disease, fection unchanged using immunoblotting) . Therefore we introduced where more than 30 causative genes have been already reported . RP COX5A coding sequence into the maxFP-Red - N plasmid to encode is characterised by progressive retinal neurodegeneration due to pho- fusion protein . The marker plasmid was co-transfected with RNAi- toreceptor apoptosis. Our group identified a previously unannotated mediating plasmid derivatives (the higher the level of fusion protein gene, CERKL, as responsible for this disease in 3 different spanish the higher the leakage of individual hairpin-mediated RISC systems) . families . CERKL encodes a pressumptive lipid kinase that shares simi- A fluorescence of fusion protein was found rapidly lower compared larity to the human ceramide kinase . Ceramides are sphingolipids, a to maxFPRed marker thereby complicating a setting of FACS mea- group of membrane lipids that have been increasingly involved in the surements, but Western Blot of fusion protein with COX5A antibody regulation of relevant cellular and physiological processes, such as gave an acceptable result . To optimize the detection of RNAi-poten- cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis and inflammation. Therefore, we tial through fluorescence by FACS, we re-cloned COX5A coding se- hypothesised that CERKL would play a key role in controlling pho- quence into 3´UTR of maxFPRed marker. The final transcript contains toreceptor survival/death . Overexpression of the CERKL enzyme in target sequence for RNAi but leads to translation of merely maxFPRed transiently transfected cultured cells clearly protects cells from apop- marker . Fluorescence intensities were comparable with that obtained tosis under oxidative stress conditions . This protection starts as early at empty plasmid . as 4 hours, but becomes more prominent at 24 hours post-treatment, Based on the above-mentioned methods, we chose three candidate where apoptosis is reduced two-fold by CERKL expression . We are shRNAs and prepared stable cell lines, where depletion of Cox5a was now actively searching for its retinal substrate . Our in vitro and in vivo confirmed using SDS immunoblotting. Also specific activity of COX preliminary results do not support that ceramide/s are the direct sub- was revealed decreased . BN-PAGE showed diminished level of COX strate for this enzyme . Subcellular localisation of CERKL shows that holoenzyme and its assembly intermediates . it is associated to membranes, such as endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi Supported by GACR 305/08/H037 and GAUK 1/2006/R . and Trans-Golgi vesicles, although it can also be found in the nucleus in some cells, pointing to shifts in localisation depending on the cel- P05.173 lular state . Dissecting the function of CERKL will provide new clues the challenges encountered in diagnostic screening of the on the sphingolipid role on photoreceptors and unveil new targets for RYR1 gene therapeutical approaches . S. M. Lillis1, T. Lepre1, H. Zhou2, F. Muntoni2, H. Jungbluth1, S. Abbs1; 1Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Neuro- P05.171 muscular Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom. mutational analysis of RHO and RDs genes in patients with Mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) are autosomal dominant form of retinitis pigmentosa from Volga- implicated in a number of congenital myopathy phenotypes including Ural region of Russia central core disease, multi-minicore disease and centronuclear my- E. R. Grinberg1, L. U. Dzhemileva1, I. S. Zaidullin2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; opathy . 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Research We have developed a high throughput 384-well sequencing approach Institute of Eye Diseases, Ufa, Russian Federation. for screening the 106 exons of RYR1 . This method uses tagged prim- Purpose: To identify mutations in the RHO and RDS genes in patients ers and robotics to overcome the practical challenges faced by screen- with autosomal dominant form of retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) from Vol- ing such a large gene . To date we have tested over 44 patients and ga-Ural region of Russian Federation . Retinitis pigmentosa, the most here we report on the complexities which have arisen . common hereditary cause of blindness, comprises a clinically and ge- Certain RYR1 related disorders may exhibit both autosomal dominant netically heterogeneous group of retinal disorders . It affects about one and recessive modes of inheritance; it is not always certain whether we in 5 000 individuals worldwide are searching for one or two mutations. The identification of missense Methods: 37 patients with adRP confirmed by pedigrees were ex- changes of unknown pathological significance complicates this. amined clinically and with visual function tests . The 5 exons of RHO Our mutation screening is further complicated due to the marked phe- and 3 exons of RDS genes were analyzed for sequence changes by notypic variability: mutations in RYR1 can manifest in a wide range single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis (SSCP) and further of clinical phenotypes whilst similar phenotypes may result from mu- sequencing . tations in a number of different genes excluding RYR1 . Additionally Results: We detected known mutation Pro347Leu, novel mutation Arg- there are reports of RYR1 mutations that only exhibit symptoms on a 252Pro and two polymorphisms IVS1+10g>a, IVS3+4c>t in RHO gene . mono-allelic background .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  One particularly interesting case involves a patient with a clinical di- CAA ATXN3 constructs, despite adequate levels of protein expression, agnosis of autosomal recessive multi-minicore disease in whom we is not toxic; (3) -1 frameshifting occurs in Drosophila and is restricted to found three RYR1 mutations - two missense mutations previously re- the expanded CAG transgenic lines . ported as pathogenic and one previously unreported three base pair Conclusions: We propose that -1 ribosomal frameshifting is a major deletion . contributor to the toxicity observed in expanded CAG repeat diseases . In addition to causing congenital myopathy, mutations in certain re- This novel pathological mechanism may open new therapeutic oppor- gions of the RYR1 gene are also associated with malignant hyperther- tunities for these diseases . mia susceptibility (MHS) and it is important that the implications of this are clearly explained to other family members . P05.176 mutation analysis of the scN1A gene and genotype-phenotype P05.174 correlations in Bulgarian epilepsy patients Role of Attct repeat interruptions in spinocerebellar ataxia I. Yordanova1,2, L. Claes3, I. Ivanov4, A. Suls3, I. Litvinenko5, P. Dimova6, D. type 10 Hristova5, V. Bozinova6, I. Kremensky1,2, P. De Jonghe3, A. Jordanova2,3; I. Alonso1, T. Almeida1, L. B. Jardim2, O. Artigalas2, M. L. Saraiva-Pereira2, T. 1National Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Matsuura3, J. Sequeiros1,4, I. Silveira1; Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, 1UnIGENe - IBMC, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Hosp. Clinicas de Porto University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 4Department of Pediatrics, Medi- Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Center for Neurological Diseases and Cancer, cal University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 5Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan, 4ICBAS, Univ. Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Porto, Porto, Portugal. Epilepsy is a common neurological disease, affecting more than 1% Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA10) is a dominant neurologi- of people from any age, gender and ethnical origin . Mutations in the cal disease, caused by the expansion of an (ATTCT)n in intron 9 of alpha1-subunit (α1) of the neuronal voltage gated sodium channel ATXN10, of still unknown function. SCA10 was first described in Mexi- Na1 .1, are associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures v can families with ataxia and seizures . We have previously described plus (GEFS+) and severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (SMEI) . It is an expansion of the ATTCT repeat in two Brazilian families presenting encoded by 26 exons of the SCN1A gene on chromosome 2q24 . ataxia without seizures . We found reduced penetrance alleles of 360- We performed a mutation analysis of SCN1A in 28 patients with 370 repeats, in elderly asymptomatic subjects . GEFS+, 20 with SMEI and 62 with other types of infantile epilepsy . To investigate a previous hypothesis of interruptions in the (ATTCT)n Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes using tract, functioning as a disease modifier, we assessed the interruption a standard sodium chloride precipitation method . The SCN1A point in another family with ataxia and seizures, and more than 2000 ATTCT mutation screening included PCR analysis followed by direct sequenc- units . ing of all exons and exon-intron boundaries of the gene . In addition, all By a modified PCR technique, an abnormal discontinuous ladder, ex- patients were analyzed for exonic deletions and duplications by MAQ ceeding the range observed for normal alleles, was detected in this assay . Brazilian family, presenting progressive cerebellar ataxia with associ- We identified 11 disease-causing mutations, including 6 missense, ated seizures and onset during or after the 3rd decade . This suggested 2 nonsense, 1 splice-site mutation and 2 single base deletions . Two the presence of interruptions within the ATTCT expansion. Modified missense and all truncating mutations were found in SMEI patients, PCR products of patients showing an interrupted pattern were aga- consistent with the severity of the epilepsy phenotype . Four GEFS+ rose-gel purified and cloned with TOPO TA cloning kit for sequencing patients carried a missense mutation. All mutations we identified had analysis and determination of the interrupted motif . not been reported in the literature. This is the first large scale study of In this family, the ATTCT repeat seems to be interrupted by a large SCN1A gene analysis in Bulgarian epilepsy patients . stretch, unrelated to the repeat sequence, and patients show progres- In our sample, a mutation was identified in 23% of patients with GEFS+ sive cerebellar ataxia with associated seizures . In contrast, the previ- or SMEI, and none in the other epilepsy patients . This nicely illustrates ous SCA10 families identified by us, showed cerebellar ataxia without that GEFS+ and SMEI are part of a continuous spectrum of fever as- seizures, caused by the expansion of uninterrupted ATTCT tracts . This sociated epilepsy phenotypes caused by mutations in SCN1A . newly identified family reinforces the hypothesis that interruptions in the (ATTCT)n tract function as a disease modifier. P05.177 KPQ del in SCN5a gene in two different types of SCD in one P05.175 family Ribosomal frameshifting on expanded ATXN transcripts: a S. Saber1, K. Banihashemi1, M. Eftekharzadeh2, M. KhosroHeidari11, m. a. Drosophila model SadrAmeli3, A. F. Fazelifar3, M. Haghjoo3, m. Houshmand4, E. V. Zaklyazmins- C. Gaspar1, S. Stochmanski1, J. Laganière1, M. Therrien1, D. Rochefort1, D. kaya5; Van Meyel2, G. A. Rouleau1; 1Special medical center genetic lab ward , Russian Academy of Science DNA 1Centre of Excellence in Neuromics, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, lab, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran clinic arrhythmia center, Tehran, Canada, 2Centre for Research in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Heart center shahid Rajaee hospital electrophysiol- QC, Canada. ogy ward, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Special medical center genetic lab Background: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) is caused by the ward, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Russian Academy of Science DNA lab, expansion of a coding CAG repeat in the ATXN3 gene . We have pre- Moscow, Russian Federation. viously shown that the expanded CAG repeat in SCA3 is prone to -1 Cardiac action potentials are generated and propagated through the ribosomal frameshifting, leading to the production and aggregation of coordinated activity of multiple ion channels, including voltage-gated proteins containing polyalanine stretches . These frameshifted mol- sodium channels, calcium channels and potassium channels . Muta- ecules confer increased toxicity to cells when compared to constructs tions in genes encoding these channels cause familial arrhythmias . containing expanded CAA repeats, which code for polyglutamine in the Heart rhythm disturbances constituent some inherited syndromes any main frame but lack the ability to frameshift into an alanine frame . An- kind of genetic nature isomycin (a ribosome interacting antibiotic that reduces -1 frameshift- Many kinds of arrhythmia caused SCD (sudden cardiac death) and ing) decreases frameshifting in expanded CAG tracts and ameliorates the prevalence of SCD is 1: 1000 individuals . Some of SCDs were the cellular toxic phenotype . caused by Na channelopathy such as LQT3 and Brugada Syn these Aims: To model expCAG repeat -1 frameshifting in vivo; to assess the are two of main caused of sudden cardiac death in young people with contribution of -1 frameshifting to expCAG toxicity in the fly. out any detectable cardiac abnormality with routine tests and we know Methods: Full-length ATXN3 Drosophila transgenic lines carrying ei- that Brugada syndrome was caused by loss of function of Na channel ther wtCAG, expCAG or expCAA constructs containing epitope tags in and LQT3 was caused by gain of function Na channel in heart . . We the three possible reading frames were generated and comparatively can check SCN5a gene for ruling out of this gene as a main gene analysed . of Na channelopathy in heart arrhythmias . We check by SSCP and Results: We show that: (1) transgenic expression of expCAG ATXN3 Sequencing this gene . We checked SCN5A in a family with 11 affect- constructs is deleterious in the fly; (2) transgenic expression of exp- ed person that approved by ECG and EPS study and some personsMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  had Brugada Syn and some had LQT3 .we checked SCN5a and we P05.180 can fined KPQ del 1505-1507 in all pationts.As you know this del was mutations in SHOX do not appear to be involved in Léri-Weill caused only LQT3.so it was very interesting that we can find this del in dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and idiopathic short stature (iss) Brugada syndrome . So we are working in other hypothesis for solving M. Aza-Carmona1, D. Gorbenko del Blanco1, S. Benito-Sanz1, P. Lapunzina2,3, this situation J. Argente1,4, K. E. Heath1; 1Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, P05.178 Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Ma- seckel-syndrome like phenotype associated with a 550 kb drid, Madrid, Spain, 3CIBERER Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, microdeletion of the long arm of chromosome 5 characterized by 4CIBER (CB06/03) Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. array comparative genome hybridization (acGH) SHOX encodes a transcription factor involved in determining stature in P. M. Kroisel1, A. C. Obenauf1, B. Plecko2, K. Wagner1, M. R. Speicher1, T. humans . Mutations/deletions of SHOX and a downstream region result Schwarzbraun1; in Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), Langer mesomelic dysplasia 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Graz, and idiopathic short stature (ISS) . However, no molecular defect has Austria. been detected in a variable proportion of LWD/ISS cases . SHOX has Primordial dwarfism and Seckel-syndrome are rare genetically het- a human homolog, SHOX2, located on chromosome 3q25 .32, which erogeneous disorders . Several subtypes of these severe growth re- function is unknown . The Shox2-/- mouse presents a cleft palate phe- tardation syndromes have been described mainly based on clinical notype with shortened limbs, suggesting that SHOX2 may participate features, growth characteristics, presence or absence of particular in limb development . skeletal anomalies and further criteria . During the last years a remark- In order to investigate if SHOX2 is implicated in LWD/ISS, we have able progress in identification of genes involved was achieved. Seckel- analyzed 35 LWD/ISS families and 89 ISS individuals, without a known syndrome and primordial dwarfism can be genetically caused following molecular defect . SHOX2 mutation screening was performed by dH- an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance . Genes involved in cell PLC and DNA sequencing of the exons and intron/exon boundaries . division, cell cycle control pathways or related to DNA repair have re- Large deletions were analyzed in the familial cases using previously cently been identified and characterized to be responsible for some described (D3S3692) and novel microsatellites (D3S4638, D3S4639 forms of these disorders when a homozygous loss of function mutation and D3S4640) flanking SHOX2 . is present . Here we report on a 3 ½ year old male patient resembling Two variants were identified in exon 1 of SHOX2 in two familial cases: phenotype features of Seckel-syndrome associated with a 550 kb mi- a missense mutation E21K and a duplication of three glycines Gly77- crodeletion 5q33 detected by high resolution aCGH . The patient is the Gly78dup (c .232_233dupGAGGAGGTG) . We subsequently screened fifth child of young healthy non-consanguineous parents. Birth weight exon 1 in 50 healthy individuals . The E21K mutation was not observed was 800 g, length 37 cm . No precise information about gestational in controls but it did not cosegregate with the short stature phenotype . week at birth was available . Weight at 3 ½ years is 4 .450 g, length 62 .4 Insertions and deletions of the glycine repeat in SHOX have been de- cm and head circumference 39 .8 cm . He shows a beaked nose, low scribed in patients with LWD/ISS but the insertion in the glycine repeat set ears, micro- and retrognathia, transverse palmar creases, fifth fin- of SHOX2 appears to be polymorphic as we observed duplications of ger clinodactyly, general hirsutism and darker skin pigmentation than this region in three normal controls . relatives . Psychomotor development is good, however he is unable These results suggest that SHOX2 is not the molecular cause of the to speak because he has a tracheostoma since more than two years . LWD/ISS in the cases studied . Investigation of those less than 20 genes deleted and the molecular rearrangement could allow identifying a gene responsible for a variant P05.181 form of primordial dwarfism or Seckel syndrome. Pathways of sOD1 and tAU-induced motor neuron degeneration L. C. Kudo, L. Parfenova, J. Pomakian, H. V. Vinters, M. Wiedau-Pazos, S. P05.179 Karsten; Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) caused by R235Q David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States. homozygous mutation in adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenera- F. Mora, J. F. Rodríguez-Gutiérrez, M. Bernal, J. A. Brieva, A. Nieto, A. Sam- tive disease that selectively affects motor neurons . To identify early palo; molecular triggers of selective motor neuron degeneration, we ap- Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain. plied microarray technology to investigate gene expression profiles Inherited deficiency of ADA accounts for approximately 17% of SCID of motor neurons and glia isolated with laser capture microdissection and 50% of autosomal recessive SCID . from two distinct transgenic mouse models of ALS: SOD1-G93A and Patient: a two months old boy from Morocco with a suspection of SCID TAU-P301L . The analysis was performed prior to the development of (severe infections, diarrhea, failure to thrive, profound lymphopenia) . neurodegeneration reducing the number of false positives due to the Parents were consanguineous (first cousins). Erythrocyte ADA en- possible reactive changes in the course of the disease . The majority of zyme activity was assayed: ADA activity in patient was nearly indetect- identified genes are model specific, indicating that TAU and SOD1 in- able while in his parents it was about 50% of a control . In his healthy duced neurodegeneration have distinct molecular pathways and there- brother activity was normal . fore, may require specific treatments. Several genes were consistently Molecular diagnosis: nearly 70 different mutations have been de- altered in the motor neurons of both models . One of them, Dynein, scribed in ADA gene causing SCID; half of them are “private” . Most points to the early dysfunction of retrograde axonal transport . To inves- patients are heteroallelic and homozygosity is mostly restricted to con- tigate the relevance of microarray identified gene expression changes sanguineous families . for human sporadic disease, immunohistochemical experiments were Mutational analysis of ADA gene was performed . We designed prim- carried out using a specific ALS tissue microarray (TMA) consisting of ers for PCR amplification of the 12 exons comprising the gene. PCR ALS, FTD and control human postmortem CNS tissues . products were purified and sequenced with the amplification primers using BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing kit in an ABI 310 Genetic P05.182 Analyzer . Alu-related 5q35 microdeletions in sotos syndrome Results: The patient was homozyguos for R235Q (704G>A) missense N. Matsumoto1, J. Mochizuki1,2; mutation in exon 8 . Both parents were heterozygous for this mutation . 1Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of His healthy brother was also heterozygous, in spite of his normal ADA Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kita- activity. It is the first time that R235Q mutation is detected in homo- sato University School of Medicne, Sagamihara, Japan. zygosity in a SCID patient, and the first time this mutation is detected Haploinsufficiency of the NSD1 gene due to 5q35 microdeletions or outside of Japan . intragenic mutations causes Sotos syndrome (SoS) . In 46 of the 49 Patient was also homozygous for D8N (22G>A) polymorphism in exon Japanese deletion-cases, common deletion breakpoints were located 1; parents and brother were carriers . This polymorphism is not related at two flanking low copy repeats (LCRs), implying that non-allelic ho- to SCID but it causes decreased enzyme activity and can contribute to mologous recombination (NAHR) between LCRs is the major mecha- the low level of ADA activity in the patient . nism for the common deletion . In the remaining three cases of atypicalMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 deletions, the mechanism(s) of deletions remains unanswered . We 14q23-q24 and the identification of 6 different truncating mutations that characterized the atypical microdeletions using fluorescence in situ were found to segregate with the disease in 8 families with a phe- hybridization (FISH), quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR), and South- notype that included, variably, some of the clinical features of Kjellin ern blot hybridization . All the deletion breakpoints in the three cases syndrome . The SPG15 mRNA was widely distributed in human tissues were successfully determined at the nucleotide level . Two deletions and in rat embryos as well. In adult rodent brain, its expression profile are 1 .07 Mb (SoS19) and 1 .23 Mb (SoS109) in size, and another con- closely resembled that of SPG11, another gene responsible for com- sisted of two deletions with sizes of 28 kb and 0 .72 Mb, intervened by plicated HSP. The identification of the SPG15 gene is a starting point an intact 29-kb segment (SoS44) . All deletions were smaller than a for the elucidation of the mechanisms underlying axonal degeneration typical 1 .9-Mb common deletion . Alu elements were identified in both in this complicated form of HSP . deletion breakpoints in SoS19, one of deletion breakpoints in SoS109, and both deletion breakpoints of the proximal deletion in SoS44 . Alu- P05.185 mediated NAHR is strongly suggested at least in two of atypical de- mutation spectrum and phenotype description in a large series letions . Finally, qPCR is a very useful method to determine deletion of patients with autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia type 11 breakpoints even in repeat-related regions . (sPG11) H. Azzedine1,2, A. Durr3,4, P. Denora3,5, A. Boukhris3,4,6, M. Tazir7, I. Lerer8, J. P05.183 Vale9, A. Hamri10, C. Goizet3,11, M. Anheim12, C. Tallaksen13, M. Tada14, G. Garri- sotos syndrome. mutational study in 186 patients gues15, C. Verny1, V. Meiner8, S. Forlani3, D. Bonneau1, C. Tranchant12, A. Los- L. Fernández1,2, J. del Valle3,4, M. del Campo3,4, P. Arias1,2, L. Magano1,2, I. sos8, F. M. Santorelli16, P. Coutinho17, C. Mhiri6, A. Brice3,4, G. Stevanin3,4; Incera1,2, F. Santos1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, F. García1,2, J. Nevado1,2, M. Palomares1,2, 1Centre National de Référence pour les maladies Neurogénétiques, Angers, V. Romanelli1,2, A. Delicado1,2, M. Mori1,2, R. Gracia5, L. Pérez-Jurado3,4, P. La- France, 2INSERM / UMR_S679, Paris, France, 3INSERM / UPMC UMR_S679, punzina1,2; Paris, France, 4Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique - CHU Pitié- 1Servicio de Genética Médica y Molecular, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 6Hôpital Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 7Hôpital Mustapha, Algiers, Algeria, Raras (CIBERER). ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Unitat de Genètica, Hospital Vall 8Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 9Hospital De d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal, 10Hôpital Benbadis, Constantine, Algeria, 11Hôpi- Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 5Servicio de Endo- tal Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 12Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France, 13Ullevål crinología Infantil, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 14Niigata University, Niigata, Japan, 15CHU Introduction . Sotos syndrome (SS) is a rare genetic condition char- de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 16Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Roma, acterized by overgrowth, macrocephaly, large forehead, large hands Italy, 17Hospital S. Sebastiao, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal. and feet, accelerated bone age, typical gestalt, mental retardation of Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are neurodegenerative disorders variable degree and a slight predisposition to develop tumours . This mainly characterized by lower limb spasticity associated, in complicat- condition is due to an abnormality of the NSD1 gene caused by dele- ed forms, with additional neurological signs. Recently, we identified the tions or spontaneous mutations . SPG11, as the responsible gene for a complex autosomal recessive Material and methods . From November 2003 to November 2007, we (AR) HSP . We have analyzed 76 index ARHSP patients for mutations evaluated 215 patients with presumed diagnosis of SS, referred to the in the SPG11 gene . We found 22 mutations segregating in 13 (30%) Spanish Overgrowth Syndrome Registry . The patients were evaluated families and 7 (21%) isolated cases . Two mutations where recurrent in their local hospitals and referred by geneticists, paediatricians, neu- suggesting founder effects . Nineteen mutations were novel . The high- rologists and other health professionals . An initial study by microsatel- est frequency of patients with SPG11 mutations (41%) was found in lite genotyping, a MLPA specific for the NSD1 critical region and neigh- HSP patients presenting with a thin corpus callosum (TCC); however, bouring genes and analysis of the coding regions of NSD1 by dHPLC these mutations were rare in patients with mental impairment without and/or bi-directional direct sequencing were made in all of them . TCC (4.5%). Disease onset occurred during the first to the third de- Results . We completed all the studies in 186 out of the 215 patients cade mainly by problems with gait and/or mental retardation . Overall, referred . One hundred and twelve presented complete clinical data or the phenotype of the 38 examined SPG11 patients was severe . After a clear phenotype of SS, evaluated by 2 clinical geneticists trained in a mean disease duration of 14 .9 ± 6 .6 years (range: 2-35), 53% of pa- SS patients . We found 76 genetic alterations, 17 of them NSD1 dele- tients used a wheelchair or were bedridden . At the time of examination, tions and 59 point mutations; a detection rate of about 68% . Some of in addition to mental retardation, 80% of the patients showed cogni- these mutations are novel and others are recurrent . tive decline with executive dysfunction . The phenotype also frequently Comments . The detection rate of mutations in patients with clear clini- included lower motor neuron degeneration (81%) with wasting (53%) . cal-neurobehavioural phenotype of SS is nearly 70%. Our figures are Slight ocular cerebellar signs were also noted in patients with long similar to that reported in other series. The finding of several recurrent disease durations . In addition to TCC (95%), brain MRI revealed white mutations suggests that there are “hot spots” in NSD1, meaning com- matter alterations (69%) and cortical atrophy (81%), which worsened mon molecular mechanisms responsible for the disease . with disease duration . Our study reveals the high frequency of SPG11 mutations in patients with HSP associating TCC and cognitive impair- P05.184 ment and also extends the associated phenotype . Identification of the SPG (spastizin) gene, responsible for an autosomal recessive complicated spastic paraplegia P05.186 S. Hanein1, E. Martin1, A. Boukhris1,2, P. Byrne3, C. Goizet1, A. Hamri4, A. Beno- sPG4 mutations and phenotype of hereditary spastic paraplegia mar5, A. Lossos6, P. Denora1,7, M. Hutchinson3, F. M. Santorelli7, C. Mhiri2, A. in Estonia Brice1,8, G. Stevanin1,8; R. Tamm1,2, M. Braschinsky3, E. Raukas2,4, S. Lüüs3, K. Gross-Paju5, C. Boillot6, 1INSERM / UPMC Univ Paris 6, UMR_S679, Paris, France, 2Habib Bourguiba F. Canzian7, A. Metspalu4,8, S. Haldre3; Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 3University College, Dublin, Ireland, 4Benbadis Hospital, 1IMCB, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Genetics, United Constantine, Algeria, 5Specialities Hospital, Rabat, Morocco, 6Hadassah-He- Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 3Neurological department, brew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7IRCCS-Bambino Gesu Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia, Hospital, Rome, Italy, 8APHP, Dept Genetics Cytogenetics, Pitie-Salpetriere 5Neurological department, West Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 6In- Hospital, Paris, France. ternational Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 7German Cancer Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are genetically and phenotypi- Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 8University of Tartu, Tartu, cally heterogeneous disorders with various clinical profiles and modes Estonia. of transmissions . The SPG15 locus was first reported to account for a Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a clinically and genetically het- rare form of complicated autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia vari- erogeneous disorder, which is classified clinically into “pure” (pHSP) ably associated with mental impairment, pigmented maculopathy, dys- and “complex” (cHSP) forms . Great inter- and intrafamilial variations arthria, cerebellar signs, distal amyotrophy and thinning of the corpus are very typical . Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia callosum, sometimes designated Kjellin syndrome . Here, we report (AD-HSP) is the most common form due to the mutations in the spas- the refinement of the SPG15 locus to less than 3 Mb on chromosome tin gene (SPG4) . The aim of this study was to describe phenotypeMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  and to detect new sequence variants within SPG4 gene in 51 HSP frequency (1:35-50) as well as the severity of disease, and the lack of patients in Estonia . Fifty healthy individuals were used as controls . effective treatment may justify the implementation of such analysis in The majority of patients had pHSP and only five patients had cHSP DNA diagnostic laboratories . form of the disease . cHSP was the most frequent in sporadic cas- es . All 51 samples were screened with DHPLC and abnormal elution P05.189 profiles were sequenced. Nine changes (G609A, A810G, 1299-1g>c, molecular Genetics and Epidemiology in spanish 1310delA, 1370+215g>c, 1370+202delG, C1503A, 1477-1481del- spinocerebellar Ataxia GAGAA, 1966insA) in SPG4 gene were detected showing no gender H. San Nicolás1, J. Corral1, I. Banchs1, L. De Jorge1, O. Combarros2, J. Ber- predisposition . Seven were new and only found in 11 HSP patients, ciano2, C. Serrano3, M. Calopa4, A. Matilla5, D. Genís6, V. Volpini1; but two (one new - 1370+215g>c and other previously described - 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis of Hereditary Diseases (CDGM)- IDI- 1370+202delG) were detected both in patients and controls . Only two BELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Dep of Neurology. Hosp Univ Marqués mutations (1299-1g>c, C1503A) showed familial segregation, in which de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain, 3Dep of Neurology. Hosp Sant Joan de Deu, three and two family members were affected, respectively . Other mu- Martorell, Spain, 4Dep of Neurology. Hosp Univ De Bellvitge. IDIBELL, Hospi- tations were found in individuals from different families . In conclusion talet de Llobregat, Spain, 5Health Sciences Research Institute Germans Trias we associate above-mentioned seven new mutations with 11 AD-HSP i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 6Dep of Neurology. Hosp Univ Josep Trueta, Girona, cases, since new sequence variants were found only in patients com- Spain. pared to healthy controls . The rest of the patients must be checked for Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCA) are a clinically and other changes (larger INDELs) in SPG4 and other genes involved in genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders in this disease should be considered for further analysis . which several spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) genes have been cloned: SCAs1-3, SCAs6-7, SCA12 and SCA17; sharing a CAG repeat ex- P05.187 pansion mutations which generally encodes a polyglutamine tract . In in depth investigation of -1 frameshifting in expanded cAG SCA8 the mutation is an untranslated CTG repeat . We have analyzed repeat tracts using time-lapse live cell imaging 340 unrelated familial and 1,013 sporadic and idiopathic cases of SCA . S. J. Stochmanski1, C. Gaspar1, D. Rochefort1, J. Laganiere1, P. Hince1, G. Di Over the familial cases 6 .04% were SCA1; 26 .85% SCA2; 32 .89% Cristo2, G. A. Rouleau1; SCA3; 7 .38% SCA6; 6 .71% SCA7; 14 .77% SCA8; and 1 .34% SCA17 . 1Centre of Excellence in Neuromics, CHUM Research Centre, Montréal, QC, In 22 familial index cases with SCA8 expansions the allele range goes Canada, 2Centre de Recherche, Hôpital Ste-Justine, Montréal, QC, Canada. from 85 to 470 repeats (129 .36% ± 67 .55%; Pearson Coef . =52 .22%) . Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) results from an expansion of a Maternal transmissions presented elongations of the CTG combined polyglutamine-encoding CAG tract in the ATXN3 gene . We have previ- sequence ranging from +2 to +13 repeats (7 .50 ± 5 .5; Pearson Coef . ously demonstrated that this expanded CAG tract is subject to -1 ribo- = 73 .33%) . In contrast, paternal transmissions presented contrac- somal frameshifting into the alanine frame, which seems to confer an tions ranging from 1 to -17 repeats (-6 .83 ± 7 .51; Pearson Coef = - increased toxicity, and that the antibiotic anisomycin reduces both -1 109 .93%) . Several giant SCA8 expansions ranges from 401 to 1,126 frameshifting and cell toxicity . Currently, dual-tagged ATXN3 reporter (N= 9), carried by unaffected adult individuals and being originated constructs were created to express DsRED in the main (glutamine) from homozygous SCA8 females with alleles of moderate size . In con- frame and EGFP in the -1 (alanine) reading frame, and these reporter trast, the homozygous males have transmitted contracted alleles, as in constructs contained either 14 CAG repeats, 89 CAG repeats, or 92 heterozygous cases occurs . We have tested 90 individuals from gen- CAA repeats . Constructs were transfected into COS-1 cells as well as eral population and the distribution of SCA8 alleles could be classified mouse cortical organotypic slice culture preparations, and were moni- in two groups: 15 to 34 CTGs, with frequency 98% and 77 to 86 CTGs, tored for the production of red or green fluorescence signals using with frequency 2% . About 60% of familial ADCA cases remained ge- time-lapse live-cell two-wave fluorescent microscopy. Employing this netically unclassified. No SCA mutations were detected in the 1,013 technique, we have confirmed the occurrence of -1 frameshifting for isolated and idiopathic cases of spinocerebellar ataxia . the CAG89 construct, whereas the constructs bearing wild-type CAG or expanded CAA repeats did not show significant frameshifting. We P05.190 also determined that there is a marked time delay between the onset of Novel mutations found in ABcA4 in spanish families glutamine-containing protein expression and the production of frame- J. Aguirre-Lamban1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, D. Cantalapiedra1,2, M. Garcia- shifted species, as well as a correlation between frameshifitng and cell Hoyos1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, A. Avila-Fernandez1,2, J. Gallego-Merlo1,2, M. Lopez- death. These findings argue in favour of local glutamine codon starva- Martinez1,2, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, C. Ramos1,2, C. Ayuso1,2; tion, followed by a shift in the reading frame to resume translation of 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica the protein in the alanine frame and seem to confirm the implication of en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. -1 ribosomal frameshifting in the pathogenesis of SCA3 . Introduction: ABCA4 mutations have been associated with Stargardt disease (STGD) . A few cases with autosomic recessive cone-rod dys- P05.188 trophy (arCRD) and autosomic recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) Quantitative analysis of SMN gene based on real-time PcR have also been found to have ABCA4 mutations . Comparative genetic M. Šimášková1, H. Poláková2, L. Kádaši1,2; analyses of ABCA4 variation and diagnostics have been complicated 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular by substantial allelic heterogeneity . Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and genetics Subjects and Methods . 31 unrelated families, were previously studied Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia. with the ABCR400 genotyping microarray . In patients with either none Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder, or only one mutant allele were analysed by dHPLC, sequencing and caused by the homozygous absence of the survival motor neutron multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Haplotype gene (SMN1) in approximately 94% of patients . Since most carriers analysis was also performed . have only one SMN1 gene copy, several quantitative analyses have Results . 27 ABCA4 mutations were found in 31 Spanish patients with been used for the SMA carrier detection . We performed a SMN1quan- the ABCR400 microarray. We confirmed that the p.Arg1129Leu muta- titative real-time PCR analysis using an allele specific primer for the tion is the most frequent in Spanish patients. dHPLC allowed us to find carrier detection of SMA. We compared the sensitivity, specificity, eleven novel mutations and were not found in the 100 chromosomes . advantages and disadvantages recently described in the quantitative Using both tools, the mutation detection rate obtained was increment- method, using TaqMan probes and a newly developed PlexorTM tech- ed in a 24 .2% with respect to the use of the microarray alone . We nology, which had not previously been used for identifying heterozy- detected 1 .6 % of false positives and 1 .6 % of false negatives . In 17/31 gotes . Using a comparative threshold cycle (C) method and the DNA patients (54 .8%) in which the second or neither mutation was found by T fragment of human beta globine gene as a reference gene, the gene these methodologies, they were studied with MLPA; however no dele- copy number of SMN1 was quantified. The sensitivity and specific- tion or duplication was found in these samples . No mutation was found ity of the TaqMan and PlexorTM technologies were similar; moreover, in 4/31 patients (12 .9%) . the assay efficiency was almost ideal when using the PlexorTM tech- Conclusions . The ABCR400 microarray is a comprehensive screening nology . The incidence of SMA (1:6000-10000) and the notable carrier tool for genetic variation in patients with ABCR-associated retinal pa-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  thology . We consider that the combination of microarray, dHPLC and P05.193 MLPA is the optimal screening strategy for mutation analysis in this Gene expression signature of adrenaline biosynthesis and huge gene in Spanish patients . inflammatory pathways in women with left ventricular apical ballooning syndrome P05.191 N. Marziliano1, M. Grasso1, A. Repetto1, E. Porcu1, A. Pilotto1, M. Diegoli2, M. Genomic structural Variation in patients with multiple sclerosis Tagliani1, E. Disabella1, A. Eloisa1; E. Docampo1,2, R. Rabionet1,2, M. García1,2, J. E. Martínez3, E. Munteis3, J. 1Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, PAVIA, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Roquer3, L. Armengol1,2, X. Estivill1,2; PAVIA, Italy. 1Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Public Health and Epide- Marked elevation of plasma catecholamine levels has been reported in miology Network Biomedical Research Center (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain, transient left ventricular apical ballooning syndrome (LVABS) . 3Neurology Service, Hospital del Mar-IMAS, Barcelona, Spain. Using quantitative PCR (Q-PCR), we investigated the expression pro- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating dis- files of inflammatory and adrenergic pathways in the RNA isolated from ease that affects the central nervous system . Several studies provide peripheral leukocytes, and from lymphocyte and monocyte subsets of evidence that MS is a complex disorder involving genetic and environ- 16 female patients with LAVBS, and compared with 7 age-matched mental factors . Several different approaches have been undertaken to women with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and 17 presenting with elucidate the genetic causes of MS, including linkage and association chest pain and angiographically normal coronary arteries . Three of studies . These have consistently shown association to the major histo- the 351 genes belonging to the adrenaline biosynthesis pathway [DAT compatibility complex (MHC) region, specifically the DR15 haplotype. (Neurotransmitter transporter, dopamine), AT (Sodium-dependant Other MS genes have been more elusive, and only ILR7 has shown amino acid transporter) and NET (Norepinephrine transporter)] were up as a clear risk factor . The aim of this study was to evaluate a pos- over-expressed in LVABS than in AMI, whereas COMT (Catechol-O- sible contribution of genomic structural variation to MS susceptibility . methyltransferase) and PMNT (Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransfer- Forty relapsing-remitting MS samples were divided into two pools and ase) were under-expressed. Similarly 3 of the 343 genes of the inflam- comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) against a pool of 50 control matory pathway [IL1β (Interleukin 1β), TNFα (Tumor necrosis factor- samples was performed using Agilent 244K arrays . With the initial se- alpha), IL10 (Interleukin-10)] were overexpressed in AMI while TBX21 lection criteria (three consecutive probes with a log2 ratio above 0 .29), (T-cell-specific T-box transcription factor) in LVABS; although higher in only the chromosome 6 MHC region, spanning four to six probes (de- LVABS, MAD-homolog was underexpressed in both AMI and LVABS pending on the pool), showed differential hybridization between cases than in controls; CCR5 (Chemochine receptor 5) was underexpressd and controls . Relaxing the criteria to only two consecutive probes, in AMI than in LVABS and controls . In addition 3 of 178 genes of the five additional regions showed a difference in cases versus controls angiogenesis pathway [AT1R (Angiotensin receptor 1), AT2R (Angio- and were selected for follow-up by RTqPCR experiments . In addition, tensin receptor 2) and HIF2A (Endothelial-pas domain protein 1)] were based on the association shown by the MHC region, a SNPlex experi- overexpressed in the AMI than in LVABS and controls, while iNOS was ment with 48 SNPs from HLA class II region was designed, including more expressed in controls than LVABS and AMI . The lymphocytes did SNPs from potential CNV regions and SNPs not analyzed by other not express DAT, NET, AT, DOPA and COMT . platforms, and three of these SNPs were shown to be significantly as- Our gene expression results suggest an overactivity of adrenergic and sociated to MS . inflammatory pathways in LVABS and replicate the biochemical profile documented previously in LVABS . P05.192 Analysis of raw data from mLPA-based assays: development of P05.194 a new web-based software ,,emLPA“ Research Report: Analysis of the tcR transciptome by J. Camajova, M. Krhounek, M. Hancarova, J. Vejvalka, M. Macek, M. Macek tcLandscape: a tool for t cell immune response characterization Jr; and patient follow-up Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles Univ.-2nd Med. School C. Ruiz1, P. Miqueu1, L. Xu2, S. Jankowski2; and Univ. Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. 1TcLand Expression, Nantes, France, 2Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, MLPA allows detection of large deletions/duplications that would oth- United States. erwise remain undetected by standard PCR-based techniques . MLPA The understanding of T cells during the immune response follow-up is is based on relative quantification of PCR-multiplexed specific se- a crucial step in the development and improvement of immunotherapy quences, and for interpretation, computerized analysis of data is nec- treatments. TcLand has developed a new workflow and tool: the Tc- essary . Available commercial, proprietary or freely distributed software Landscape . This method provides a global and detailed analysis of packages differ in user friendliness, diagnostic utility, sensitivity and the T Cell Receptor (TCR) β-chain transcriptome. The TcLandscape specificity. Usually, these software applications also do not allow op- consists of a quantitative analysis of TCR β-chain mRNA expression timization of utilized algorithms by long-term “feedback learning” from by real-time PCR, followed by a qualitative diversity study and T cell stored data . selection based on the collection of the TCR Complementarity Deter- Our “eMLPA” software aims to provide a universal computational inter- mining Region 3 (CDR3) length distribution (CDR3-LD) with a capillary face for all MLPA-based assays . While other software packages use electrophoresis sequencer . An integrated analysis is then performed defined algorithms for data analysis, eMLPA allows selection of variant to assess the contribution of each Vβ chain length with the total T cell methods for e .g . probe normalization . As none of the individual steps repertoire . The result is displayed in a 4-dimensional visualization (peak discrimination, e .g .) is a trivial task, instead of rigid computations graph. Novel dedicated statistical analysis methods, including specific our approach suggests solutions to be verified, corrected or rejected signal treatment algorithms and multidimensional data reduction meth- in interaction with users . Data transformation via independent proce- ods, allow the identification of significant differences between the dif- dures allows for flexibility and comparison of results at various analyti- ferent groups of patients . cal steps . Data manipulation (management of users, probes, samples The ability to analyze whole T cell populations, as well as specific T and results) is implemented in a web-based system, with no other cells, such as CD4+/CD8+ or Treg cells, provides a powerful tool to requirements than a browser . To support the logistics of teamwork highlight sub-populations of interest in order to understand auto-im- properly, eMLPA allows users to create, manage and collaborate on mune diseases, transplantation, vaccination and other immune re- defined projects. eMLPA also offers long-term storage of anonymized sponses. In this presentation, we will outline the workflow to conduct intermediary data for evaluation of different numerical methods, for a TcLandscape study . data quality control or for assessment of variance of results of specific probes within a given MLPA mix . P05.195 Supported by VZFNM 000064203 and Medigrid 1ET202090537 . characterization of a spontaneous, recessive, missense mutation arising in the Tecta gene M. Moreno-Pelayo1,2, R. Goodyear3, A. Mencía1,2, S. Modamio-Høybjør1,2, K. Legan3, L. Olavarrieta Scappini1,2, F. Moreno1,2, G. Richardson3; 1Unidad de Genética Molecular-Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 2CentreMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3School are heterozygotes and 1,5% were homozygous . The Leiden mutation of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QG, United was found in 9% of patients and all were heterozygotes . In 4% of pa- Kingdom. tients the Leiden mutation was the only abnormality . It was present The TECTA gene encodes alpha-tectorin (TECTA), a major non-col- in combination with other mutations in 5% . In contrast, the factor V lagenous component of the tectorial membrane (TM) . In humans, Leiden mutation was found in only 1,3% of controls . The G20210A mutations in TECTA lead to either dominant (DFNA8/A12) or reces- mutation of the prothrombin gene was found in 4% of patients, and sive (DFNB21) forms of non-syndromic hearing loss . All missense all are heterozygotes . The mutatnt was the only abnormility in 2% of mutations in TECTA that have been reported thus far are associated patients and it was present in combination with other mutations in a with the dominant subtype, whereas those leading to recessive deaf- further 2% . In controls this mutation was not found . The combination ness are all inactivating mutations . Here we characterize a spontane- of two and even of three defects of thrombophilia were found in 18% ous missense mutation (c .1046C>A, p .A349D) arising in the mouse of patients whereas in the control group we found only isolated defects Tecta gene that is, unlike all previously reported missense mutations of thrombostasis . in TECTA, recessive . The morphological phenotype of the TectaA349D/ A349D mouse resembles, but is not identical to, that previously described P05.198 for the TectaΔENT/ΔENT mouse . As in the TectaΔENT/ΔENT mouse, the TM is screening for the c46t polymorphism in the F gene by completely detached from the surface of the organ of Corti and spiral melting point analysis with the Light cycler system: atypical limbus, lacks striated-sheet matrix, and is deficient in both beta-tec- results, detection of the variant G47A torin (Tectb) and otogelin. A significant amount of Tecta is, however, I. Tirado, I. Coll, E. Martínez-Sánchez, A. Santamaria, J. Soria, J. Fontcuberta; detected in the TM of the TectaA349D/A349D mouse and numerous, elec- Hospital Sant Pau Lab. Hematologia Unitat Hemostàsia i Trombosi, Barcelona, tron-dense matrix granules are seen interspersed amongst the disor- Spain. ganised collagen fibrils. Mutated TectaA349D is therefore incorporated The C46T in the F12 gene is a novel genetic risk factors for thrombo- into the TM but presumably unable to interact with either Tectb or embolic disease . Thus we designed a method, based on melting peak otogelin . The TectaA349D/A349D mouse therefore reveals that missense analysis using fluorescence hybridization probes (Real Time PCR- mutations in Tecta can be recessive and lead to TM detachment, and Lightcylcer, Roche), to genotype the C46T as a routine analysis . We suggest that should similar mutations arise in the human population, report the results of one case that showed atypical melting curves in they would likely cause deafness . the LightCycler analysis . The patient was a 53-year-old man with cerebral ischemia diagnosed P05.196 by computed tomography . A genetic analysis showed that he was het- molecular genetic analysis of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in erozygote for the prothrombin G20210A mutation and showed atypi- four Russian families cal melting curves when the C46T polymorphism was analyzed . The V. V. Zabnenkova, I. G. Sermyagina, A. V. Polyakov; family study revealed that his father, his sisters and one son were also Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. carriers of the G20210A and they showed the same atypical melting The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is a rare X-linked recessive immunode- curves for C46T . Subsequent sequencing revealed a G47A heterozy- ficiency disorder caused by mutations in the WASP gene . gous variant . This variant was not detected in 250 healthy controls WASP gene located at Xp11 .22-p11 .23, has 12 exons containing 1823 indicating that this variant is extremely rare . base pairs . Although the G47A variant is rare, its position adjacent to the C46T A search for WASP gene mutations was performed by direct DNA se- polymorphism imposes some diagnostic limitations in that C46T might quencing analysis of all exons and exon-intron junctions . be undetectable . In addition individuals with C46T exhibit low levels of Four different WASP gene mutations were found in the four unrelated FXII because this variant generates an alternative initial methionine families with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome . and as consequence a stop codon resulting in the synthesis of a pre- In the first case only biological material of an affected proband’s moth- mature protein . The presence of both, G47A and C46T in such close er was available for searching for mutations . The frameshift mutation positions prevents the generation of an alternative methionine and (p .Phe36fs44) was found in the exon 1 of WASP gene in heterozy- consequently cancels the effect of C46T . gosity . Also, the prenatal diagnosis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome was This study was supported by the Ministerio Sanidad y Consumo, Insti- carried out for this family . In the second case the missense mutation tuto de Salud Carlos III, RECAVA (03/01) and by PETRI (PET-2006- (p .Asp224Gly) was found in the exon 7 . Proband’s mother was hetero- 0361) . zygous for the mutation . In the third and fourth families the splice site mutations were found in the intron 8 of WASP gene - IVS 8 + 1nt G → P05.199 C and IVS 8 + 1nt G → A, respectively. Probands mothers were het- A transporter of the thyroid hormone t3 (mct8) is implicated in erozygous for found mutations . Also, in the last case proband’s brother X-linked dysmyelination (Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Like Disease / had the same mutation and maternal aunt and grandmother were non spastic Paraplegia type 2) carriers of this mutation . C. Vaurs-Barrière1,2, M. Deville3, C. Sarret1,2, G. Giraud1,2, V. Des Portes4, O. One novel mutation p .Asp224Gly was found in this molecular inves- Boespflug-Tanguy1,5, R. Touraine3; tigation, the others have been reported . We supposed the mutations 1GReD INSERM U931, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Université de Clermont, “hot spot” in intron 8 of WASP gene . UFR Médecine, Génétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3Service de génétique clinique chromosomique et moléculaire, CHU, St Etienne, France, P05.197 4Centre de référence des déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares, Service Hereditary forms of thrombophilia in patients with fetal loss in de neurologie pédiatrique, Lyon, France, 5Centre de référence des leucodystro- the Kazakh population phies, Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France. G. S. Svyatova, G. K. Rapilbekova; Among the numerous genes implicated in X-linked mental retardation, The Scientific Centre of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Ka- the one coding for the specific thyroid hormone T3 transporter, i.e. zakhstan. monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8, SLC16A2, MIM 300095), has The aim of this research is to detect hereditary forms of thrombophilia been initially implicated in boys presenting a severe delay of psycho- in patients with syndrome of loss of fetus in the Kazakh population . motor development and secondly in a syndromic mental retardation We investigated the genotype frequencies of the C677T mutation of affection characterized by a progressive spasticity, the Allan-Herndon- the MTHFR gene, the G20210A mutation of the prothrombin gene Dudley syndrome (MIM 300523) . In those clinical pictures, abnormal and the Factor V Leiden mutation in 100 Kazakh patients with a his- relative concentrations of thyroid hormones (total T4 decreased, TSH tory of fetal loss and 200 healthy female as controls . The hereditary borderline and total T3 increased) suggest the implication of this gene . thrombophilias were found in 53% of patients . The C677T mutation The identification of a MCT8 missense mutation in one of our patients was present in 41% of patients, 35% women were heterozygous and presenting a diffuse hypomyelination on MRI imaging until the age of 6% patients were homozygous . This mutation was found in isolation 3 years old has inclined us to test the implication of this gene in X- in 28% of patients, and in combination with other mutations in 13% . linked early dysmyelination suggestive of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Like The C677T mutation was found in 22% of controls, from them 21% disease or spastic paraplegia type 2 . MCT8 coding sequences haveMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  been analyzed by DHPLC in a cohort of 37 boys presenting a hypo- P05.202 myelination without mutation in the PLP1 gene . A MCT8 mutation has Analysis of the tsc1 and tsc2 genes in patients with tuberous been identified in 4 patients from 4 independent families. These results sclerosis from spain demonstrate the interest of MCT8 mutation screening in hypomyelin- C. Vidales, I. Zubillaga; ating leukodystrophies of unknown origin and suggest, at least in hu- Policlinica Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain. mans, a new role of MCT8 in oligodendrocyte maturation . Tuberous Sclerosis is a multisystemic disorder characterised by ham- arthomas frequently found in brain, skin and kidney . Convulsions, sei- P05.200 zures and mental retardation are also common features of the entity . TS Alopecia areata: Association with resistance to thyroid is caused by mutations in TSC1 (9q34) and TSC2 (16p13) genes . Both hormones are tumour suppressor genes and encode the hamartin (TSC1) and R. Bircan1, T. Güran2, T. Akcay2, S. Turan2, A. Bereket2; tuberin (TSC2) proteins. We report here our findings after the TSC1/ 1Namik Kemal University, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Department of Mo- TSC2 genetic study of patients coming from several hospital span- lecular Biology and Genetics, Tekirdag, Turkey, 2Marmara University, School of ish services . Mutational analysis were performed by DNA sequencing . Medicine, Dept. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey. Our results are discussed in basis of the relation between clinical data Context : Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) syndrome is a rare of patients and the gene mutation variant associated . We have familial genetic disorder, generally characterized by the absence of the usual and sporadic cases and in both we also try to establish the number of symptoms and metabolic consequences of thyroid hormone excess . minimum criteria for candidate selection to genetic testing . Mostly it is caused by thyroid hormone β receptor mutations. Up to date 124 mutations in the TRβ gene identified in 500 different families. P05.203 Besides, alopecia areata (AA) is an autoimmune disease of the hair What about UmOD gene involvement in renal development? A follicle, frequently associated with other autoimmune disorders, one novel UmOD mutation associated with immature renal structures of the most common of which are thyroid diseases like hashimoto thy- E. Benetti1, G. Caridi2, M. Della Vella3, L. Rampoldi4, A. Zucchini5, G. Ghiggeri2, roiditis and Graves’ disease . L. Artifoni3, L. Murer1,6; Objective: we described a family having RTH syndrome, caused by a 1Pediatric Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of Pe- novel TRβ mutation, coexisted with diffuse, patchy alopecia without diatrics, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2Laboratory of Pathophysiology of autoimmune thyroid disease in affected members Uremia, Istituto Gaslini, Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 3Laboratory of Nephrology, De- Design: For the precise diagnosis of RTH, genetic testing was car- partment of Pediatrics, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 4DIBIT San Raffaele, ried out on the index patient, two siblings, his mother and father . Ge- Milan, Milan, Italy, 5Pediatric Unit, Hospital of Faenza, Faenza, Italy, 6Laboratory nomic DNAs were extracted from peripheral blood samples by using of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Padua, Padua, standard protocols. Exon 7-10 of the thyroid receptor beta (TRβ) were Italy. amplified by PCR and possible candidate mutations screened by using Mutations of the UMOD gene, encoding uromodulin, have been as- direct DNA sequencing . sociated to medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD), familial juvenile Main Outcome: A novel TRβ mutation (I353V) was found in a 9 1/3 hyperuricemic nephropathy (FJHN) and glomerulocystic kidney dis- years old boy having both RTH syndrome and alopecia areata . This ease (GCKD) . mutation was also detected in his father and elder brother who were We report on an 13-year-old boy, presenting with moderate chronic affected by RTH and also have alopecia areata . It could be Speculated renal failure, a family history (father) of an undefined renal-transplan- that alopecia areata might be a novel sign of RTH either coexisted with tation-requiring nephropathy and a personal history of hyperuricemia the other distinctive clinical and phenothypical characteristics of the and urine concentrating ability impairment preceding the onset of renal syndrome . failure . Renal ultrasonography demonstrated slightly reduced bilateral kidney volumes and cortical hyper-echogenicity, with two tiny cysts in P05.201 the left kidney . Renal biopsy showed up to 60% of glomeruli featuring Functional characterisation of single nucleotide polymorphisms an enlargement of Bowman’s space (glomerular cysts), with mild inter- in the coding region of the human tryptophan hydroxylase gene stitial fibrosis (αSMA-positive), inflammatory infiltrate and focal tubular TPH atrophy at the cortical level . At the cortico-medullary junction, imma- K. Bokelmann, M. V. Tzvetkov, M. Sedej, J. Brockmöller; ture tubules (some dilated), with PAX2-positive immunostaining, sur- University Medicine, Göttingen, Germany. rounded by a vimentin-positive mesenchymal tissue . Unlike previously The tryptophan hydroxylase isoenzyme 2 (TPH2) catalyzes the rate- reported cases, no uromodulin positive globular aggregates within the limiting step of serotonin synthesis in the human brain . Reduced sero- cytoplasm of tubular cells were observed . tonin synthesis may be linked with neuropsychiatric disorders like ma- Genetic analysis revealed a novel heterozygous mutation of UMOD jor depression or bipolar disorder or with the success or failure in ther- gene (c.149 G>C;p.Cys50Ser), involving the first EGF-like domain of apy of these diseases . Several genetic variants in the coding region of the protein, both in the boy and his father . the TPH2 gene have been reported but, thus far, only few of them have This novel UMOD mutation, associated with an immunohistochemi- been functionally characterized . Here we present functional analysis of cal pattern different from the previous reports and a histological pic- the THP2 variants L36Q, P206S, P312P, A328V and D479E . ture characterized by immature renal structures, opens up new issues The enzyme variants were heterologously expressed in PC12 and about UMOD possible role in renal development . HEK293 cells . Enzyme activity of the protein variants was assessed as amount of intracellular serotonin or 5-hydroxy-tryptophan measured by P05.204 HPLC . The expression rates were controlled by qRT-PCR and West- PDZK7 does not participate in the usher protein network ern blot . E. Aller1,2, E. van Wijk3, T. Jaijo1,2, C. Nájera4, F. Palau5,2, J. M. Millán1,2, H. The 328V variant showed significantly decreased activity both in PC- Kremer3; 12 (only 28% of the wild type activity, P<0 .002 Mann-Whitney U test) 1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 22. Center for Biomedical Re- and HEK293 cells (16%, P<0 .05) . The P206S substitution led to de- search on Rare Diseases (CIBERER). ISCIII, Valencia, Spain, 3Department of crease of the TPH2 activity in HEK293 cells (32%, p<0 .05), but not in Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, PC-12 cells . The L36Q and D479E substitutions showed no effect on The Netherlands, 4Departamento de Genética, Universidad de Valencia, Valen- the enzyme activity in both cells tested . The common silent variant cia, Spain, 5Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC, Valencia, Spain. P312P did not effect enzyme expression or activity . Furthermore, no Introduction: Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive ge- effect of the P312P variant on the TPH2 splicing could be shown in an netic disease defined by the association of sensorineural hearing loss exon-trapping assay . and visual impairment due to retinitis pimentosa (RP), with or without In conclusion, the A328V substitution leads to significant reduction of vestibular affectation . USH is clinically and genetically heterogeneous . the TPH2 activity in vitro . The role of this variant in the susceptibility or Nine genes have been identified which codify for proteins that are in- in the therapy of serotonin-related neuropsychiatric disorders reminds tegrated in a protein network known as Usher interactome . The central to be elucidated . core of the interactome is formed by the PDZ domain containing homo- logues harmonin and whirlin with the rest of USH proteins assemblingMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  to this core . Additional interacting proteins assembling to the USH pro- P05.207 tein network are candidates to be responsible for Usher syndrome, the study of the WFs1 gene is useful in non syndromic hearing non-syndromic hearing loss or retinal dystrophies . loss, with ascending or U-shape audiometric curve Hypothesis: The protein product predicted for PDZK7 (NM_024895) L. Jonard1, D. Feldmann1, S. Marlin1, C. Koval1, M. Louha1, K. Olszewski1, R. shows high homology to both harmonin and whirlin and could have a Couderc1, H. Dollfus2, V. Drouin-Garraud3, D. Lacombe4, F. Fellmann5, C. Fran- similar function . Thus, it is a candidate member for the Usher interac- cannet6, G. Lina-Granade7, C. Petit8, F. Denoyelle1; tome . 1AP-HP, Paris cedex 12, France, 2Génétique médicale, Strasbourg, France, Objective: The aim of the present work was to determine the exis- 3Génétique clinique, Rouen, France, 4Génétique médicale, Bordeaux, France, tence of interactions between PDZK7 and the proteins of the Usher 5Génétique médicale, Besançon, France, 6Génétique clinique, Clermont-Fer- interactome: usherin, NBC3, VLGR1, cadherin 23, protocadherin 15 rand, France, 7ORL Hôpital E.Herriot, Lyon, France, 8INSERM U587, Paris, and SANS . France. Methods: Interactions were tested by yeast two hybrid (Y2H) assays Introduction: Wolfram syndrome or DIDMOAD is characterized by the and by co-expression and co- localization in cos-1 cells studies . association of diabetes, optic atrophy and hearing impairment . This Results: No interaction was found between PDZK7 and USH pro- autosomal recessive syndrome is due to WFS1 gene mutations . Some teins . dominant mutations of the same WFS1 gene have been associated Conclusions: The absence of interactions between PDZK7 and USH with nonsyndromic deafness, preferentially affecting low frequencies proteins indicates that it is not part of the USH interactome . (DFNA6/14/38) . Unlike the Wolfram’s mutations, the dominant muta- tions are essentially located in the exon 8 of the WFS1 gene . P05.205 Methods: We have analysed exon 8 of the WFS1 gene in a cohort of Assessment of hearing loss in French patients diagnosed with 64 unrelated individuals affected by nonsyndromic hearing loss (HL) . pathogeneous genotypes in usherin 23 individuals presented with an ascending audiometric curve and 41 C. Abadie1, L. Larrieu1, D. Baux1, C. Blanchet2, S. Gerber3, J. Kaplan3, M. presented with a U-shape curve . Claustres1,4, A. Roux1; Results: In four different families, we identified a heterozygous muta- 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Inserm U827, Montpellier cedex 5, tion: c .923C>G (p .Ser308Cys), c .1079G>A (p .Cys360Tyr), c .2141A>G France, 2Centre de référence des affections génétiques sensorielles, Montpel- (p .Asn714Ser) and c .2421C>A (p .Ser807Arg) . These new WFS1 vari- lier cedex 5, France, 3Inserm U393, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, ations segregate perfectly with the HL, are missense mutations affect- France, 4Université Montpellier I, Montpellier, France. ing highly conserved residues, and are absent from 100 control DNA Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by samples . hearing impairment, retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and variable vestibular These 4 French families are affected with isolated autosomal dominant dysfunction . Usher syndrome presents both genetic and clinical het- HL . In a same family, a mutation can cause an HL characterised by erogeneity, and is divided into 3 subtypes caused by at least 9 genes . an ascending curve or a U-shape curve, and evolution between these Usher syndrome type II (USH2) is the most frequent clinical group . two shapes has been observed . The exhaustive audiological and Affected patients show moderate to severe hearing loss (HL) and vari- clinical examination of the 17 affected patients allowed us to precise able evolution of RP . Typical USH2 audiograms have a gently down- DFNA6/14/38 phenotype . sloping configuration from moderate in the low frequencies to severe Conclusion: The molecular screening of WFS1 gene is useful for pa- or profound in the high frequencies . High variability is recognised and tients presenting with sporadic or familial non syndromic hearing loss, clinical diagnosis of USH2 can be missed suggesting that USH2 is with an ascending or U-shape audiometric curve . Moreover, our study likely to be more frequent than estimated . USH2A is the overwhelm- leads to clarify the spectrum of WFS1 mutations and the related phe- ingly involved gene in USH2 and encodes two isoforms of the protein notype in non syndromic hearing impairment DFNA6/14/38 . called usherin (a short isoform of 1546 residues and a long isoform of 5202 residues) . P05.208 Audiograms were collected in a french cohort of 30 patients presenting DNA repair efficacy determines the severity of XPB associated with pathogenic genotypes in usherin . ISO 7029 norm-based calcula- progeroid cockayne syndrome tion was used to abolish age-related and gender bias . For a third of J. Andressoo1,2, G. Weeda3, J. de Wit3, J. R. Mitchell3, R. B. Beems4, H. van these patients, audiograms could be collected over several decades Steeg4, J. H. Hoeijmakers3, G. T. J. van der Horst3; in order to assess the progression of HL . Preliminary results tend to 1Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki, Finland, 2Former address: Erasmus Medi- show a homogeneous range of hearing deficiency, either considering cal Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Neth- the affected isoform, or the type of mutations (truncating, missense erlands, 4National Institute of Public Health and Environment, Bilthoven, The or splice variants). However, some audiograms did not fit within the Netherlands. defined range; some of them could be explained by the presence, on Mutations in the basal transcription and nucleotide excision repair one allele, of the controversial p .Cys759Phe variant . (NER) helicase XPB associate with a mild form of the combined cancer and premature aging syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum / Cockayne P05.206 syndrome (XPCS) . Due to the dual role of XPB and absence of animal New mutations in VWF Gene, from mexican patients with „Von models, the underlying molecular mechanisms of XPB-XPCS have Willebrand Disease“ remained obscure. Here, with the first Xpb mouse models we demon- R. Peñaloza, H. Benitez, V. Rojas, M. Espinosa, A. Cervantes, M. Flores, D. strate that severe alterations in Xpb are lethal, providing explanation to Arenas, F. Salamanca; the relative scarcity of XPB associated disease . Furthermore, we show IMSS, Mexico City, Mexico. that knock-in mice with an XPCS-patient-derived XPB mutation mimic We analyzed exon 28 of VWF gene from 20 Mexican Mestizo index the UV-sensitivity typical for XP, but fail to show CS features and age cases with von Willebrand disease, using DNA amplification by poly- normally . However, further ablation of DNA repair capacity by cross- merase chain reaction and direct sequenciation using Big Dye (Ap- ings the Xpb mutant mice to other NER mutants causes appearance plied Biosystem, USA) . They have high frequency of blood group type of CS-like features such as premature aging and increase in cellular O (80%), and normal or low aPPT, VWF:Ag, VWF:RCo, and FVIII:C . sensitivity to chronic oxidative stress, demonstrating the causative We found two novel mutations: (insT3706) and (delG4911) in patients role of DNA repair defect in the onset of XPB-associated accelerated with VWD type 1 . Both produce an early stop with a short putative aging . The Xpb/Xpa double mutants display a novel NER phenotype, protein. The first one corresponding to a woman with menorrhagia, with intermediate severity of ageing symptoms and remarkable inter- and the second one to a male with mucocutaneous bleeding to require animal variance . This large variance provides experimental evidence hospitalization . Moreover, we found other polymorphisms previously to the hypothesis that stochastic DNA damage accumulation is an im- informed . This is the second part of molecular study of VWF gene portant determinant of clinical variance in NER syndromes . Based on where we informed other three new mutations, previously . our results, we suggest a model of NER phenotypes in which the inter- individual variation first increases and then decreases as a function of the degree of DNA repair deficiency.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P05.209 Hierarchical analysis of 28 Y-chromosome sNP’s in the A novel frame-shift mutation of the EDA gene in a spanish family population of the Republic of macedonia with X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia P. Noveski, S. Trivodalieva, G. D. Efremov, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska; M. Núñez Lozano1, S. Ciria Abad1, J. Cañueto Álvarez2, M. I. Zafra Cobo2, M. Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic Morán Estefanía2, A. Santos-Briz Terrón2, P. Unamuno Pérez2, R. González Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Sarmiento1; Macedonia. 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de Analysis of Y-chromosome haplogroups, defined by single nucleotide Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Departamento de Dermatología, Hospital polymorphisms (SNP’s), has become a standard approach for studying Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. the origin of human populations and measuring the variability among X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED) is character- them . Furthermore, Y-SNP’s represent a new forensic tool, because ized by defects in the development of ectodermal structures as sweat their population specificity may allow to determine the origin of any glands, hair and teeth . Mutations in EDA gene, which codes for ecto- male sample of interest for forensic purposes . The aim of this study pasin-A, cause alterations in the protein and seems to be responsible was to develop a strategy for rapid, simple and inexpensive Y-chromo- for this disorder . In the present study, we analyse, by PCR, heterodu- some SNP’s typing in the population of R . Macedonia . We have stud- plex analysis and automatic sequencing, the full coding region and the ied a total of 343 DNA male samples; 211 Macedonians, 111 Albanians exon-intron boundaries of the EDA gene in DNA from peripheral blood and 21 of other ethnic origin (Roma, Serbs and Turks) . Methodology of one Spanish family with XLHED . included multiplex PCR and single nucleotide extension reaction by We found an alteration in the EDA gene in two members of the studied SNaPshot multiplex kit . The set of 28 markers has been grouped in family . This alteration consists in a duplication of 2bp (c .974-975ins- 5 multiplexes in order to determine the most frequent haplogroups GA) in the 5 exon that produces a change in the DNA sequence of col- using only 1 or 2 multiplexes . Twenty different Y haplogroups were lagen like domain rich in Gly-X-Y motifs . This domain is important for determined among 343 male DNA samples. The finding that five hap- multimerization of the protein . Furthermore this duplication produces a logroups (E3b1, I1b1, J2b1a, R1a and R1b) comprise more than 70% truncation of the last exon that codes for a part of a TNF-like domain, of the Y chromosomes is consistent with the typical European Y chro- which can affect the NF-κB and c-Jun kinase pathway. mosome gene pool . The distribution of the Y-haplogroups differs be- The two affected members of the family show remarkable phenotypic tween Macedonians and Albanians . The most common Y haplogroup characteristics on skin, teeth, eyebrows, lips and head hear, but ag- among Macedonians is I1b1 (27 .5%), followed by three haplogroups gravated in one of them . This phenomenon is explained by inheriting present with similar frequencies E3b1 (15 .6%), R1a (14 .2%) and R1b of the mutation and epigenetics mechanisms of anticipation of the dis- (11 .4%) . Among Albanians the most frequent Y haplogroup is E3b1 ease across generations . (28 .8%), followed by R1b (18 .0%), J2b1a (13 .5%) and R1a (12 .6%) . This results show a novel mutation in the EDA gene in a Spanish family with XLHED syndrome which introduces a new reading frameshift and P05.212 a premature stop codon . This extends our knowledge of pathogenic Elucidating the molecular function of ZFYVE27 (Protrudin) mutations in EDA gene . K. Pantakani D.V., T. Khromov, J. Wolter, G. Tomasik, H. Hühn, A. U. Mannan; Instiute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. P05.210 ZFYVE27 is a member of the FYVE-finger family of proteins. The X-linked juvenile Retinoschisis (XLRs) in spanish patients: FYVE-finger domain is suggested to be responsible for endosomal lo- common ancestries, hot spots and incomplete penetrance calization of these proteins and the majority of the FYVE-finger proteins R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, M. Garcia-Hoyos1,2, D. Diego-Alva- serve as regulators of endocytic membrane trafficking. ZFYVE27 was rez1,2, D. Cantalapiedra1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, J. Aguirre-Lamban1,2, A. Avila-Fernan- identified as a spastin interacting protein and previously, we character- dez1,2, A. Gimenez1,2, C. Ramos1,2, C. Ayuso1,2; ized its interaction with spastin in mammalian cells . More importantly, 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica we identified a German family in which mutation in ZFYVE27 causes en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. autosomal dominant form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) . A Purpose: X-linked juvenile Retinoschisis (XLRS) is one of the most comprehensive expression analysis of ZFYVE27 in mouse revealed common causes of juvenile macular degeneration in males, charac- a high level of expression primarily in the HSP affected tissues such terised by mycrocystic changes, splitting within the inner retinal layer as brain, cerebellum and spinal cord . Immunohistochemical analysis (“schisis”) and presence of vitreous veils . The aim was to describe the of tissue sections from various subdivisions of brain and spinal cord genotype-phenotype correlation in Spanish XLRS families with muta- showed expression in both cell soma and axons of the motor-neu- tions in the RS1 gene . rons . To elucidate the molecular function of ZFYVE27 in vivo, we are Methods: The study was performed in 31 Spanish XLRS families, generating a loss of function mouse model by knockout strategy .Con- comprising 46 affected males and two symptomatic women . Molecular ceivably the phenotype of these mouse models might mimic the patho- analyses included direct sequencing, haplotype construction and de- logical features of HSP, therefore will provide us with a valuable model termination of the X inactivation pattern . system to study the underlying cause for HSP etiology . Results: 18 different RS1 mutations were identified; eight of them were novel ones . These new changes included missense (p .Gln154Arg, P05.213 p .Leu137Pro, p .Glu215Val, p .Arg197Ser, p .Pro192Leu, p .His207Asp), Pitfalls of mapping a large turkish consanguineous family with nonsense (p .Gln80Ter) and frameshift substitutions (p .Thr138fsX) . 2 vertical monilethrix inheritance out of 31 “de novo” mutational events were detected . The most com- F. Celep1, A. Uzumcu2, F. M. Sonmez3, O. Uyguner2, Y. Isik Balci4, S. Bahadir5, mon mutation (p .Gln154Arg; 6/18) presented a common haplotype . A. Karaguzel1; The symptomatic women showed a normal X inactivation pattern . In- 1Karadeniz Technical University, Faculty of Medicine, Department Medical Biol- terestingly, a healthy male presenting the p .Arg209His mutation was ogy and Genetics, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Fac- identified. ulty, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Karadeniz Technical Conclusions: A prevalent mutation in Spanish XLRS patients University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics Neurology, Trabzon, (p.Gln154Arg) has been first reported in this work and presented a Turkey, 4Pamukkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics common origin . The frequency of “de novo” mutations was 6%, which Haematology, Denizli, Turkey, 5Karadeniz Technical University, Faculty of Medi- mainly rise in CG dinucleotides (hot spots) . Further analyses showed cine, Department of Dermatology, Trabzon, Turkey. that the retinal affectation in both women could be due to mutations in Monilethrix, a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by hair another gene . Nevertheless, the possibility of incomplete penetrance fragility and follicular hyperkeratosis, is caused by mutations in three for RS1 variants or a gain-of-function alteration in a different interact- type II hair cortex keratins . The human keratin family comprises 54 ing gene might be suspected . Despite the mutation spectrum is large members, 28 type I and 26 type II . The phenotype shows variable and the phenotype variable, there was no correlation between muta- penetrance and results in hair fragility and patchy dystrophic alope- tion type and severity of disease . cia . In our study, Monilethrix was diagnosed on the basis of clinical characteristics and microscopic examination in a family with 11 af- P05.211 fected members . Haplotype analysis was performed by three SimpleMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  Tandem Repeat markers (STR) and KRT86 gene was sequenced for pression of developmentally significant genes including genes impli- the identification of the disease causing mutation. In the results of this, cated in birth defects and inherited metabolic disorders . autosomal dominant mutation (E402K) in exon 7 of KRT86 gene was The HDBR has ethical approval for the collection, storage and distri- identified as a cause of Moniltherix in the large family from Turkey. bution of material between 4 and 12 weeks of development . Ethics Committee approval and a laboratory Risk Assessment is required be- P05.214 fore material can be supplied . The HDBR can provide fresh, frozen or PEX7 gene mutation in infant with Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia sectioned material . In addition the HDBR administers the Fetal Tissue Punctata type 1 Bank (FTB) collection, previously at the Hammersmith Hospital . The M. G. Ogur1, C. Has2, A. Yıldıran1, P. Baysal1, H. R. Waterham2; FTB collection is composed of material between 8 and 19 weeks of 1Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Samsun, Turkey, 2Academic Medi- gestation and is either frozen or cryopreserved for the generation of cal Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. cell lines. A significant proportion of the HDBR material is karyotyped Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is an autosomal reces- and normal karyotyped material is provided for research but karyotypi- sive peroxisomal disorder. Clinically patients present dwarfism due to cally abnormal material can be provided on request . symmetrical shortening of proximal long bones, ataracts, periarticular In addition the HDBR offers an in-house gene expression service for calcifications, multiple joint contractures, and psychomotor retardation. the analysis of RNA or protein using in situ hybridisation or immuno- So far three subgroups have been defined due to different genes in- histochemistry respectively . The HDBR provides electronic images for volved . The most common of these is RCDP Type 1 which is caused publication and advice on interpretation of results . Data is deposited, by mutations in PEX7 gene . in a public database . Here we report a 4 year 6/12 month-old male infant diagnosed as RCDP Data from recent HDBR studies will be presented . due to distinct clinical manifestations: short stature, rhizomelic shorten- ing of proximal long bones, multiple joint contractures, and psycomo- P05.217 tor retardation. There was notable frontal bossing, depressed profile, Renal damage triggers cyst formation in an inducible Pkd- a flat nasal bridge, dysplastic external ears, and small nares. Roent- deletion model genological studies included abnormalities such as severe shortening H. Happé1, A.M. van der Wal 2, I.S. Lantinga-van-Leeuwen1, W.N. Leonhard1, of the femur and humerus, irregular and broad metaphyses, calcific M.H. Breuning1, E. de Heer2 and D.J.M. Peters1; stippling of the epiphyses (humerus) . Bilateral cataract was diagnosed 1Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2Pathology, Leiden Uni- later . Plasma phytanic acid levels were elevated . Mutation analysis for versity Medical Center PEX7 gene revealed a homozygous mutation for 370_396del127bp (del G124_S132) . The parents were consanguineous and the family history yielded Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) is caused another similarly affected and deceased female child . After mutation by a mutation in the PKD1 or PKD2 gene . This disease is character- analysis family was informed and data given for possibilities of a pre- ized by large fluid-filled kidney cysts and a progressive deterioration of natal diagnosis in any subsequent pregnancy . renal function eventually leading to renal replacement therapy . We generated a tamoxifen-inducible, kidney epithelium-specific Pkd1- P05.215 deletion mouse model . Deletion of the Pkd1 gene in adult mice result- Identification of a novel mutation in DKC1 in Russian family with ed in a mild cystic phenotype . However, in newborn mice, this results Dyskeratosis congenita in massive cyst formation . In young mice, tubular cell proliferation still M. Kurnikova1, I. Shagina1, M. Maschan2, A. Maschan2, L. Khachatryan2, D. takes place to elongate the nephron, in contrast to the adult kidney . Shagin1,3; Therefore, we hypothesized that renal injury followed by a tissue repair 1Evrogen Joint Stock Company, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Re- response, including epithelial cell proliferation, accelerates cyst forma- search Clinical Center for pediatric hematology, oncology and immunology, tion in adult Pkd1-deletion mice . Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioor- Inducible Pkd1-deletion mice were treated with the nephrotoxicant ganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation. DCVC upon Pkd1-gene inactivation . 10-14 weeks after DCVC treat- Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is a rare congenital syndrome charac- ment, renal function rapidly declined in DCVC treated Pkd1-deletion terized by the triad of reticular skin pigmentation, nail dystrophy and mice, as determined by blood urea concentration . Kidney-to-body mucosal leukoplakia, and the predisposition to bone marrow failure weight ratios were increased in DCVC treated animals compared to and malignancies . Mutations in DKC1 gene encoding dyskerin are re- controls . Histopathological analysis revealed numerous cysts mainly sponsible for the X-linked DC . We found novel mutation in DKC1 in of proximal tubular origin . Cyst formation was absent in DCVC treated Russian family with X-linked DC . The proband was a 10-y-old boy with Pkd1+/- mice while non-treated Pkd1-deletion mice only showed few fo- skin lesions, nail dystrophy, oral mucosa erosions, epiphora and blood cal cysts . Renal proliferation indexes were determined by Ki-67 stain- marrow failure, and his 8-y-old brother had identical signs of ectoder- ing at 1 wk after injury and were increased in Pkd1-deletion animals mal dysplasia without bone marrow failure . Their 2-y-old sister had no compared to DCVC treated Pkd1+/- mice . clinical signs of DC . Each of the 15 coding exons of the DKC1 gene In conclusion, these data provide evidence that injury-induced en- and their flanking regions were amplified from genomic DNA by PCR hanced proliferation of renal epithelium in the absence of wild type and screened for mutations by SSCP analysis, and the shift detected polycystin-1 is a trigger for cyst formation . Since polycystin-1 localizes on the SSCP gel was re-amplified, cloned and sequenced. The novel in the basal-body/centrosome, we hypothesize that aberrant planar mutation is a 2-bp inversion in exon 3: NM_001363:c .166_167invCT cell polarity of the newly formed cells plays a role in ADPKD . (L55S) . It was found in the proband and his brother; their mother was a carrier and the sister was not. This is the first report of DKC1 mutation analysis in Russian patients . P05.216 Human developmental biology resource D. Gerrelli1, S. Lisgo2, A. J. Copp1, S. Lindsay2; 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Human Genet- ics, Newcastle, United Kingdom. The Human Developmental Biology Resource (HDBR) is a unique resource, funded by the Wellcome Trust and UK-MRC to provide hu- man embryonic and fetal tissue to the research community for gene expression studies . The HDBR is based at the Institute of Child Health, University College London and the Institute of Human Genetics, New- castle University . The HDBR collects material from terminations of pregnancy . This valuable material is used primarily to study the ex-Genetic analysis, linkage, and association  P06. Genetic analysis, linkage, and trols . There was a tendency toward reduced YY54 genotype frequency in the entire stroke group. Upon stratification by age at disease onset, association male stroke patients under the age of 50 (n=15) showed significantly reduced frequency of YY54 compared to control males (24 .2% vs . P06.001 41 .3%; OR:2 .205 [95%CI:1 .079-4 .504]; p=0 .0377) . No such associa- Identification of novel variants in the Arylalkylamine N- tions were found in female cases . In healthy controls, cholesterol lev- acetyltransferase (AANAT) human gene and their contribution to els of individuals with YY54 genotype (n=71; median 4 .51 [25th-75th mood Disorders susceptibility percentiles, 4.19-5.43] mM) were significantly reduced compared to V. Soria1, M. Gratacòs2, È. Martínez-Amorós1, J. Valero3, C. García2, J. R. YC54 and CC54 individuals combined (n=120; median 4 .95 [4 .42- González4, A. Gutiérrez-Zotes3, E. Saus2, M. Bayés2, J. M. Crespo1, L. Mar- 5.88] mM, p=0.009). In addition, we identified a new ABCG8 variant, torell3, E. Vilella3, A. Labad3, J. Vallejo1,5, J. M. Menchón1,5, X. Estivill2,6, M. Ur- T401S, in a healthy control . retavizcaya1,5; Conclusions . According to our data ABCG8 YY54 may be a potential 1Mood Disorders Clinical and Research Unit, CIBER-SAM, Psychiatry Depart- protecting factor against ischaemic stroke in young males; and Y54C ment, Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERESP (CIBER en polymorphism may influence cholesterol plasma levels in healthy in- Epidemiología y Salud Pública), Genes and Disease Program and CeGen Bar- dividuals . celona Genotyping Node, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 3Grup d’Investigació en Psiquiatria. Hospital Universitari Institut Pere P06.003 Mata, Rovira i Virgili University, Reus, Spain, 4CREAL, Center for Research Acetyl coA carboxylase 2 (ACACB) promoter sNP -8414 C/T is in Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Clinical associated with body fat in women and affects promoter activity Sciences, Bellvitge Campus, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain, 6Experi- A. K. H. Lee1, T. Kyriakou1, D. Ge2, G. Liu3, H. Snieder3,4, T. D. Spector4, S. D. mental and Health Sciences Department, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, O’Dell1; Spain. 1Nutritional Science Division, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, Disruption of circadian rhythms, including abnormalities of circadian 2Center for Population Genomics and Pharmacogenetics, Duke University, phase position and melatonin secretion, have been described in mood Durham, NC, United States, 3Unit of Genetic Epidemiology and Bioinformatics, disorders (MD) but the molecular mechanisms underlying their pathol- University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Twin Research and Ge- ogy are largely unknown . Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) netic Epidemiology Unit, King’s College London, St Thomas’ Hospital Campus, is a key enzyme involved in circadian oscillations of melatonin levels . London, United Kingdom. In order to assess the possible contribution of AANAT gene variability Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) catalyses the formation of malonyl- to the susceptibility to MD, we systematically investigated common and CoA, an intermediate in fatty acid synthesis and a potent inhibitor of rare variation in the AANAT gene through a sequential sequencing and carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT1) . CPT1 transfers long-chain fatty single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP)-based genotyping approach . acyl-CoA (LCFA-CoA) to the mitochondria for β-oxidation, so ACC Our sample consists of 445 unrelated patients with MD (257 unipolar causes cytoplasmic accumulation of LCFA-CoA by increasing CPT1 major depressive disorder, 188 bipolar disorder) diagnosed according inhibition . Elevated LCFA-CoA in the hypothalamus signals energy sur- to DSM-IV criteria and 440 screened control subjects . The entire cod- feit and leads to inhibition of feeding . We proposed that genetic varia- ing region, the exon-intron boundaries, the promoter and 3’UTR of the tion influencing the level of expression of the ACC2 gene (ACACB) AANAT gene were directly sequenced in a subset of 360 MD patients could be influential in determining body weight. We selected -8414 C/T by PCR, identifying 17 changes . Thirteen out of the 17 changes repre- (rs16939972), sited -368bp from the exon 1b transcription start site in sent novel sequence variations and four had been described before: ACACB promoter II, as a potential functional or marker site . We tested rs3760138, rs4238989, rs4646261 and rs8150 . The novel and previ- association with anthropometry, body fat, serum leptin, triglyceride and ously reported variants in dbSNP public database were genotyped in insulin sensitivity in 2633 healthy Caucasian females from the Twins the rest of the MD sample and in the control sample using SNPlex ge- UK cohort (mean age 47 .3±12 .6 y) . Allele C was associated with high- notyping system . Non-rare variants (MAF>2%) were further included in er total body fat (P=0 .014) . We then tested the activity of the promoter a case-control association study. The results showed significant differ- with respect to -8414 C/T alleles in transfected HepG2 hepatocytes . ences in genotype distributions for two SNPs located in the promoter The constructs contained a 907bp region (from position -870 to +37 region of AANAT gene (p=0.00006; p=0.004), which remained signifi- relative to the transcription start site) and were co-transfected with an cant after correcting for multiple comparisons . Our results suggest that SREBP-1a expression plasmid . Activity associated with allele C was genetic variability in the promoter region of AANAT gene contribute to 57 .5±4 .0% and with allele T 25 .0±10 .8% of that of an SREBP-1a con- the human susceptibility to mood disorders . trol plasmid, i .e . allele C showed 2 .3 times greater activity than allele T. ACACB could be influential in determining body weight. P06.002 Frequencies of four ABcG8 polymorphisms in patients with P06.004 ischaemic vascular diseases Polymorphisms in ActN3, AcE and AmPD1 genes and physical A. Szilvási1, H. Andrikovics1, E. Pongrácz2, Á. Kalina3, Z. Komlósi4, I. Klein5, A. performance in Bulgarian sub-elite athletes Tordai1; S. A. Andonov1, R. Saraeva2, S. Andonova2,3, R. Kaneva2,3, V. Gigova1, L. Ste- 1Hungarian National Blood Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary, 2Central fanov1, I. Kremensky2,3, P. Atanasov1; Hospital of Ministry of Interior, Budapest, Hungary, 3Hospital of the National 1National Sports Academy “Vassil Levski”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Railways, Budapest, Hungary, 4Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, Center, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital of Obstetrics, 5Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. Sofia, Bulgaria. Background . ABCG5 and ABCG8 mediate sterol absorption and ex- The aim of this study was to analyse ACTN3 (R577X), ACE (I/D) and cretion. It is still not clarified how the most common polymorphisms AMPD1 (34C>T) polymorphisms in sub-elite athletes (n=70, 57 males of these genes contribute to cholesterol plasma level changes, and and 13 females) and controls (n=44, 15 males and 29 females) . The whether polymorphisms are associated with multifactorial vascular correlations between genotypes and physiological and biochemical diseases . parameters at anaerobic conditions was investigated . Athletes were Methods . We investigated 241 unrelated, consecutively enrolled pa- divided into three sport groups according to a power-time model of tients with ischaemic stroke, 148 patients with coronary heart disease performance intensity . The physiological parameters were evaluated (CHD) and 191 blood donors as healthy controls for allele frequencies by standard Wingate Anaerobic Test and Ergospirometry . Spectropho- (AF) of four common ABCG8 polymorphisms (D19H, Y54C, T400K, tometry and Blood-Gas analysis were used for the estimation of the A632V) . glycolytic enzyme activity of Lactate Dehydrogenase and Acid-Base Results . Linkage disequilibrium test revealed linkage between the re- Balance, respectively . DNA samples was genotyped by RFLP analysis spective neighbouring loci of ABCG8 . Estimated haplotype frequen- followed by agarose gel-electrophoresis . Differences in the distribu- cies were similar for the three investigated groups (stroke or CHD tion of alleles and genotypes between the groups were assessed by patients and healthy controls) . AFs of the investigated polymorphisms x2-test . Statistical analysis of variances was performed using one way in patient-groups showed no significant differences compared to con- ANOVA. No significant differences between the athletes and controlsGenetic analysis, linkage, and association  was found according the allele and genotype frequencies of the in- haplogroups that are present in the U .K . according to data from the vestigated polymorphisms . AMPD1 heterozygous male athletes in the Y chromosome Consortium data and personal communication with Y “Anaerobic” group showed greater Mean Power Output (Watts) in com- chromosome researchers . Statistical analysis of Y chromosome hap- parison to CC homozygous athletes (9,11 vs. 7,34 Watts). Significant logroup analysis revealed no significantly increased representation of correlation was observed also with the buffering capacity (HCO3 and any haplogroup in cases with ADHD or schizophrenia compared to BE) . No Individuals homozygous for the T-allele of AMPD1 were found . controls . However, this is one of the few studies to have genotyped Y The ACTN3 genotype correlated with parameters relevant to exercise chromosome markers in such a large number of U .K . individuals and capacity such as oxygen uptake, saturation and Lean Body Mass in therefore our results provide an insight into the population structure of the male sub-groups of anaerobic sports and endurance sports, but U .K . Y chromosome haplogroups . not in the female sub-groups . P06.007 P06.005 The influence of adiponectin G276T gene polymorphism on case-control study of six genes asymmetrically expressed in the changes in adiponectin levels or its oligomer composition by two cerebral hemispheres: evidence of association of BAIAP exercise training and NEUROD with adulthood attention-deficit hyperactivity D. Ando1, Y. Hosaka2, K. Suzuki1, Z. Yamagata1; disorder 1School of Medicine, Chuo, Japan, 2Hosaka Clinic, Fujiyoshida, Japan. M. Ribases1,2, R. Bosch1, A. Hervás3, J. Ramos-Quiroga1,4, A. Bielsa1, X. Purpose: Exercise training improves glucose and lipid metabolism me- Gastaminza1, M. Fernández-Anguiano3, M. Nogueira1, N. Gómez-Barros1, X. diated by altered adiponectin oligomer composition . The purpose is to Estivill5,6, M. Casas1,4, M. Bayés5,6, B. Cormand7,8; determine the effects of exercise training on total and high molecular 1Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, weight (HMW) adiponectin and adiponectin oligomeric distribution and Spain, 2Research Group in Childhood Neurology and Psychiatric Genetics, influence of adiponectin G276T gene polymorphism on changes in adi- Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Child and Adolescent ponectin levels or its oligomer composition by exercise training . Mental Health Unit, Hospital Mútua de Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain, 4Depart- Subjects and Methods: A randomized parallel-design study (n = 53; 36 ment of Psychiatry and Legal Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, women and 17 men; aged 32-65 years) at a fitness club from April 2006 Barcelona, Spain, 5Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regu- to July 2007 was conducted . Participants were randomly assigned to lation (CRG), UPF, Barcelona, Spain, 6CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública, the exercise (n = 26) or control (n = 27) group and received exercise Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 7Departament de Genèti- training for 70 min 2 times per week for 12 weeks and exercise advice ca, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 8CIBER at the baseline, respectively . Main outcome are muscle strength; body Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain. weight; body mass index; blood pressure; glucose and lipid parameter; Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common child- circulating levels of total adiponectin and HMW adiponectin; and per- hood-onset neuropsychiatric disorder that persists throughout lifespan centage of HMW adiponectin . in at least 30% of ADHD children . Different lines of evidence suggest Results: After 12 weeks, there were no differences between the groups that abnormal right-left brain asymmetries in ADHD patients may be for the total adiponectin levels, HMW adiponectin levels, or percentage involved in a variety of ADHD-related cognitive processes, including of HMW adiponectin. No significant difference in the change in the total sustained attention, working memory, response inhibition and plan- and HMW adiponectin levels and the percentage of HMW adiponectin ning . Although the exact mechanisms underlying cerebral lateraliza- between the subjects with the G276G genotype and 276T allele carri- tion are unknown, left-right cortical asymmetry in humans has been ers were found in either the exercise or control group . associated with transcriptional asymmetry at early embryonic stages Conclusion: In the absence of weight loss, Exercise training, does not and a number of genes differentially expressed between hemispheres change HMW adiponectin levels or the adiponectin oligomer composi- have been identified. Among these, we selected six functional candi- tion . Adiponectin G276T gene polymorphism may not modify the adi- date genes showing at least 1 .9-fold differential expression between ponectin change response to exercise training . hemispheres (BAIAP2, DAPPER1, LMO4, NEUROD6, ATP2B3, ID2) and performed a case-control analysis in 531 ADHD patients (320 chil- P06.008 dren and 211 adults) and 531 sex-matched unrelated controls . The Genetic analysis of adult stature in Dutch isolated population single- and multiple-marker analysis provided preliminary evidence for I. V. Zorkoltseva1, T. I. Axenovich1, C. M. van Duijn2; the contribution of BAIAP2 (P=8 .5e-06; OR = 2 .69 (1 .74-4 .17)) and 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Depart- NEUROD6 (P = 0 .0053, OR = 1 .76 (1 .18-2 .61)) to adulthood ADHD . ment of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Additionally, association between both genes and performance deficits We analysed a large complex pedigree from a Dutch genetically iso- in the Conners Continuous Performance Test (CPT-II) was also identi- lated population . About 2600 of 19700 pedigree members were phe- fied. Our results support the participation of BAIAP2 and NEUROD6 notyped and genotyped for autosomal 5208 SNPs (Illumina 6K linkage in the continuity of ADHD across lifespan and suggest that genetic panel) . Complex segregation analysis of adult height was performed factors potentially influencing abnormal cerebral lateralization may be under mixed model including effects of biallelic major gene, polygene, involved in the predisposition to this neurodevelopmental disorder . age and sex . We used likelihood approximation based on breaking pedigree loops. The results confirmed large contribution of genes in P06.006 the trait variance (h2 = 0.85 ) and significance of major gene effect the genetic causes of sex differences in neurodevelopmental in accordance with Elston-Stewart test . Three genotypic means were disorders estimated as 183 .5, 178 .3 and 174 .6 cm in males at 40 years with E. Stergiakouli, H. Williams, K. Langley, A. Thapar, M. J. Owen; average difference of male and female genotypic means about 13 cm . Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United King- The putative major gene explained 18% of trait variance . dom. A genome-wide scan was performed by variance-components method ADHD and schizophrenia are heritable, neurodevelopmental disorders using Merlin program . Prior to analysis, the pedigree was split into that are more prevalent in males . Both disorders also show sex dif- smaller non-overlapping fragments, with maximum bit-size of 18 . No ferences in age of onset and severity . The Y chromosome is poten- loci demonstrated significant linkage, however for 6 loci linkage was tially an important influence on male susceptibility to neuropsychiatric suggestive: disorders . Animal models have associated the Y chromosome with SNP Chr Position(cM) LodScore aggression and decreased levels of serotonin and dopamine in the rs1993104 19 56 .9 2 .71 brain. However, due to difficulties arising from the lack of recombina- rs1873191 18 44 .7 2 .60 tion and widely accepted nomenclature, the Y chromosome has been rs1019845 2 195 .8 2 .27 rs958883 5 123 .3 2 .15 largely excluded from genetic and genomic studies of neuropsychiatric rs936347 16 17 .2 2 .11 disorders . . In order to overcome this lack of knowledge we chose to rs216223 17 2 .1 2 .11 study the Y chromosome in a sample of 210 cases with ADHD, 310 cases with schizophrenia and 700 U .K . controls . In total, 40 Y chromo- Of these six loci, five were identified in previous linkage analyses, while locus at chro- some markers were selected to represent the main Y chromosome mosome 16 (rs936347) was new.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P06.009 Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Pediatric polyclinic N1, Ufa, Russian Federation. A candidate phenotypic modifier gene in fibrinogen deficient Allergic rhinitis (AR) is the result of an immunologically mediated hy- mice: beta-1,4-N-acetyl-galactosaminyl transferase 1 (galgt1) persensitivity reaction of the nasal mucosa, initiated by exposure to R. J. Fish1, D. Vu1, A. Fort1, S. Deutsch1, J. Degen2, M. Neerman-Arbez1; specific allergens. The prevalence of AR in various countries ranges 1Geneva University Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Cincinnati from 10-25% . It has been suggested in various studies that genetic Children’s Hospital Research Foundation and University of Cincinnati College defects in acetylation may be involved in the pathogenesis of allergic of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States. diseases and atopy . In humans the absence of circulating fibrinogen leads to a bleeding dis- The aim of this study was to examined the allele and genotype fre- order with variable severity, afibrinogenemia. Fibrinogen alpha chain quencies of three polymorphisms (481C>T, 590G>A, 857G>A) of the knock-out mice (FGA-/-) are effectively afibrinogenemic and show a gene and analysed their combinations . The patient group consisted strain-specific bleeding phenotype in neonates. This variability implies of 264 individuals with AR with different ethnic origins (Russians, Ta- that modifier genes exist in FGA-/- mice and in humans with afibrino- tars, Bashkirs), the control group included 185 unrelated non-allergic genemia . About 70% of C57BL/6 FGA-/- mice die in the neonatal pe- individuals . The NAT2 alleles (*4, *5, *6, and *7) were determined by riod whereas survivors have normal longevity . Fewer (~20%) FVB/N polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism FGA-/- mice die as neonates but show high mortality at P30 to P60 . To methods with DNA extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes by stan- identify candidate FGA-/- phenotypic modifier genes, we used microar- dard phenol/chloroform method . ray analysis on liver RNA from both mouse strains . Of the genes identi- The analysis has revealed that Tatars have significant higher frequen- fied with variable expression between strains, one encodes a Beta-1,4- cy of *4 allele (wild type) of the NAT2 gene in control group than in N-acetyl-galactosaminyl transferase (galgt1) . A galgt1 paralog, galgt2, patients (P=0,0007; OR=0,34; 95%CI=0,18-0,64) . At comparison of was identified as a modifier gene in a mouse model of another human group of patients with high total IgE level and the control group we bleeding disorder, von Willebrand’s disease(1) . By RT-PCR, we found have also determined increased frequency of *4 allele of the NAT2 that galgt1 expression increases in the liver of C57BL/6 mice from P0 gene in healthy donors (P=0,026; OR=0,53; 95%CI=0,3-0,93) . More- to P30 . In contrast, galgt1 expression is low in FVB/N mice at birth and over, an association of *5*6 genotype of the NAT2 gene with AR at declines with age. Using strain-specific polymorphisms and sequenc- patients with high total IgE level has been found (P=0,012; OR=2,4; ing of RT-PCR products, we determined the expression of C57BL/6 95%CI=1,19-4,82) . and FVB/N galgt1 alleles in livers from F1 hybrid mice . Both alleles Thus, we have determined statistically significant association between were expressed at P0, but only the C57BL/6 allele was detected at NAT2 gene polymorphisms and allergic rhinitis in Volga-Ural region of P30 . Using pyrosequencing, the FVB/N allele expression was 22 .8% Russia . at P0 and undetectable at P30 . We are investigating the genetic basis for this differential allelic expression and whether it can explain strain- P06.012 specific phenotypic variation in FGA-/- mice. (1)Mohlke et al, (1999) inherited alopecia and ectodermal dysplasia in pakistani Cell, 96, p111-120 . kindereds I. Ahmad, M. Tariq, A. Ali, M. Bakhtiar, A. Azhar, S. M. Baig; P06.010 National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisala- Identification of susceptibility genes for Multiple sclerosis: a bad, Pakistan. study of the genomic region 2q13-14 in an italian population Inherited Alopecia (AP) is a rare autosomal recessive disease clinically I. Borzani1, M. Tola1, L. Caniati2, G. De Santis1, A. R. Collins3, C. Scapoli1; characterized by total or partial hair loss soon after their birth and the 1University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2St. Anna Hospital, Ferrara, Italy, 3Universi- development of papular lesions of keratin-filled cysts over extensive ty of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. area of body . The inherited hypohidrotic and anhydrotic ectodermal Understanding the genetic basis of multiple sclerosis (MS) remains dysplasia (ED) is characterized by the absence or hypoplasia of hair, a major challenge, despite decades of intensive researches . Whole teeth and eccrine sweat gland . Ecotodermal dysplasias are highly het- genome linkage studies were carried out in different populations and erogeneous with more than 200 distinct clinical forms reported so far . from these analyses the prediction of at least 38 potential non-MHC The X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLED) is the most susceptibility regions emerged (Abdeen et al ., 2006) . Among these, common form of ED . In this study, twelve consanguineous families chromosomal portions of specific interest to some populations came with alopecia and seven with ectodermal dysplasia were ascertained out: the region 2q14 in the Irish and English population (Heggarty et from Southern Punjab and Northern areas of Pakistan having multiple al ., 2003; Mann et al ., 2002), the region 2q36 in the Sardinians (Co- affected members . Pedigrees were analyzed to determine the pattern raddu et al, 2003) and the region 2p21-22 in Continental Italian popula- of inheritance; in four families with AP the disease was inherited in the tion (Liguori et al ., 2003) . autosomal recessive pattern . Short Tandem Repeat Markers (STR) The main objective of this study was to investigate the role of 2q13-14 were used in the exclusion mapping for the ten most common loci re- region in the pathogenesis of MS . The investigation was conducted on ported . According to results, one family with AP was linked to the type 120 patients, with clinically defined MS, and on 249 healthy subjects 1 keratin genes (17q21 .2locus) while other families are still undergo- collected from the North-Italian population . Using CHROMSCAN (Ma- ing exclusion analysis . In four families with ED exclusion to all known niatis et al, 2002, 2005), a map in LD-units, under the Malécot model loci has been observed whereas one family is showing linkage to the for multiple markers, was constructed . The block-step structure of the type II keratin (KRT) genes (12q13 .13 locus) . Exclusion analysis is in 2q13-14 region was based on 70 SNPs (validated in the Caucasian process in two pedigrees with ED . The families excluded to all known population) selected from the HapMap database, with rare variant fre- loci will be subjected to genome wide scan by SNP (Single Nucleotide quencies higher than 10% and evenly covering a region of 1 .2 Mb Polymorphism) analysis using Affymetrix 250K array system to find the within the segment 2q13-14 . homozygous regions to find out the locus having the disease gene. We tested the association with the disease through both allelic as- Statistical analysis such as LOD (log of odds) will be used to validate sociation and by association mapping with the Malécot Model (Morton the data obtained . et al . 2007) . The present results support a possible association between this candi- P06.013 date region and MS in the North-Italian population . Alpha-synuclein in familial Parkinson‘s disease and Lewy Body Dementia P06.011 V. Greco1, E. De Marco1, F. Rocca1, P. Tarantino1, F. Annesi1, D. Civitelli1, G. Association between the N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAt2) gene Provenzano1, V. Scornaienchi1, I. Cirò Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, G. Squillace1, polymorphisms and allergic rhinitis in Volga-Ural region of G. Nicoletti1,2, G. Annesi1; Russia 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone A. Khuzina1, A. Karunas1, A. Biktasheva2, A. Yuldasheva3, E. Etkina2, E. Khus- (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, nutdinova1; Italy. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Acad- Alpha-synuclein has been implicated in the pathology of certain neu- emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Medical State University, rodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD) and de-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  mentia with Lewy bodies (DLB) . Alpha-synuclein is the major compo- to -174 and -597 polymorphisms were observed among groups . How- nent of the filamentous Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites that define ever GG genotype and G allele of rs 1800796 polymorphism occurred these diseases at a neuropathological level . The points mutations A30P more frequently in patients than in young controls (p=0 .045, p=0 .031, and A53T in alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA) cause familial forms of PD respectively) . A tendency to a higher frequency of GG genotype in el- and DLB . Recently, a third missense mutation E46K in SNCA was de- derly than in young controls was also detected (p=0 .06) . In our study scribed in a Spanish family with DLB and parkinsonism . Moreover the G allele excess among AD patients of rs 1800796 is due to either a A53T alpha-synuclein mutation was found in an elder Greek man with problem of the control sample or associated to a AD susceptibility . DLB . These cases suggest that E46K and A53T mutations should be Financial Support: FAPESP, CNPq, CAPES considered in the differential diagnosis of DLB . The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of E46K alpha-synuclein mutation as a risk P06.016 factor in DLB and in familial PD . We analysed the E46K mutation in Association analysis of sNPs in PLAU and iDE genes with late- seventeen sporadic DLB patients and thirty-seven familial PD patients . onset Alzheimer’s disease in a sample of mexican patients The clinical diagnosis of DLB was based on the criteria proposed by C. Venegas1, N. Najera1, F. Mena1, F. Garcia1, L. Gutiérrez2, M. López3, S. the International Consortium on DLB . PD patients were diagnosed ac- Kofman1; cording to UK Brain Bank criteria . We conducted a genetic analysis by 1Hospital General de Mexico, Servicio de Genética. Facultad de Medicina, standard PCR and restriction digestion method . None of the subjects Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 2Servicio de examined had the E46K alpha-synuclein mutation . These results do Geriatría, Instituto Nacional de la Nutrición y Ciencias Médicas, Mexico. D.F, not support a role for this mutation in our patients with DLB or familial Mexico, 3Secretaria de Enseñanza Clínica Internado y Servicio Social, Facultad PD, in agreement with the emerging consensus that mutations in the de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. D.F, Mexico. SNCA are associated with PD in few families worldwide . Background: Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (PLAU) and in- sulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) genes represented strong positional P06.014 and biologic candidates for late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) sus- Associations of Alpha-1 antitrypsin Pi*s allele with cOPD ceptibility . PLAU and IDE are located on chromosome 10q22 .2-23 .3 D. Serapinas, B. Sitkauskiene, R. Sakalauskas; close to a region of linkage for LOAD . In addition, many studies have Department of Pulmonology and Imunology, Kaunas University of Medicine, identified a possible role of PLAU and IDE genes in the degradation Kaunas, Lithuania. of different forms of Amyloid β-peptide. Several polymorphisms of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is characterized by these genes have been analyzed, however a systematic meta-analy- progressive airflow limitation and related to an abnormal inflammatory sis of this SNPs of previous association studies; suggested that only response of the lung that results from a gene-environment interaction . (PLAU_1=rs2227564) and (IDE_9=rs1887922), are true allele risk with The best documented genetic risk factor is severe hereditary deficien- OR>1 .10 . Materials and Methods: A case-control study was design to cy of Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) . The presence of Pi*Z allele (Glu342→ evaluate the possible association between these SNPs with LOAD of Lys) in homozygote state, that is inherited in autosomal recessive way Mexican patients . Data collection was performed from 55 patients with is already well proven factor for developing COPD . Data about Pi*S al- LOAD and 55 sex and age-matched controls subjects . We analyzed lele (Glu264→ Val) influence for developing COPD are not ascertain yet. alleles and genotype distributions for APOE (ε2/ε3/ε4), one (C/T) poly- Current study analyzed 1000 COPD patients, that clinical diagnosis morphism in exon 6 of the PLAU (rs2227564), and one (C/T) SNP in was confirmed by using GOLD spirometric criteria. AAT serum con- intron 20 of the IDE (rs887922) . Results: We found different allele and centrations were measured by means of nephelometry, and phenotyp- genotype frequencies for all SNPs analyzed between cases and con- ing was carried out by means of isoelectic-focusing . We found Pi*S trols. Association was observed for the APOE ε4 allele (OR =2.42), TT allele in 44 patients: 1 in homozygous state SS, 43 in heterozygous genotype of PLAU (OR =2 .20), and CC genotype of IDE (OR =1 .18) . state: 40 MS and 3 SZ. AAT concentrations were significantly lower in Conclusions: These data suggest a genetic association between SS and SZ group compared with normal AAT variant MM (p= 0,035) . APOE (ε4), PLAU (TT), and IDE (CC) genotypes with LOAD in Mexi- Lung function parameter - forced expiratory volume in one second can population . Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part (FEV1) was also worse in SS and SZ patients (p=0,043) than in MM by CONACyT (2004-C01-129) and Universidad Nacional Autónoma group . Clinical and biochemical characteristics of COPD patients with de México (SDEI . PTID .05 .5) MS and MM phenotypes has no statistical differences . In conclusion, the results of the present study support the concept that Pi*S allele is P06.017 genetic risk factor for COPD for carriers of phenotypes SS and SZ, Absence of Association between APOA1 Polymorphism and but not SM . Alzheimer’s disease M. L. Varlese1,2, C. Babalini1, C. Patrono1,3, Z. Esposito1,2, A. Borreca1,2, P. Mon- P06.015 tieri1,2, G. Sancesario2, A. Orlacchio3, G. Bernardi1,4, T. Kawarai5, A. Orlacchio1,2; Association of iL-6 with Alzheimer in a Brazilian sample 1Laboratorio Neurogenetica CERC-IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy, 2Diparti- F. F. Barbosa1, R. W. de Labio2, N. M. dos Reis2,3, L. T. Rasmussen1,2, L. Hori- mento di Neuroscienze, Università degli Studi di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Rome, guchi2, C. R. T. Terazaki2, C. E. M. Kawamata3, H. Krieger3, T. Minett4, P. H. F. Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Scienze Biochimiche, Università Bertolucci4, M. A. C. Smith4, S. L. M. Payão4,1,2; degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università 1USC, Bauru, Brazil, 2FAMEMA, Marília, Brazil, 3USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, degli studi di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 5Department of Neurology, Hyo- 4UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil. go Brain and Heart Center, Himeji City, Japan. Interleukin-6 is a multifuncional cytokine produced by immune and non Apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1) is the major apolipoprotein of the high- immune cells and act as an inflammatory mediator as well as endo- density lipoprotein, involved in reverse cholesterol transport . Altera- crine and metabolic regulator . The IL-6 human gene is located in chro- tions in cholesterol homeostasis influence the risk for Alzheimer’s mosome 7p21 and present many polymorphisms . The IL-6 rs 1800795 disease (AD) . Vollbach et al . (2005) suggested that variation in the (-174G>C) polymorphism has been associated with Alzheimer´s dis- APOA1 might influence the function of the protein, and thus brain cho- ease (AD) in some populations, however these findings have not been lesterol metabolism, leading to an increased risk for AD . They identi- replicated in other studies . The IL-6 rs 1800796 ( -572G>C) polymor- fied two polymorphisms, a G/A substitution at position -75bp and a C/T phism has been considered as a risk factor for cardiovascular dis- and G/A base substitution at position -83bp or -84bp, or both, in the eases and the IL-6 rs 00797(-597G>A) showed an association with APOA1 promoter and investigated the effect of these polymorphisms systemic sclerosis, an autoimmune disease . To our knowledge, both on the risk for AD in 427 AD patients and 500 controls of German and polymorphisms have not been investigated in AD . DNA was extracted English descent . They found that the A allele of the APOA1 -75bp G/A from blood samples of 302 subjects with similar ethnic origins, being polymorphism was significantly associated with an increased risk for 137 patients with AD, 130 elderly controls and 107 young controls . AD in subjects with an age at onset of 66 years or younger . In order to Subjects were genotyped concerning the three IL-6 polymorphisms confirm these data we analysed the presence of this association in the using PCR-RFLP technique . AD patients were diagnosed according to Italian population recruiting 203 patients (n 75</=66 and 128>66 years NINCDS-ADRDA criteria . Association study was performed using Chi old) affected by sporadic AD and 232 controls (n 100</=66 and 132>66 Square tests with p=0.05. No significant genotype distributions related years old) . In agreement with Vollbach et al . (2005), our analysis didn’tMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  show any statistically significant association in LOAD group. On the The aim of this research is to study features of distribution of alleles other hand, we didn’t find any association between APOA1 -75bp G/A of Apo E Gene at pregnant women of Kazakh population with clini- polymorphism and the EOAD group (χ2=0,084, df = 2, p = 0,959) . In cal placental insufficiency and habitual non-carrying of pregnancy in opposition to Vollbachet al . (2005) our results show that variants of anamnesis . APOA1 don’t influence the onset and the risk for Italian AD sample. Materials and Methods of Research . By the method of PDRF analy- sis on the basis of PCR-mediated and site-directed mutagenesis, P06.018 an analysis of frequencies of alleles of Apo E Gene was held at 12 Paraoxonase gene polymorphism association with ALs in the pregnant Kazakh women with diagnosed placental insufficiency and French, Quebec and swedish populations habitual non-carrying of pregnancy in anamnesis . Examples of DNA, P. N. Valdmanis1,2, E. Kabashi2, J. Bouchard3, F. Salachas4, V. Meininger4, P. taken from 32 sound non-related pregnant Kazakh women with physi- Andersen5, W. Camu6, N. Dupre3,2, G. A. Rouleau2; ologically going pregnancy, were used as control examples . 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Center of Excellence in Neuromics, Results . The analysis of frequency of detecting polymorphism of Apo E University of Montreal, CHUM-Notre-Dame Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, Gene made known that favorable genotype E2E3 was really detected 3Department of Neurological Sciences, CHAUQ Enfant-Jesus, Quebec City, more frequently at patients of the control group (75%) than at those QC, Canada, 4Fédération des maladies du système nerveux, Hôpital de la of the basic group (50%) . Frequency of genotypes E3E3 and E3E4 Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Department of Neurology, Umeå University hospital, was 33 .3% and 8 .3% in the researched pathology group against 6 .25 Umea, Sweden, 6Unité de Neurologie Comportementale et Dégénérative Mo- and 0% in the sound group . The revealed data are in accordance with lecular Unit, Institute of Biology, Montpellier, France. data taken from publications, and they are proof of its possible genetic Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset neurodegenera- relation with unfavorable allele E3E4 of Apo E Gene at development of tive disease that results in the loss of upper and lower motor neurons . placental insufficiency during habitual non-carrying of pregnancy. The disease is 90-95% sporadic in nature which suggests that multiple The further research of molecular-and-genetic markers will allow us to subtle genetic effects may lead to the development of ALS . One prima- get more objective information about the nature and mechanisms for ry threat to motor neurons is oxidative stress . As such, an association rise of placental insufficiency. has been observed between paraoxonase (PON) gene variants and ALS susceptibility . The PON cluster consists of three adjacent genes P06.021 on chromosome 7q21.3 that aid in the detoxification of organophos- A second candidate gene causing aniridia? : preliminary results phate insecticide and prevent the oxidation of lipoproteins . We sought F. Bayrakli1, D. Ceyhan2, Y. Bayri3, I. Guney4, T. Cankaya5, K. Bilguvar3, S. to examine the frequency of coding and intronic PON polymorphisms Bayrakli6, M. Gunel3; in a set of 1197 ALS case and 1076 control samples from France, Swe- 1Marmara University, Department of Neurosurgery, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Van Mili- den, and the founder French Canadian population of Quebec . Twenty tary Hospital, Department of Ophthalmology, Van, Turkey, 3Yale University, De- SNPs that span the three paraoxonase genes were selected for Taq- partment of Neurosurgery, New Haven, CT, United States, 4Marmara University, man genotype analysis . While individual SNPs were not considered Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Istanbul Surgery Hospital, associated on their own, a haplotype of SNPs at the C-terminal portion Division of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Istanbul University, Department of Fam- of PON2 that includes the PON2 C311S amino acid change was signif- ily Practice, Istanbul, Turkey. icant in the French (p-value 0 .0075) and Quebec (p-value 0 .026) popu- Aniridia can range from a readily visible, almost complete absence of lations as well as all three populations combined (p-value 1 .69x10-6) . the iris, through enlargement and irregularity of the pupil mimicking a Thus, we have identified two populations where susceptibility to ALS coloboma, to small slit-like defects in the anterior layer seen only on is significantly associated with variants in the PON gene cluster. The transillumination with a slit-lamp . functional consequence of the variants identified with respect to motor Approximately one third of all cases of aniridia are sporadic and these neuron degeneration will provide insight into the role of these genes in are often found to have cytogenetically detectable deletions involving susceptibility to ALS . 11p13, besides balanced chromosomal translocations and single chro- mosomal breaks . P06.019 Aniridia can also be caused due to six different categories of PAX6 Identification of TDP-43 variants in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutations including nonsense, splicing, frame-shifting insertions or (ALs) patients deletions, in-frame insertions or deletions, missense, and run-on mu- E. Kabashi, P. N. Valdmanis, P. Dion, G. A. Rouleau; tations . Centre de Recherche de l’Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. We found a large kindred with aniridia that have 10 live affected pa- Recently, TDP-43 was identified as a major component of ubiquitinated tients with autosomal dominant trait . While ophthalmological examina- aggregates in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal tions of the affected patients revealed total aniridia, cranial magnetic dementia (FTD) . We have screened 200 ALS patients, 120 sporadic resonance imaging studies showed no abnormalities in brain tissue . (SALS) and 80 familial (FALS) cases and we have identified several Karyotype analysis (550 bands) revealed normal male (46, XY) and missense variants in the TDP-43 gene . None of these variants were sequencing of translated and untranslated exons of PAX6 gene were present in 360 unaffected controls . We are currently aiming to deter- revealed no causative mutation. Chromosome 11 specific array-CGH mine the causative effect of TDP-43 mutations in ALS pathogenesis for micro unbalanced translocation, deletion or amplification detection and motor neuron degeneration . We will sequence further ALS cases in or around the PAX6 gene is underway . for mutations, perform functional assays to determine what could be This preliminary results suggest that there can be another causative the gain or loss of function of TDP-43 and test whether this leads to se- gene for aniridia . Whole genome linkage analysis is the next step to lective vulnerability of motor neurons . Finally, we are generating three identify responsible chromosomal locus . in vivo models, including transgenic mice, which will determine wheth- er mutations in TDP-43 induce a motor neuron disorder and motor P06.022 neuron pathology in other species . This project will contribute greatly APO E epsilon genetic polymorphism and foot ulceration to our understanding of ALS pathophysiology and the functional role severity in peripheral vascular complications of type 2 diabetes that TDP-43 plays in this disease . mellitus V. V. Petrova1, M. A. Bogdanova2, A. N. Voitovich2, Y. A. Spesivcev2, V. I. La- P06.020 rionova2; Analysis of assosiation of Apo E gene with placental 1St. Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. insufficiency at habitual non-carrying of pregnancy Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fede- N. Mamedalieva, G. Svyatova, T. Nurbayeva; ration. Scientific Center of Obstetric, Ginecology and Perinatology, Almaty, Kazakh- Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) includes inflammatory process that stan. leads to cell damage and impaired regeneration within a vessel wall Both non-carrying of pregnancy and placental insufficiency are the ba- resulting in the formation of foot ulcers . PVD is a common and severe sis of many kinds of heavy obstetrical pathology which causes unfa- complication of type 2 diabetes mellitus . Many investigations show that vorable outcome for the fetus . polymorphisms in apolipoproteins genes can be associated with PVD .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Therefore, they may play a role in genetic predisposition of diabetic genotype frequencies between the patients with combined hyperlipid- foot ulcers . In this study, 100 diabetic patients with PVD (age 55-75, emia and the normolipidemic group (p=0 .01) . The DM2 patients with disease manifestation 5-15 years) were divided into three groups us- hypertriglyceridemia both isolated and combined have significantly ing the Wagner ulcer classification system: the first group consisted of higher 19W-allele frequency in comparison with normolipidemic group patients with 1-2 grade of ulceration, the second group with 3-4 grade of patients with DM2 . of ulceration and the third group with 5 grade of ulceration . The allelic and genotype frequency distribution of APO E epsilon genetic poly- P06.025 morphism was estimated in these groups using the chi-squared test . Autozygosity mapping in a large cohort of consanguineous We found out the allele and genotype frequencies in the second and iranian families reveals three frequent loci for autosmal the third group differed significantly from the same in the first group recessive intellectual disability (p=0 .05) . The diabetic PVD patients with 3 to 5 grade of ulceration had A. W. Kuss1, M. Garshasbi1, L. Abbasi-Moheb1,2, M. M. Motazacker1, K. Kah- a significantly higher E4-allele frequency in comparison with the group rizi2, S. Abedini2, S. Esmaeli-Nieh1, F. Behjati2, A. Tzschach1, H. Ropers1, H. of patients with 1-2 grade of ulceration . Najmabadi2; 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re- P06.023 search Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehe- Apolipoprotein A5 gene iVs3+G476A allelic variant confers ran, Islamic Republic of Iran. susceptibility for development of ischemic stroke There is reason to believe that autosomal recessive intellectual dis- A. Maasz1, P. Kisfali1, Z. Szolnoki2, L. Jaromi1, F. Hadarits3, B. Melegh1; ability (ARID) is more common than X-linked intellectual disability, but 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pecs, it has so far received considerably less attention . This is partly due to Pecs, Hungary, 2Department of Cerebrovascular Diseases, Pándy Kálmán small family sizes and low consanguinity rates in industrialized societ- County Hospital, Gyula, Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, Markusovszky County ies, both of which have hampered gene mapping and identification. Hospital, Szombathely, Hungary. To shed more light on the causes of ARID and as a prerequisite for Background: The T-1131C, T1259C and IVS3+G476A are naturally oc- diagnosis, counselling and therapy, we have set out in 2003 to perform curring variants of the apolipoprotein A5 gene; the aim of this study systematic clinical and molecular studies in large consanguineous Ira- was to investigate the possible impact of these variants in the devel- nian families with several mentally retarded children . This has already opment of ischemic stroke . Methods: PCR-RFLP assays were used led us to the discovery of 12 novel ARID loci, eight of which had a to determine the distributions of the apolipoprotein A5 gene alleles in LOD score above three, and in one of them we were recently able to small-, large-vessel and mixed subgroups of 378 patients and in 131 identify a mutation in GRIK2 . Contrary to previous observations which stroke-free control subjects . Results: Increased triglyceride levels were prima facie argued against the existence of frequently mutated genes, found in subjects carrying -1131C, 1259C, IVS3+476A alleles in all investigations in our expanding cohort of more than 200 families have stroke groups and in controls . The -1131C and IVS3+476A alleles, but now led to the identification of three loci (on chromosomes 1, 5 and not the T1259C variant showed significant accumulation in all stroke 19), that show overlapping autozygosity regions of three, four and six subgroups . Logistic regression analysis adjusted for age, gender, BMI, families, respectively . At each of these loci a minimum of two overlap- total cholesterol levels, ischemic heart disease, hypertension, diabetes ping linkage intervals were solitary in the respective family and showed mellitus, smoking-and drinking habits revealed, that the IVS3+476A a significant LOD score of or above three. Mutation screening in order allele represent independent susceptibility factor for stroke (ORs for to elucidate the underlying gene defects is ongoing and likely to reveal small-vessel: 4 .748; large-vessel: 3 .905; mixed: 2 .926; overall: 3 .644 frequent ARID genes . The outcome of our project will broaden the ba- at 95% CI; p<0.05); we could also confirm the previously verified sis for genetic counselling and provide insight into the molecular basis pathogenic role of -1131C variant . Conclusions: Our results suggest of brain function . that while all of the three apolipoprotein A5 gene variants are associ- ated with elevated triglycerides; only the -1131C and the IVS3+476A P06.026 alleles confer risk for all types of ischemic stroke; such association Association of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene could not be detected for 1259C allele . c677t polymorphism with unipolar depression T. G. Noskova, E. K. Khusnutdinova; P06.024 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Centre RAS, Ufa, Rus- APOA5 gene s19W polymorphism and atherogenic dyslipidemia sian Federation. in patients with type 2 diabetes Unipolar depression (UD) is a complex disorder thought to result from A. N. Voitovich1, A. A. Bystrova2, V. L. Stepanova2, B. I. Smirnov3, O. A. multiple genes interacting with environmental and developmental com- Berkovich2, E. V. Shliakhto2, V. I. Larionova1; ponents . The 5,10-methylentetrahydrofolate reductase gene (MTHFR) 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian is considered to be an important candidate gene of MDD . A single Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian base mutation C677T results in production of a mildly dysfunctional Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Electrotechnical University, Saint-Petersburg, thermolabile enzyme . The MTHFR 677T/T genotype and, to a lesser Russian Federation. extent the 677C/T genotype, is associated with a significant elevation Atherogenic dyslipidemia (AD), characterized by increased plasma in the circulating concentrations of the homocystein and a decrease in levels of triglycerides or combined hyperlipidemia (hypertriglyceride- serum folate concentrations, which may be parallel a similar reduction mia and low plasma HDL level), is the most common in patients with in 5-methyltetrahydrofolate in CNS and may lead to reduction in mono- type 2 diabetes (DM2) . Apolipoprotein (apo) A5 gene S19W polymor- amine neurotransmitter function and greater risk of UD . This study phism has been shown to associate with increased plasma TG levels . examined association of the MTHFR gene C677T polymorphism with So, the goal of this study was to define types of AD in patients with UD in Russian and Tatar patients . Samples of 174 patients and 331 DM2 and to estimate the allele and genotype frequencies distribution healthy volunteers were investigated using PCR method and subse- of S19W APOA5 in groups of patients with different types of AD . A total quent enzyme digestion. There were significant differences in distribu- of 232 patients with DM2 (168 women and 64 men, mean age 57±7) tion of genotype (χ2 = 6.006, P =0.05) and allele (χ2 = 4.603, P =0.03) were classified as belonging to a group with isolated hypertriglyceride- frequencies between depressive patients and controls in total sam- mia (62 subjects), a group with isolated hypoalphalipoproteinemia (13 ples . For the Tatars the MTHFR*T/*T (OR = 3 .21, 95%CI =1 .04-9 .93) subjects), a group with combined hyperlipidemia (27 subjects) and a and the MTHFR*T (OR = 1 .87, 95%CI =1 .19-2 .94) are risk markers; normolipidemic group (118 subjects) . APOA5 S19W genetic polymor- the MTHFR*C/*C (OR = 0 .51, 95%CI = 0 .29-0 .90) and MTHFR*C (OR phism was studied using the PCR-RFLP method . For statistical analy- = 0 .53, 95%CI = 0 .34-0 .84) are protective markers . For the Russians sis of the allele and genotype frequencies distribution, the AD groups only MTHFR*T/*T genotype (OR = 2 .56, 95%CI = 1 .01-6 .48) is a pos- were compared with a normolipidemic group using the chi-squared sible risk marker for development of UD. Our results confirm the role of test or the Fisher’s exact test . We found out the allele and genotype MTHFR C677T polymorphism in susceptibility to unipolar depression frequencies in the group with isolated hypertriglyceridemia differed sig- in patients of Russian and Tatar descents . nificantly from the same in the normolipidemic group (p< 0.001). At the same time there was a statistically significant difference in allele andMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.027 using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymor- the role of cytokine gene polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of phism (PCR-RFLP) method or TaqMan assay . childhood asthma There were significant differences in the genotype and allele distri- Y. Fedorova1, A. Karunas1, N. Ramazanova2, E. Etkina2, E. Khusnutdinova1; bution of rs1800469 and rs2241715 polymorphisms of the TGF- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir β1 between asthmatic patient and controls . The combination of TC Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. and TT genotypes of rs1800469 were also associated with a signifi- Asthma is a complex genetic disease characterized by increased air- cantly increased risk of asthma as compared with the CC genotype way responsiveness, reversible airway obstruction, and airway inflam- [OR=1 .697, 95%CI= 1 .151-2 .503] . The G allele of rs2241715 was mation. Cytokines have important pathogenic role in this inflammation. associated with an increased risk of asthma as compared with the T In the present study, we analyzed associations between polymorphic allele [OR=1 .331,95%CI=1 .051-1 .684], however, only borderline sig- variants of cytokine and cytokine receptor genes (IL4, IL4RA, IL10, nificant genotypic difference was found between asthma and control IL1B, IL1RN) and asthma . The patient group consisted of 150 children group. Significant difference in the observed haplotype frequencies with atopic asthma; the control group included 183 unrelated non- between cases and controls was also found . Those subjects with hap- atopic individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia . Genotyping was lotype TCTG have increased risk of asthma . performed by polymerase chain reaction with specific primers followed Our results suggest that the two polymorphisms of the TGF-β1 gene by restriction digestion and gel electrophoresis . are significantly associated with asthma in Chinese population of Tai- A significant difference was observed in the allele and genotype fre- wan . quencies of -627C>A polymorphism of the IL10 gene and -590C>T polymorphism of the IL4 gene between children with asthma and non- P06.030 atopic control (p<0,05) . The frequency of CC genotype of the IL10 Association between ABcA1 transporter mRNA level and gene was higher in asthma patients (58,0%) compared with control atherosclerosis groups (42,1%; OR=1,9) . Increased frequencies of TT genotype and T E. Demina1, T. Rodygina1, A. Sheydina1, A. Denisenko2, A. Shvarcman1; allele of the IL4 gene were found in asthma patients (17,3% vs 7,7%; 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute of RAS, Gatchina Leningradskaya OR=2,5 and 46,0% vs 33,5%; OR=1,7, accordingly) . oblast`, Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg Institute of Experimental Medi- The analysis of -511C>T and 3953C>T polymorphisms of the IL1B cine, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. gene, VNTR-polymorphism of the IL1RN gene, Ile50Val polymorphism ABCA1 transporter is known to play important role in the cholesterol of the IL4RA gene revealed that there are no significant differences in transport from peripheral tissues. However its influence on atheroscle- the frequencies of allele and genotype between asthma patients and rosis development remains not studied completely . control group (p>0,05) . According to our hypothesis ABCA1 gene expression level may influ- In summary, these results provided evidence for a role of IL4 (-590 ence on metabolism of antiatherogenic high density lipoproteins (HDL) C>T) and IL10 (-627 C>A) polymorphisms in susceptibility to childhood and contribute to atherosclerosis development . asthma in Volga-Ural region of Russia . For ABCA1 gene expression level analysis banks of cDNA, isolated from leukocytes and macrophages of controls and patients with ath- P06.028 erosclerosis diagnosed using angiography, were created. A significant iL4RA and iL12B gene polymorphisms with atopic asthma and reduction of ABCA1 mRNA level in leukocytes of patients with athero- opistorchosis sclerosis when compared with controls was discovered . Mean ABCA1 I. Saltykova1, A. Simakina1, E. Bragina2, M. Freidin2, L. Ogorodova1, V. Pusy- expression levels in leukocytes for the group of patients and for the rev2; control group are 0 .63±0 .28 and 0 .92±0 .13 (p=0 .02) . In the same time 1Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of we detected a significant increase of ABCA1 mRNA level in macro- Medical Genetics of Tomsk Scientific Center of Siberian Branch of Russian phages of patients when compared with controls . Mean ABCA1 ex- Academy of Medical Science, Tomsk, Russian Federation. pression levels in macrophages for the group of patients and for the Two common polymorphisms of the human IL4RA (I50V) and IL12B control group are 1 .32±0 .11 and 0 .90±0 .16 (p=0 .003) . (1188A/C) genes were studied in 150 Russian patients with atopic In the group of patients with atherosclerosis 2-fold increase of ABCA1 bronchial asthma (BA), patients with Opisthorchis felineus helminth gene expression level in macrophages when compared with the one in invasion, patients co-affected by these two diseases, and 150 healthy leukocytes was discovered . Mean levels of ABCA1 gene expression in controls from Tomsk (Russia) . Unlike the previous studies, no associa- macrophages and leukocytes of patients are 1 .32±0 .11 and 0 .63±0 .28, tion with any disease was found for IL4RA gene polymorphism . The respectively, (p=0 .000026) . In the control group ABCA1 gene expres- 1188A/C exchange in the IL12B gene was not associated with BA as sion level in macrophages did not differ from the one in leukocytes . well; however, the 1188C/C genotype prevalence was significantly The study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research higher in opisthorchosis patients as compared to the controls (p<0 .05) . (grant 06-04-49609) . These data suggest a possible involvement of common polymorphism of the IL12B gene in pathogenesis of opisthorchosis . P06.031 study of heme oxigenase 2 gene mutation as risk factor for cAD P06.029 in iranian patients with Atherosclerosis Association between genetic polymorphisms in transforming S. Raoufzadeh, M. Zamani, S. Aleyasin; growth factor beta-1 (TGFβ1) and asthma National Institut for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic H. W. Lin1, G. G. Yang2, L. Y. Wang3, M. W. Lin1,4; Republic of Iran. 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2De- Heme oxygenase 2 (HMOX2) enzyme is important in oxidative stress partment of Respiratory and Critical Care, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, found in endothelial cells and adventitial nerves of blood vessels . This Hualien, Taiwan, 3Institute of Aboriginal Health, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, enzyme in collaboration with heme oxygenase 1 enzyme metabolizes Taiwan, 4Department of Medical Research & Education, Taipei Veterans Gen- heme molecules into ferrous iron, carbon monoxide (CO) and biliver- eral Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. din which is further reduced to bilirubin . Both of biliverdin and biliru- Asthma is a complex disease resulting from a combination of multiple bin are potent antioxidants and reduce the chance of atherosclerosis . genetic and environmental factors . Transforming growth factor beta-1 HMOX2 induces endothelial relaxation by synthesizing CO . This is the (TGF-β1) is expressed in many cell types including inflammatory cells first study to investigate heme oxygenase 2 gene mutations in 137 and structural cells, such as airway epithelial and smooth muscle cells . patients with premature CAD affected with atherosclerosis and 100 TGF-β1 may modulate airway inflammation and remodeling, therefore normal controls . Pairs of primers have been designed to amplify exons TGF-β1 is a plausible candidate gene for asthma . 2, 3 and 4 of HMOX2 gene . All products have been analyzed by SSCP To investigate association between asthma and polymorphisms of analysis and shifted fragments were separated for further sequencing . the TGF-β1 gene, we conducted an age-sex matched case-control Two new sequence variations were observed among 13 patients with study including 283 asthmatic patients and 285 healthy controls in Tai- atherosclerosis consisted of C to A substitution in codone A70D (GCC wan . We selected 4 SNPs (rs1800469 C/T,rs1982073 T/C,rs2241715 to GAC) and A to G substitution in codone K89E (AAG to GAG) . Levels T/G,rs2241716 G/A) on the TGFβ1 gene and performed genotyping of total direct and indirect bilirubin were determined in patients andMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  control groups. Statistical analysis showed significant association be- observed with five consecutive SNPs of ATP1A2 (1q23; p=0 .00055) tween A to G mutation and risk of atherosclerosis (P = 0.01). No signifi- and with eight consecutive SNPs within a TLE-gene cluster (19p13; cant alteration in the level of total bilirubin was observed between case p=0 .000078) . This association evidence was not detected using the and control groups (P = 0.6). This is the first report on the association nationwide sample, suggesting enrichment of these loci to our pedi- between HMOX2 and atherosclerosis among Iranian CAD patients . gree . We are currently performing a high-resolution analysis of the This finding presences the importance of this mutation in development extent of shared chromosomal regions among the members of the of atherosclerosis . More study would show the importance of hemoxy- pedigree with Illumina 317k platform . genase 2 gene mutation in other populations . P06.034 P06.032 the BDNF receptor gene NTRK is a susceptibility gene for Large scale association study of gene-gene interaction within autism the filaggrin pathway C. Correia1,2, I. Sousa2, I. Peixeiro2, L. Lourenço2, J. Almeida3, R. Lontro3, L. E. Rodríguez1, H. Baurecht1, N. Novak2, N. Klopp3, T. Illig3, S. Wagenpfeil1, A. Galllagher4,5, M. Gill4,5, S. Ennis6, G. Oliveira3, A. M. Vicente1,2; D. Irvine4, S. Weidinger1; 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr.Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Instituto 1Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2University of Bonn, Bonn, Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Germany, 3Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Our Lady’s Coimbra, Portugal, 4Department of Genetics, Smurfit Institute, Trinity College, Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. Dublin, Ireland, 5Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, Filaggrin deficiency due to null mutations in the FLG gene has been 6School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, University College, Dublin, Ireland. established as risk factor for atopic eczema (AE) . Processing of pro- Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder likely determined by filaggrin to biologically active filaggrin monomers involves several de- multiple genes . The NTRK2 gene encodes a receptor, TrkB, for neu- phosphorylation and proteolytic steps, and their impairment might also rotrophin 4/5 and Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF), which disturb skin barrier function . Among the proteases suggested to be promotes neuronal differentiation and regulation of synaptic function implicated in profilaggrin processing is the stratum corneum chymo- in the developing and adult nervous system . Intriguing observations, tryptic enzyme (SCCE), which is possibly regulated by SPINK5-de- such as increased BDNF levels in autistic children and NTRK2 muta- rived serine proteinase inhibitor LEKTI. An insertion in the 3′ untrans- tions in children with developmental delays, raise the hypothesis that lated region of the kallikrein 7 gene (KLK7) encoding SCCE as well as an abnormal function/expression of NTRK2 might be involved in au- a SPINK5 variant have been reported to be associated with AE, but tism . 38 tag SNPs, spanning the NTRK2 gene, were tested for as- could not be replicated so far . sociation with autism in 323 Portuguese trios. We found significant In our study we aimed at clarifying the role of these genetic variants for transmission disequilibrium of alleles at three markers in introns 5-6 AE. Considering the potential biological interactions between filaggrin, and 15-16 (0 .011<P<0 .041) . Given this evidence for association, we SSCE and LEKTI, we also examined gene-gene interactions . genotyped these markers in a second population sample of 168 Irish Association analysis was carried out in a cohort of 486 German fami- trios . In the combined sample (N=491) we found an association of the lies as well as in a cohort of 773 cases and 2924 supernormal controls . same three SNPs at a more stringent P-level (0 .006<P<0 .015), and Whereas the strong effect of FLG polymorphisms was confirmed, no found nominal associations with four additional markers in intron 22- association of the KLK7 insertion could be detected . Concerning the 23 (0 .0211<P<0.043). Previously we have described a significant in- SPINK5 polymorphism rs2303067 A-allele, weak association was ob- crease of plasma BDNF levels in approximately 30% of our patients . served in the family collection only, with a strong maternal effect . There We therefore screened NTRK2 exons encoding ligand-binding and was no evidence for epistatic effects between FLG, KLK7, and SPINK5 catalytic regions (exons 6, 7, 12, 18, 20-24) for mutations in 20 autis- variants that significantly predict AE risk. Thus, our data confirm the tic individuals with increased BDNF levels and 10 controls . No muta- impact of filaggrin deficiency due to FLG loss-of-function mutations on tions were identified in these individuals, and there was no evidence AE risk, but do not support the hypothesis that this effect is dependent for association of NTRK2 with plasma BDNF distribution . The overall on KLK7 or SPINK5 . results therefore suggest that NTRK2 may be a susceptibility gene for autism, but its impact on autism is not mediated by the increased P06.033 BDNF levels . Linkage and linkage disequilibrium scan for autism in an extended pedigree from Finland P06.035 H. Kilpinen1, T. Ylisaukko-oja1,2, K. Rehnström1,2, E. Gaál1, J. A. Turunen1, E. A large-scale systematic search for causal variants involved Kempas1, L. von Wendt3, T. Varilo1,2, L. Peltonen1,2,4; in autism and schizophrenia: resequencing of X chromosome 1Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, synaptic genes Finland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Fin- A. Piton, G. Julie, S. 2. D. team, G. A. Rouleau; land, 3Unit of Child Neurology, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki, Center for the study of brain diseases, CR CHUM Hopital Notre-Dame, Montre- Finland, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. al, QC, Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada. As a part of the genetic study of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) Autism (AUT) and schizophrenia (SCZ) are two common neurodevel- in the Finnish population, an extensive genealogical search was con- opmental disorders, which result from the combination of genetic and ducted to find out whether a substantial fraction of the families would environmental factors . Linkage studies on the whole genome and as- share the same ancestral lineage . Based on this search back to the sociation studies with candidate genes have failed to clearly identify 17th century, 18 ASD families (33 affected) were merged into one ex- the genes involved in the pathogenesis of these two diseases . We tended pedigree . hypothesize that several different rare variants in numerous genes, We hypothesized that this pedigree could expose rare ASD gene(s) including de novo variants, could lead to these diseases . enriched to this internal subisolate, and performed a genome-wide Therefore, we decided to directly sequence, in 285 AUT and SCZ pa- scan using 1107 STS-markers (intermarker spacing ~3 .4cM) . A joint tients, genes coding for proteins involved in the synapse, as defects analysis of linkage and linkage disequilibrium was performed with in synaptic processes can lead to impairment in cognitive function . We Pseudomarker statistics and a traditional multipoint linkage analysis decided to focus on the X chromosome, as evidence supports its impli- with Simwalk2 . cation in the predisposition to AUT especially, but also to SCZ . Nine loci exceeded the chosen significance level of -log(p)>2.5. Of Using various methods and sources, we established a complete list these, 1q21-23 (p=0 .00082) is one of the best loci in our previous ge- of 183 synaptic and potentially synaptic genes located on this chro- nome-wide scans for autism and Asperger syndrome in Finland, while mosome and we ranked them according to their relevance for the 15q11-13 (p=0 .00081) is a well-recognized site for cytogenetic abnor- diseases . We selected in this way 104 X-linked candidate genes that malities associated with autism . Best multipoint linkage was observed have been sequenced in our patient cohort. We have already identified at 19p13 [-log(p)=3 .57] . more than hundred rare non-synonymous variants in AUT and SCZ Regional candidate genes were chosen from these best loci at 1q23, patients . Some of them are particularly interesting due to their inheri- 15q12 and 19p13, and analyzed with SNPs using additional 126 tance mode and their potential effect on the protein . families with ASDs (281 affected). Most significant association was The screening of synaptic genes located on the X chromosome has ledMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  to the identification of deleterious variants that could be responsible for P06.038 AUT or SCZ in our patients . We are currently performing functional A strong association of axillary osmidrosis with genotype of the validation of these variants using animal models (zebrafish, fruitfly, ABCC11 gene defining the earwax type worm or mice neurons). M. Tsuda1,2, N. Miwa1,2, M. Nakashima1,3,2, M. Nakano4, M. Nakashima5, K. Yoshiura1,2, T. Ohta6,2, N. Niikawa6,2; P06.036 1Department of Human Genetics, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki Association between polymorphisms of immune defense University, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 2So- modifier genes and autoimmune diseases in Tomsk population lution Oriented Research of Science and Technology, Japan Science and A. A. Rudko1, E. I. Kondratieva2, N. V. Tarasenko2, E. V. Loshkhova2, G. N. Technology Agency, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Reconstruction and Plastic Yankina2, N. P. Stepanenko2, V. P. Puzyrev1; Surger, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University Graduate School 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 4Department of Reconstruction and State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Plastic Surgery, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University Graduate The results of an investigation of the influence of immune defense School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 5Tissue and Histopathology modifier genes polymorphism [IL1B (+3953A1/A2), IL1RN (VNTR), IL4 Section, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University Graduate School (3′-UTR G/C), IL4RA (I50V), IL12B (A1188C) and VDR (F/f and B/b)] of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 6Research Institute of Personalized on the development and presentation of type 1 diabetes, celiac dis- Health Sciences, Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, Hokkaido, Japan. ease (CD), and autoimmune thyroiditis (AT) are presented . The study Two types of cerumen are known in humans: the wet type with brown- was performed in 49 families with 139 patients affected by CD, 110 ish sticky earwax, and the dry type lacking or reducing ceruminous families with 350 type 1 diabetes patients, 119 patients with AT, and secretion . The wet type is predominant in populations of European 129 unaffected controls of Russian ethnicity from Tomsk . We discov- and African origin, while the dry type is often seen in Eastern Asian ered various potential associations. The first was between +3953A1/ populations . An association of axillary odor with the wet earwax type A2*IL1B and type 1 diabetes (p=0 .040), and the second between the among the Japanese was reported about 70 years ago . However, VV genotype of I50V*IL4RA and AT (p=0 .032) . Family-based studies the data of the two traits were based on phenotypical analysis by re- revealed association between 3’-UTR G/C* IL4 and CD (p=0 .024), and searchers or on self-declaration by the subjects examined, because of between I50V*IL4RA with type 1 diabetes (p=0 .018), and additionally lacking of definite diagnostic methods. We recently found that a SNP with complications of the disease: diabetic retinopathy (p=0 .050), ne- (rs17822931) of the ABCC11 gene is the determinant of the earwax phropathy (p=0 .026) and neuropathy (p=0 .050) . Furthermore, the as- types . In the present study, a total of 79 individuals with axillary os- sociation with clinical course of the CD (typical form) was obtained midrosis (AO), who received a surgical operation to remove bilateral for I50V*IL4RA and F/f*VDR polymorphisms (p=0 .001 and p=0 .009, axillary apocrine glands, were examined for their earwax types by ge- respectively) . The combination of type 1 diabetes and AT was asso- notyping at the rs17822931 polymorphic locus . The earwax-type fre- ciated with allele A2 of the VNTR*IL1RN polymorphism (p=0 .018), quency among them was compared with that in the general Japanese whereas combination of CD and AT was associated with allele C of population . The result showed a strong association between AO and G/C 3’-UTR*IL4 . Thus, in this investigation we detected associations the wet earwax type (c2 = 90 .00, p < 2 .5x10-21) . In addition, immu- of the studied phenotypes mainly occurred in polymorphic variants of nohistochemical study of the axillary and ceruminous apocrine gland the Th2-immunity genes . tissues using an anti-ABCC11-protein antibody revealed that ABCC11 is strongly expressed and localized in the apical membrane of the both P06.037 gland cells . The result indicates that ABCC11 protein (MRP8) functions Genetic analysis of pedigrees with autosomal dominant in the axillary apocrine gland as well as in the ceruminous gland, and Premature Graying of hair supports the association between axillary odor and earwax type . S. Ari1, A. K. Maiti2, J. V. Solanki3, R. Uppala1, U. Radhakrishna1; 1Green Cross Blood Bank & Genetic Centre, Ahmedabad, India, 2Sealy Center P06.039 for Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, BcLi glucocrticoid receptor gene polymorhism and bone United States, 3Department of Animal Genetics & Breeding, Veterinary College, mineralisation and methabolism in juvenile idiopathic arthritis Gujarat Agriculture University, Anand-388001, India. M. M. Kostik1, A. A. Kozyreva2, D. N. Baranov1, N. N. Slizovskaya1, V. I. Lari- Whiteness of hair is one of the most recognizable early signs of aging . onova1; This is also termed ‘Canities’ . It is caused by the gradual decrease of 1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, pigmentation that occurs when melanin ceases to be produced in the 2Federal heart, blood and endocrinology center, named by V.A. Almazov, Saint- hair root, and new hairs grow without pigment . The change naturally Petersburg, Russian Federation. occurs as people age, usually turning hair from its natural color to gray, Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is group of chronic inflammatory joint then to white . Premature-graying of hair (MIM 139100) or whiteness of disease with different complications, such as osteopenia . Some pa- the hair is a phenotypic change that appears as early as at teens and tients receive only nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) and twenties, for some, even in childhood . The causes of this relatively other patients receive glucocorticoides . common condition are largely unknown, although genetic, medical and The aim of our study was whether BclI glucocorticoid receptor (GCR) other environmental factors all are suspected . The phenotype is fre- gene polymorphism associated with bone mineralization and metabo- quently associated with many known genetic disorders such as Book lism disturbances in JIA children . syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome and Lison syndrome . The most Objectives: we included in our study 122 JA children, 43 boys (35,2%) common factors that could trigger the condition were tobacco smok- and 79 girls (64,8%) . Glucocorticoides were administered 30 children ing . We have studied six large Indian families with premature-graying (24,6%), 3 boys and 27 girls . Another 92 JIA children were treated with of hair . The phenotype in these families is constituent with autosomal NSAID . dominant mode of inheritance . The pedigrees consist of 290 individu- Methods: BclI GCR polymorphism was detected by polymerase chain als including 57 affecteds (25 males 32 females . The age of onset reaction with restriction assay [Fleury I . et all, 2003] . Osteopenia was ranged from early childhood to teenage with a graying range from 20- detected by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry L1-L4 (Hologic QDR 40% hair and it increased with the advancement of age . Skipping of a 4500C), with national pediatric referent database (Scheplyagina L .A ., generation was observed in three pedigrees . Cytogenetic analysis of 2005 et all) . Bone metabolic markers, such as total Ca, Ca++, phos- two affecteds in each family did not show any anomaly . Systematic ge- phate, and total alkaline phosphatise, osteocalcine, β-CrossLabs and nome-wide association or high density linkage studies with microchips parathyroid hormone also were detected in our patients . could be initiated in these families to identify the genetic loci . Email: Results: We haven’t differences between genotypes and alleles dis- u_c_rao@hotmail .com tribution between children, who received NSAID and glucocorticoi- des. Girls with osteopenia (Zscore<-1,0 SD) had significantly higher GG genotype and G allele GCR gene . Girls, carriers G allele had significantly low bone mineralization parameters: bone mineral den- sity (BMD) - Z score (p=0,003) and tendency: bone mineral content (p=0,07) and BMD, measured in g\sm2 (p=0,06) and significantly highMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  osteocalcine level (p=0,05) when girls with CC genotype . P06.042 Conclusion: in our study we have revealed that GG genotype and G A 7 mb region within 11q13 is candidate to contain a high allele BclI GCR was associated with osteopenia in JIA girls with high penetrance gene for breast cancer osteocalcine level . J. M. Rosa Rosa1, G. Pita1, A. González-Neira1, V. Fernández1, R. Oldenburg2, P. Devilee3, J. Benítez1; P06.040 1Human Cancer Genetics Programme, Madrid, Spain, 2Dept. of Clinical Genet- S2G (Syndrome to Gene): Novel software for the identification of ics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Human Genetics, Leiden, The Nether- genes associated with human genetic syndromes lands. A. Gefen, R. Cohen, O. S. Birk; Familial breast cancer represents up to 5% of the total breast can- National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel. cer cases . Only a fraction of families affected by breast cancer is ex- The identification of genomic loci associated with human genetic syn- plained by mutation in BRCA1 and BRCA2 . Recently, our group has dromes has been significantly facilitated through the generation of performed a new SNP-based linkage study in 19 non-BRCA1/2 fami- high density SNP arrays. However, the identification of the specific dis- lies from Spain, Netherlands and USA We found that a single family ease-associated genes within such loci is still a tedious labor-intensive was linked to two different chromosomes (regions 11q13 and 14q21), bottleneck. Optimal selection of candidate genes from within a defined and showed a non-parametric LOD score of 11 .5 in both regions . The genomic locus is a crucial step in the process . regions spanned 28 and 14 .5 Mb respectively . We ruled out any pos- We have generated novel software that selects optimal candidate sible translocation between both chromosomes using cytogenetic genes, using a two step procedure . For any given syndrome, the soft- techniques . We used both a panel of STRs and an indirect approach ware seeks all genes associated with syndromes containing similar based on HapMap data to narrow down these two regions from 28 phenotypes . It then searches through the entire human genome for to 7Mb in chromosome 11 and from 14 .5 to 8 .5 Mb in chromosome other genes that are associated with these reference genes . This 14 . We selected the 11q13 region to perform a mutational screening search takes into account interacting biochemical pathways, protein- on some candidate genes (NuMA1, FGF3, CCND1, RAD9A, RNF121, protein interactions, transcription factor cascades, etc . A gene list is FADD and has-mir-192) . Although we have not found any deleterious generated with an order of priority (degree of possible interaction with mutation in the coding sequence of these genes, data from infrequent the reference gene(s)). This list is then filtered for the specific genomic markers located in different genes confirms 11q13 as a candidate locus in question - and a prioritized list of candidate genes is gener- region to contain a breast cancer susceptibility gene . A larger study ated . involving new families could limit their size and facilitate a more exten- S2G can be used also in clinical genetics: when S2G gets a query sive mutational screening . for related syndromes of a given one, the score vector of the given syndrome is sorted creating a list of syndromes starting with the clos- P06.043 est related syndrome . The result of the query is a list of syndromes PPPR and NFATC polymorphisms have no influence on with their known causing genes, so one can view and explore which cardiac parameters in healthy individuals and related to cardiac genes are associated with similar phenotypes to those of the query remodeling in patients with cardiovascular disease syndrome . O. G. Ivanova1, O. A. Makeeva1, I. V. Tsimbal’uk2, K. V. Puzyrev3, O. Y. Byich- kova1, A. A. Lezhnev3, V. A. Kazakov3, V. M. Shipulin3, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; P06.041 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian Dystrobrevin binding protein 1 gene (DTNBP) in a Bipolar case- State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute of control study (BAccs) Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation. D. Gaysina1,2, S. Cohen1, P. C. Chow1, L. Martucci1, A. Schosser1,3, H. A. Ball1, Numerous data appeared supporting the notion about an important F. Tozzi4, J. Perry5, P. Muglia4, I. W. Craig1, P. McGuffin1, A. Farmer1; role which calcineurin pathway plays in myocardial hypertrophy, car- 1MRC SGDP, Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Bio- diac remodeling and human heart failure . Though only few studies had chemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Medical University Vienna, been reported to date which demonstrate an association of calcineurin Vienna, Austria, 4GSK Research & Development, Verona, Italy, 5GSK Research pathway genes polymorphisms with cardiac parameters or other car- & Development, Greenford, United Kingdom. diovascular measurements . Background: Recent studies suggest a substantial degree of overlap in In this study we analyzed association of two calcineurin pathway genetic susceptibility across the traditional categories of schizophrenia genes polymorphisms (5-base pair deletion in calcineurin B promoter and bipolar disorder . There is consistent evidence for an association - 5I/5D PPP3R1 gene polymorphism and SNP rs2228309 in exon 2 of the DTNBP1 gene with schizophrenia, and thus this gene has also of NFATC4 gene - G160A) with echocardiographic parameters in 216 become a focus of further investigation in bipolar disorder (BD) . healthy individuals . Two polymorphisms under study had previously Methods: The aim of our study is to explore the association of DTNBP1 been shown by us to be associated with left ventricular (LV) remodel- gene with BD and with a sub phenotype such as presence/ absence ing in patients with arterial hypertension . of psychotic symptoms in a sample of 465 patients with BD (ICD10/ In healthy subjects we did not find association of those two polymor- DSMIV) and 478 ethnically matched control subjects recruited from phisms with LV myocardium mass index, wall thickness, LV remodel- the UK . Seven SNPs of the DTNBP1: rs2743852 (SNP C), rs760761 ing index, end diastolic size, ejection fraction or other cardiovascular (P1320), rs1011313 (P1325), rs3213207 (P1635), rs2619539 (P1655), parameters . rs16876571 and rs17470454 were investigated using SNPlex geno- To further analyze the role of two functional genetic variants we collect- typing system . ed a group of patients with ischemic heart disease and ischemic cardio- Results: We report significant differences in genotypic and allelic fre- myopathy (n=104) . We had revealed that patients differed from healthy quencies of rs3213207 and rs760761 of DTNBP1 gene between the subjects in A160G NFATC4 gene allele frequencies (p=0,046) . bipolar patients and controls . We also show a global haplotypic as- Our data supports the assumption that calcineurin pathway compo- sociation and an association of a specific haplotype within this gene nents may be involved in pathological types human heart remodeling . with BD . Conclusions: Our results are consistent with previous studies in term P06.044 of a general association between the dysbindin gene and bipolar dis- study of genetic risk factors for cardiovascular disease in são order and provide additional molecular genetic evidence that a portion miguel island population (Azores) of the genotypic overlap between schizophrenia and bipolar affective T. Pereirinha1, C. C. Branco1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; disorder is attributable to this gene . 1Mol Genetics & Pathology Unit; Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of Ponta Acknowledgements: Russian Science Support Foundation Grant Delgada, EPE, Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, Oeiras, (Gaysina), MRC UK PhD studentship (Cohen), Erwin-Schrodinger Portugal. Fellowship (Schosser), ESRC UK PhD studentship (Ball) . The case- Several genetic variants − factor V Leiden (G1691A), prothrombin control collection was supported by GlaxoSmithKline, Research and (G20210A) and MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) − were found to be as- Development . sociated with cardiovascular disease (CVD), a frequent cause of death in many populations . The aim of this study is to investigate the preva-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  lence of CVD risk mutations in São Miguel Island (Azores) . From this (3) integrin gene (ITGB3) -Leu33Pro polymorphism may be a sus- population, 87 healthy individuals were analysed for the following vari- ceptible predictor different types of the cerebral infarctions in Kazakh ants: factor V Leiden, MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) by PCR-RFLP, population . and prothrombin by real-time PCR (FACTOR II Q - PCR Alert Kit, Nanogen Advanced Diagnostics) . The allelic and genotypic frequen- P06.047 cies of these polymorphisms were estimated and their values were Analysis of N-acetyltransferase 2 gene polymorphism in cervical compared with other populations . The results demonstrate that values cancer of the mutant alleles MTHFR 677T (38 .5%) and 1298C (23 .6%) were I. Novakovic1, D. Vusurovic1, N. Maksimovic1, T. Damnjanovic1, B. Jekic1, B. relatively similar to those found in other populations . However, in São Popovic2, L. Lukovic1, R. Papovic1, V. Kesic3; Miguel Island population, factor V Leiden shows a value of 1 .7% for 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of the 1691A allele, one of the lowest in Europe . Whereas, prothrombin Human Genetics, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Gynecol- (20210A) is present at a frequency of 3 .4%, being one of the highest . ogy and Obstetrics, CCS, Belgrade, Serbia. Genotype frequencies of the genetic polymorphisms analysed showed Cervical cancer (CC) is one of the most common causes of morbidity similar values to other European populations . Furthermore, thirteen and mortality in women . Although the HPV is a major factor associated genetic profiles were identified in the study group: 13 individuals with CC the other risk factors have been indicated including smoking, (14 .94%) had none of the variants, 37 (42 .53%) only one, 33 (37 .93%) oral contraceptive usage, luck of awareness for preventive care as well two, and 4 (4 .60%) had three or more polymorphisms . The joint analy- as genetic risk factor . sis of these polymorphisms represent a valuable contribution to further In our research N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) gene polymorphism was understanding the CVD in São Miguel Island . Funded by Azorean Gov- estimated as a possible genetic risk factor . NAT2 has an important role ernment (M1 .2 .1 ./I/003/2005) . lmotavieira@hdes .pt in the metabolism of carcinogens and “slow acetylator” phenotype has been considered as risk factor for malignancy . P06.045 Our study included 51 women with diagnosis of CC and control group Analysis of sequence variants and splice isoforms in iL18RAP in of 51 healthy women . Alleles detrmining fast acetylation (F1) or slow celiac disease acettlation (S1, S2, S3) at NAT2 loci were detected by PCR-RFLPs G. Trynka1, A. Zhernakova2, K. A. Hunt3, G. A. R. Heap3, L. Franke2, J. Roma- method . The other risk factors were collected by questionnaire . It was nos1, A. Szperl1, M. Bruinenberg1, M. C. Wapenaar1, P. Deloukas4, R. McMa- calculated the frequency of gene polymorphisms, possible link with nus5, D. A. van Heel3, C. Wijmenga1,2; CC, frequency of other risk factors as well as combination of all esti- 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University mated risk factors . Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Queen Mary University of Lon- The most common genotypes in the CC and control group was don, London, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, F1S1and S2S3, respectively, both in the same percentage of 27 .45% . United Kingdom, 5Trinity Centre for Health Science, Dublin, Ireland. Genotype S2S3 has been significantly frequent in CC women what is Celiac disease (CD) is a common autoimmune disorder of the small in- considered as a predisposition for disease . Protective role of F1 allele testine induced by the ingestion of gluten protein in genetically suscep- for CC was not established . Smoking, rare gynecological checks, as tible individuals . CD is a complex genetic trait in which presence of the well as luck of knowledge of CC prevention are confirmed as important HLA-DQ2/8 genotype is necessary but not sufficient for the disease risk factors for disease . development . Previously a genome wide association study (GWAS) in The research indicated rolle of NAT2 polymorphism in CC and con- the UK celiac cohort initially identified a new non-HLA locus on chromo- firmed that regular gynecological check trough well organised screen- some 4q27 . In a more extensive follow-up study, 1020 UKGWAS top ing is still best preventive method . associated SNPs were independently genotyped in three additional European celiac cohorts (2 .410 celiac cases, 4 .828 controls) and sev- P06.048 en novel celiac loci were identified. One of the associated regions (P the taqiB Polymorphism of cEtP Gene is Associated with Risk overall=8 .49x10-10) maps to a 350-kb block on the chromosome 2q11- of coronary Atery Desease (cAD) in men in Russian Population 2q12 . This block contains four genes including two IL-18 receptors M. A. Bogdanova1, A. N. Voitovich1, O. S. Romashkina1, N. Moroshkina2, O. (IL18R1 and IL18RAP) . The strong correlation between the IL18RAP Ignateva2, V. Isakov1, A. Y. Anisenkova1, B. I. Smirnov3, Y. R. Kovalev1, O. A. mRNA expression and associated SNP was observed in a group of Bercovich2, V. I. Larionova1; treated celiac patients (p<0 .0001) . Since the associated SNP is an 1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian intronic variant we sequenced the coding regions of IL18RAP in 23 ce- Federation, 2St. Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, liac disease patients and 8 controls, and found 19 variants, 17 of which Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg Electrotechnical University, St.Petersburg, were already in dbSNP . One novel variant (c .1210+17A>G) was ob- Russian Federation. served in a single control and the other one (c .1384+70_1384+71insT) CETP plays a central role in the metabolism of lipoproteins and might was found in two celiac individuals . We are now genotyping the 19 therefore alter the susceptibility to atherosclerosis . The TaqIB polymor- SNPs in a large cohort of Dutch, UK and Irish celiac samples . IL18RAP phism of the CETP had been shown to be associated with its effect is known to express two splice variants . Using quantitative real-time on lipid-transfer activity and on HDL cholesterol (HDL-CH) concentra- PCR we are currently testing for correlation between the genotypes tions . and the expression of IL18RAP splice isoforms . This study was undertaken to investigate genotype distribution and allele frequencies of CETP Taq B1 polymorphism in CAD patients of P06.046 different age and sex and healthy individuals and to reveal its influence Relationship between Beta (3) integrin (itGB3) Leo 33 Pro on HDL-CH concentration in theese groups of patients . Polymorphizm and cerebral infarction 594 patiens were included in our study: 227 men who survived miocar- S. K. N. Lee E.Y, S. K. N. Lee E.Y; dial infarction (MI) under the age of 45 (group I), 95 men with MI after Medical Institution, Almaty, Kazakhstan. 60 years (group II) and 115 healthy men (group III); 73 angiographicaly Objective: To explore the distribution of B beta 3 integrin (ITGB3) poly- diagnosed CAD women (group IV) and 84 women (age > 80 years) morphism in Kazakh population and the association of the polymor- without CAD (group V), all originated from Saint-Petersburg, Russia . phisms with the occurrence of different types cerebral infarction . Genotypes were determined by PCR-RFLP, statistic: χ2 tests, SPSS . Methods: The B beta 3 integrin - Leu 33 Pro polymorphism was identi- In group I levels of total cholesterol, LDL-CH and triglycerides was fied by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length poly- significantly higher, and levels of HDL-CH lower in comparison with morphism in 37 patients with different cerebral infarctions (CI) and 87 group II. We found that frequency of B1B2 genotype was significantly healthy controls matching on age and sex . . higher among patients from group I than among patients from group II Result : Distribution of genotypes ITGB3 basic group ( LL 37,8%, LP and group III (p=0,02 and p=0,04 respectively; OR=2) . There was no 56,8%, PP 5,4%),in control group (LL 55,2%, LP 44,8%) (p=0,2880) . difference in B1 and B2 allele frequency in droups of CAD and healthy Frequency 33Pro allele provided of above that control group (33, 8% men .Our results allow to suggest that B1B2 genotype of CEPT is a risk and 22, 4% accordingly) (p<0,05) . factor of CAD in men but not in women in analyzed groups . Conclusion: The study demonstrated that 33 Pro allele of the B betaMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.049 P06.051 Analysis of cFtR gene in italian patients with idiopathic Peripheral Gene Expression Profiling of CCK-4-Induced Panic in normocalciuric calcium nephrolithiasis Healthy subjects M. Gabaldo1, C. Bombieri1, A. Fabris2, A. Lupo2, P. F. Pignatti1, G. Gambaro2; K. Kallassalu1,2, E. Maron3,4, A. Tammiste1, R. Kolde5, I. Tõru4, V. Vasar4, J. 1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dpt.of Mother and Child and of Biology-Ge- Shlik6, A. Metspalu7,2; netics, University of Verona, Italy, 2Division of Nephrology, Dpt.of Biomedical- 1IMCB, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Research Depart- Surgical Sciences, University Hospital of Verona, Italy. ment of Mental Health, The North Estonian Regional Hospital, Psychiatry Clinic, Idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis (ICN) is a multifactorial disease, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, whose pathogenesis involves a complex interaction of environmental 5Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Department and individual factors, possibly genetic . A growing body of evidence of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 7University of Tartu, shows an association between Cystic Fibrosis (CF) and calcium neph- Tartu, Estonia. rolithiasis . Of patients with CF, 3 .0 to 6 .3% are affected with nephro- Panic attacks are anxiety-related phenomena defined as discrete pe- lithiasis, generally with calcium oxalate stones, a percentage greater riods of abruptly escalating intense fear or discomfort with multiple than that of age-matched healthy controls (1-2%) . CFTR mutations somatic and cognitive symptoms . Panic-induction or challenge tests may be responsible for abnormal kidney development or may affect in healthy subjects provide certain advantages in the investigation some steps of renal crystallization processes, thus favouring stone for- of genetic mechanisms of panic . Understanding why some, but not mation . Aim of this project was to investigate whether idiopathic normo- all, healthy subjects demonstrate panic response to a challenge test calciuric calcium renal stone formers are associated with CFTR gene may advance knowledge about the pathogenesis of panic attacks and mutations or polymorphisms . A group of 44 italian normocalciuric ICN panic disorder . patients and presenting no story reminding of CF were selected . Clini- In the present study we used the Illumina Human-6 v2 Beadchips for cal and laboratory test to determine renal function were performed to whole genome expression profiling in healthy subjects (n=31) partici- exclude other causes of nephrolitiasis . The complete coding sequence pating in a cholecystokinin-tetrapeptide (CCK-4) challenge test . We and the intronic flanking regions of the CFTR gene were analysed by aimed to explore the association between gene expression signatures, DGGE and sequencing . A total of 5/44(11%) patients had a mutation in the occurrence of panic attacks, and the influence of the CCK-4 chal- the CFTR gene, all in heterozygosis (2 F508del, 1 D1152H, 1 R110H, 1 lenge on peripheral transcriptional activity . R75Q) . This results is not statistically different from that found in a pre- The results showed that, after summarizing gene expression profiles vious study on the general population (HumGenet,106:172-178,2000) . before and after CCK-4 provocation, 16 genes were differently ex- The frequency of other common polymorphisms of the CFTR gene is pressed between panickers and non-panickers (p<0 .05) . Considering also not different from the general population . These results show that the higher susceptibility to panic attacks in females, we also performed the CFTR gene carrier status is not a risk factor for normocalciuric separate analyses by gender . The transcriptional levels of 8 genes ICN . distinguished female panickers from female non-panickers . In males, Work supported by Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation (grant 17 genes differed between panickers and non-panickers . Comparison FFC#6/2004) with contribution of “Fondazione G .Zanotto Verona” . of gene expression profiles in males and females revealed 5 genes expressed differently between genders. Gene expression profiling two P06.050 hours post-CCK-4 challenge in all subjects, 78 genes showed signifi- MTHFR gene polymorphisms as a risk factor for congenital heart cant changes in their transcriptional activity . disease in são miguel island, Azores (Portugal) In summary, this study represents the first attempt to find associations R. Cabral1,2, F. Tejero1, L. de Fez1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, C. P. Du- between panic attacks and peripheral gene expression in humans us- arte3, R. Anjos4, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; ing a challenge experiment design . 1Mol Genetics & Pathology Unit; Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of Ponta Delgada, EPE, Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, Oeiras, P06.052 Portugal, 3Pediatric Department; Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of Ponta Genetic polymorphism in the matrix metalloproteinases genes Delgada, EPE, Azores, Portugal, 4Pediatric Cardiology Department; Hospital of mmP1, mmP9,mmP12 and risk of chronic lung disease in Santa Cruz, Carnaxide, Portugal. children Congenital heart defects (CHD) are among the most common birth O. Tselousova1, G. Korytyna1, L. Akhmadishina1, T. Victorova1,2; defects worldwide, occurring in São Miguel Island with a prevalence 11Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir of 9 .16 per 1000 live births (Cymbron T et al . Community Genet; 9: State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. 107-112, 2006) . Several studies demonstrate that the intake, by the The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes that mothers, of periconceptional folic acid reduces the risk of congenital play an essential role in lung tissue remodeling and repair during the anomalies, including CHD . This fact led to the search of candidate inflammatory response. MMP1 (interstitial collagenase), MMP9 (ge- genes involved in folate metabolic pathways . Methylenetetrahydrofo- latinase B) and MMP12 (macrophage elastase) may be important in late reductase (MTHFR), a regulating enzyme of this metabolism, is the development of chronic lung disease. In our study, we investigated responsible for the availability of active folate . Our main goal is to test the role of common polymorphisms within several MMP gene promot- the C677T and A1298C MTHFR polymorphisms as risk factor for CHD . ers in genetic predisposition to chronic lung disease in children . DNA We analyzed these two variants in a control population of 469 healthy samples from 235 children with chronic respiratory diseases were ana- blood donors from São Miguel and in the CHD group of 95 patients . For lyzed . The control group consisted of 323 conditionally healthy per- 677CC, 677CT and 677TT, we observed 28 (29 .5%), 54 (56 .8%), and sons, living in the Republic of Bashkortostan, Russia . 13 (13 .7%) CHD cases, respectively . Similar proportions were found We have shown that the alleles and genotypes distribution of MMP12 in the control individuals, that is, 162 (34 .5%) were CC, 223 (47 .6%) gene A(-82)G polymorphism was significantly differed between pa- were CT and 84 (17 .9%) were TT . Genotype frequencies of 1298AA, tients with chronic lung disease and controls (x2=5 .45, df=1, P=0 .02 1298AC and 1298CC were 56 (58 .9%), 38 (40%) and 1 (1 .1%) among and x2=5 .85, df=1, P=0.016). The AA genotype was identified as a cases and 264 (56 .3%), 177 (37 .7%) and 28 (6%) among control pop- risk factor for chronic lung disease in children (x2=5 .85, df=1, P=0 .02, ulation, respectively. These values reveal no significant differences P =0 .04; OR=2 .02, 95%CI 1 .13-3 .62) . Genotype AG was more fre- cor between both groups (odds ratio, 95% confidence interval). Because quent in healthy children, and was identified as a protective genotype we have evidences of familial aggregation in CHD cases, this study is (x2=5 .85, df=1, P=0 .02, P =0 .04; OR=0 .50, 95%CI 0 .28-0 .89) . cor being concluded with the transmission/disequilibrium test in order to However, the genotype and allele frequencies of polymorphisms G(- analyse the transmission distortion in the 89 nuclear families . Funded 1607)GG of MMP1 gene and C(-1562)T of MMP9 gene do not signifi- by Azorean Government (M1 .2 .1 ./I/003/2005) . ritacabral@hdes .pt cantly differ in groups . Our results showed that the polymorphisms in several MMP genes may play a significant role in the development of chronic lung disease in children.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 00 P06.053 P06.055 Association study of microsattelite markers of five candidate Role of the c1236t (rs1128503) polymorphism of the mDR-1 loci in the cleft lip and palate patients of Lithuania Gene on clopidogrel Responsiveness L. Ambrozaitytė1,2, A. Matulevičienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; E. Trabetti1, M. Zanoni1, P. Prandini1, D. J. Angiolillo2, E. Bernardo3, A. Fernan- 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius dez-Ortiz3, C. Macaya3, T. A. Bass2, P. F. Pignatti1; University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University 1Department of Mother and Child and of Biology-Genetics, Section of Biology- Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. Genetics, Verona, Italy, 2Division of Cardiology, University of Florida College of The incidence of cleft lip and/or cleft palate (CL/P) in the population of Medicine-Shands Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, United States, 3Cardiovascular Lithuania is 1 in 544 newborns; nonsyndromic CL/P cases are 74 .1% Institute, San Carlos University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. part of it . Many different genes are considered as candidate loci for Background: Clopidogrel intestinal absorption and active metabolite nonsyndromic CL/P responsible for this malformation . And the results formation are influenced by P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux. The func- by many study groups are still very inconsistent . tional activity of P-glycoprotein is under genetic control by the Multi We have investigated five microsattelite markers D2S292 in TGFA Drug Resistance-1 (MDR-1) gene . If genetic variations of MDR-1 con- gene, D14S61 in TGFB3 gene, D15S97 in GABRB3 gene, D17S1335 tribute to variability in clopidogrel response in patients with coronary in RARA gene and BCL3 in BCL3 gene in 120 triads (child with non- artery disease remains poorly explored . syndromic CL+/-CP and both parents) - 102 triads with a child with Methods: The C1236T (rs1128503) polymorphism of the MDR-1 gene nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NS-CL+/-P) and 18 was assessed in 62 patients . Patients were divided into 2 groups: car- triads with a child with nonsyndromic cleft palate only (NS-CPO) . As- riers and non-carriers of the T allele . Platelet aggregation was per- sociation analysis was performed by using transmission disequilibrium formed before and 24 hours after clopidogrel administration . Standard test (TDT) . (300mg; n=45) and high (600mg: n=17) loading dose regimens were Allele-wise and genotype-wise analysis gave no statistically significant used . All patients were on treatment with aspirin (100mg/day) . Peak results (p>0 .05) . Nevertheless transmission disequilibrium analysis platelet aggregation was assessed by LTA using 6 μmol/L ADP stimuli. of every marker allele separately showed significant association be- Post-treatment platelet reactivity and percentage inhibition of platelet tween three out of investigated five microsattelite markers and NS- aggregation (IPA) were determined . CL+/-CP: allele 6 (182 bp) of D2S292 marker (p=0 .024), allele 11 (206 Results: 71% and 29% of the study population were T and non-T allele bp) of D14S61 marker (p=0 .025) and allele 3 (128 bp) of BCL3 marker carriers, respectively . At baseline, there were no differences in platelet (p=0 .015) . aggregation between the two groups . At 24 hours there were no dif- These results suggest the contribution of TGFA, TGFB3 and BCL3 ferences in post-treatment platelet reactivity between groups follow- genes to nonsyndromic CL/P as well as indicate that these genes are ing a 300mg loading dose administration . However, following a 600mg probably not the causal genetic risk factors . loading dose administration, post-treatment platelet reactivity was sig- nificantly higher in T allele carriers (35±11% vs 16±3%; p=0.006). Ac- P06.054 cordingly, there were no differences in IPA following a 300mg dose and intron region importance of BCL gene in the nonsyndromic IPA was significantly lower in T allele carriers following a 600mg dose cleft lip and/or cleft palate (44±18% vs 73±5%, p=0 .001) . I. Prane1,2, B. Lace1, L. Piekuse1, J. Klovins2, B. Barkane3, I. Akota3, A. Kru- Conclusions: The C1236T polymorphism of the MDR-1 gene modu- mina1; lates clopidogrel responsiveness in the acute phase of treatment when 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, using high loading dose regimens . Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia, 3Depart- ment of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Stomatology, Riga Stradins P06.056 University, Riga, Latvia. Association of cocaine dependence and neurotrophic factors: Background: Orofacial clefts form as a result of interaction of envi- contribution of the Brain-Derived Neurotrofic Factor (BDNF) and ronmental and genetic factors . Still up to now the exact mechanism the Neurotrophic Tyrosine Kinase Receptor 2 (NTRK) of how the clefts form are not known . This is why it is so important to N. Fernandez-Castillo1, M. Ribasés2, B. Gonzalvo2, M. Casas2,3, C. Roncero2,3, explore and investigate genes constituting to this process . It has been B. Cormand1,4; reported that BCL3 (B-cell leukemia/lymphoma-3) on chromosome 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia. Universitat de Barcelona, 19q13 .1-q13 .2, or a nearby gene may play a role in the etiology of Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or cleft palate (CLP/CP) . There is possibility Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Departament de Psiquiatria i Medicina Legal, BCL3 gene mutations increase affinity to transcriptional factors thus Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBER Enfermedades inhibited expression of genes, which are important in mesenchymal Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain. development process . Drug addiction is a complex psychiatric disorder that results from the The aim of the study was to evaluate relevance of BCL3 gene intron interaction of different genetic and environmental factors . Tolerance, region in development of nonsyndromic orofacial clefts . sensitization, craving and abstinence are common features in drug Materials and methods: Eight SNPs (rs7257231, rs1040117, rs8103315, addiction, and may be related to neuronal processes such as plastic- rs2927457, rs11671085, rs1979377, rs2927456 and rs2306148) in the ity and remodeling . Animal and pharmacological studies suggest that BCL3 gene were analyzed with MALDI-TOFF technique for allelic as- neurotrophins may play an important role in cocaine addiction through sociation with the nonsyndromic CLP/CP in 75 trios (proband with both their effect on these processes . To evaluate the contribution of the parents) from Latvia . Observed data were analyzed with transmission Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) and its specific receptor disequilibrium test (TDT) . Neurotrophic Tyrosine Kinase Receptor 2 (NTRK2) we genotyped two Results: Three of eight SNPs (rs2927457, rs11671085 and rs2306148) SNPs in the BDNF gene and three SNPs in the NTRK2 gene in a were not polymorphic, five were found to be polymorphic - rs7257231, Spanish sample of 91 cocaine dependent patients and 91 sex and age- rs1040117, rs8103315, rs1979377 and rs2927456 . TDT analysis matched healthy controls . The single-marker analysis showed associa- revealed SNP rs10401176 (χ2=5 .143, P=0 .023, df 1) in the CLP pa- tion between cocaine dependence and the Val allele of the p .Val66Met tient group and three SNPs rs10401176 (χ2=5 .444, P=0 .0196, df 1), BDNF polymorphism (rs6265; 2p=0,014; OR=2,14 (1,16-3,96)) and the rs7257231 (χ2=4.455, P=0.034, df 1), rs2927456 (χ2=4 .000, P=0 .045, c .2732T>C polymorphism of the NTRK2 gene (2p=0,0062) . Addition- df 1) in the CP patient group showed statistically significant associa- ally, the multiple-marker analysis supported an overrepresentation of tion . the C/A/C haplotype (rs1187325/rs1047896/c .2732T>C) of the NTRK2 Conclusion: Statistical analysis of obtained results showed BCL3 gene gene in cocaine addicts (2p=0,005; OR=7,19 (1,77-29,2)) . Our results, intron 1 as an meaningful region for further studies . although preliminar, point out that the BDNF and NTRK2 genes may contribute to the predisposition to cocaine addiction and suggest a po- tential participation of neurotrophic factors in drug dependence .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P06.057 Pediatrics, Justus Liebig Universität, Giessen, Germany, 6Department of Pedi- clinical and immunohistochemical pre-screening and RNA atrics, Medical Genetics, Human Genetics, Pathology, Obstetrics and Gynaeco- sequencing increase mutation detection rate for the collagen Vi logy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. genes We observed a large American family of Norwegian descent with X- T. P. Cullup1, C. Jimenez-Mallebrera2, L. Feng2, S. Robb2, F. Muntoni2, S. Yau1, linked nonprogressive congenital ataxia (XCA) and normal cognitive S. Abbs1; development in six affected males over three generations . Neuroimag- 1DNA Laboratory, Guy’s & St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United ing showed global cerebellar atrophy without evidence of supratento- Kingdom, 2Neuromuscular Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United King- rial anomalies . Linkage analysis resulted in a maximum LOD score dom. Z=3.44 for marker DXS1192 at θ =0.0 with flanking markers DXS1047 Ullrich Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (UCMD) and the milder Beth- and DXS1227 defining a region of 12cM in Xq25-q27.1. The clinical lem Myopathy (BM) are caused by mutations in COL6A1, COL6A2 and neuroradiological findings in the present family are very similar to and COL6A3 which collectively are comprised of 106 coding exons . those described in two other reported X-linked families however, the Neither phenotypic nor immunohistochemical analyses are able to pin- newly identified locus does not overlap with the one defined previously point which of these genes to target for mutation screening . in Xp11 .21-Xq24, indicating that there are at least two genes respon- We have established a diagnostic mutation screening service for these sible for this rare form of X-linked congenital cerebellar ataxia with three genes based on sequencing cDNA derived from fibroblast cul- normal intelligence . tures . This requires only 26 overlapping cDNA fragments, compared with over 100 fragments needed to cover the genes using genomic P06.060 sequencing . Autosomal dominant left atrial isomerism with suggestive Mutations have been detected in 14 out of an initial cohort of 16 pa- linkage to chromosome 9q tients; this 87 .5% detection rate compares favourably with the 62% K. van Engelen, J. B. A. van de Meerakker, J. Lam, R. H. Lekanne dit Deprez, detection reported in Lampe et al . This higher rate of detection can I. B. Mathijssen, M. J. H. Baars, B. J. M. Mulder, A. F. Moorman, A. V. Postma; be partly attributed to the sequential use of clinical and immunohisto- Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. chemical screening prior to molecular analysis and partly to the RNA- Background based approach . In particular a change ten bases from the start of Left isomerism is a laterality disorder, characterized by bilateral left sid- the exon in COL6A2 (c .1117-10A>G) is likely to be responsible for the edness including cardiovascular malformations, bilateral bilobed lungs splicing out of exon 13 in one patient, and in a second patient an ab- and polysplenia . Autosomal dominant laterality disorders are infre- sence of exon 10 at the cDNA level of the same gene has as yet no quent and have only been reported in a few families . In this study, we confirmed mechanism at the DNA level. analyzed a large three generation family with cardiac left isomerism . Surprisingly eight patients with a UCMD phenotype, previously thought Methods and results of as a recessively-inherited form, have a single mutation; this rein- We obtained phenotypic information, including physical examination, forces current thinking that the two disorders represent either end of a electrocardiography, echocardiography and blood samples of 22 fam- phenotypic spectrum . ily members . Thirteen individuals had a cardiac anomaly, with consid- Lampe, A . K . et al; J Med Genet 2005;42:108-120 erable variation between patients . Cardiac anomalies considered to be part of the left isomerism spectrum were, among others, bilateral P06.058 left atrial appendages, septal defects, persistent left superior caval A computational test for biological relatedness in genetic vein and specific electrocardiographic disturbances compatible with association studies using probabilistically inferred haplotypes absence of the sinoatrial node . Other heart defects were present as L. Xumerle, G. Malerba, P. F. Pignatti; well . The condition was inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern . Department Maternal Infantile and of Biology-Genetics. Section of Biology and Subsequent genome wide linkage analysis demonstrated linkage to Genetics, University of Verona, Italy. a single locus on chromosome 9q shared by all affected individuals, An association between gene and disease may be incorrectly estimat- with a multipoint maximum LOD score of 2 .20 at marker D9S283 . The ed if the allele frequencies differ among cases and controls depending shared locus was delineated by markers D9S167 and D9S1677, was on inbreeding or unrecognized population stratification. 26 Mb in size and contained 218 genes . Sequence analysis of three A program (http://medgen .univr .it/jenoware/) was developed to com- candidate genes in this region (Inversin, TGFBR1 and IPPK) revealed pute the probability of genetic relatedness in pairs of individuals using no mutations . a likelihood ratio test . Conclusions Using loci that are in LD decreases the accuracy of parentage assign- The mapping of a suggestive locus for this autosomal dominant lateral- ments . Groups of SNPs in linkage disequilibrium (LD) were simulated ity disorder on chromosome 9q represents an important step toward to verify the effects of linkage on relatedness assignment . The prob- the discovery of genes implied in laterality disorders . Further sequenc- ability of genetic relatedness was computed using the single SNPs ing and investigation of genomic duplications/deletions of candidate and treating the SNPs as composite markers with different r² threshold genes will be the next steps in the identification of the susceptibility values . Haplotypes were probabilistically inferred using the PHASE gene . and Gerbil programs . False positive rate and power were assessed by simulation in unrelated individuals and in pedigrees . P06.061 As an example of results, in order to estimate the support for II degree implication of HOXB9 and cOL1A1 genes in congenital hip relatedness with power 80%, and false positive rate 5%, the follow- dislocation : a case-control association study in Brittany ing was needed: 100 SNPs with no linkage; 275 SNPs having r²=0 .4; (Western-France) 20 probabilistically inferred haplotypes (100 SNPs having r²=0 .4); 40 K. Rouault1,2, V. Scotet1, S. Autret3, F. Dubrana4, B. Fenoll5, F. Gaucher6, D. probabilistically inferred haplotypes (200 SNPs having r²=0 .8) . Tanguy7, C. Yaacoub8, C. Ferec1,2; In conclusion, if LD blocks are examined, the biological relatedness 1INSERM U613, BREST, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, CHU can be computed with a limited number of markers increasing test ac- Morvan, Brest, France, 3Université de Bretagne Occidentale, BREST, France, curacy with probabilistically inferred haplotypes . 4Department of orthopedic surgery, CHU La Cavale Blanche, BREST, France, 5Department of pediatric surgery, CHU Morvan, BREST, France, 6Department P06.059 of orthopedic surgery, Hotel Dieu, Pont l’abbe, France, 7Department of physical A new gene for X-linked congenital Ataxia maps to Xq25-q27.1 medicine, Centre de Perharidy, ROSCOFF, France, 8Department of orthopedic G. Zanni1,2, E. Bertini2, C. Bellcross3, B. Nedelec1, G. Froyen4, G. Neuhäuser5, surgery, CH Cornouaille, QUIMPER, France. J. M.Opitz6, J. Chelly1; Congenital dislocation of the hip (CDH) is a complex disease which 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, Departement Génétique et Dével- presents a mechanical component due to the pregnancy and delivery oppement, Paris, France, 2Ospedale Pediatrico Bambin Gesù, Unit of Molecular conditions and a genetic component linked to the ethnical predisposi- Medicine, Rome, Italy, 3Dean Medical Center, Department of Perinatology, tions and the familial aggregation . A case-control association study was Madison, WI, United States, 4Human Genome Laboratory, Department of Hu- set up in the area of Finistère (western Brittany, France) where CDH man Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of is frequent in order to study the implication of two candidate genes,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 HOXB9 involved in the embryonic development of members and CO- P06.063 L1A1 implied in the constitution of cartilaginous tissue . TagSNPs were Association of copy Number Variation at 22q11.23 with selected using Haploview and Tagger softwares (r²=0 .8, MAF=0 .05) schizophrenia and genotyped using SNaPshot method (HOXB9: n=3 and COL1A1: B. Rodríguez-Santiago1, B. Sobrino2, C. Serra1, R. Flores1, A. Brunet3,4, E. n=12) . All SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . Associations Gabau4, R. Guillamat4, E. Vilella5,6, L. Martorell5,6, J. Valero5,6, A. Gutiérrez- were tested using logistic regression analysis . Our cohort included 239 Zotes5,6, A. Labad5,6, Á. Carracedo2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,7; CDH patients and controls and CDH affected 91 .2% of women and was 1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, U-735 CIBERER, Barcelona, bilateral in 60.8% of cases. Breech presentation was significantly as- Spain, 2Institute of Legal Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, U- sociated with CDH (OR=10 .10 [2 .96-34 .46], p<0 .0001) and hyperlaxity 711 CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Genes and Disease Program, was also more frequent in cases (OR=6 .74 [2 .31-19 .71], p<0 .0001) . Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF) and CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, On genetic aspects, no significant association was observed between 4Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 5Hospital Psiquiàtric Univer- CDH and the markers of HOXB9 gene . The analysis of COL1A1 gene sitari Institut Pere Mata, Reus, Spain, 6Unitat de Psiquiatria, Facultat de Me- revealed significant association for two markers: rs1107946 (genotype dicina i Ciències de la Salut, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain, 7Programa AA+AC vs CC: p=0 .0379) and rs2857396 (genotype TT+TC vs CC: de Medicina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. p=0.0426). These findings were not confirmed after Bonferroni correc- Copy number variation (CNV) is likely to be a substantial source of tion . An interaction between primiparas and rs1107946 was observed human genetic diversity, influencing the variable susceptibility to multi- (p=0 .0491) . A replication study (TDT) and a haplotype analysis are still factorial disorders . However, the relatively high cost and false positive in process and will better explain the role of this two genes in CDH . rate of genome wide methodologies have still precluded large scale This work was supported by a grant from PHRC and PRIR . association studies in patients and controls . Schizophrenia is a com- plex illness thought to be caused by a number of genetic and environ- P06.062 mental effects, few of which have been clearly defined. We have used Endothelial nitric oxide synthase polymorphism in children with a multiplex-ligation-PCR-amplification based method to target previ- connective tissue dysplasia in saint-Petersburg ously reported and putatively relevant gene-containing CNV regions . I. A. Kostik1, M. L. Chukhlovina2, V. I. Larionova2, T. I. Kadurina1; A total of 122 genes were studied in 451 schizophrenic patients and 1Medical Academy Postgradute Studing, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 304 matched controls for association studies . Most genotyped CNVs 2State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. (84%) showed very low (<1%) population frequency, while only few Connective tissue dysplasia (CTD) is a group of geterogenous diseas- were common variants whose frequency did not differ between groups . es with hereditary and inborn collagen synthesis disturbance . These A few rare variants were only present in patients suggesting a possible patients have risk of vascular disorders . Previous studies have sug- pathogenic involvement. We found two patients with amplification of gested an influence of gene endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) two consecutive probes in 22q11 .23 that were further characterized . on vascular disorders (VD) in adults and children . Both patients showed 1 .2 Mb overlapping duplications spanning 24 The aim of our study was to detect distribution polymorphic eNOS genes, being de novo in the case for whom the parents were available . genotypes and alleles in CTD children and healthy children in Saint- A specific assay targeting this complex 22q11.23 region revealed two Petersburg . additional CNVs significantly associated with increased risk for schizo- 101 CTD children (38 girls, 63 boys) and 146 healthy Saint-Petersburg phrenia, the duplication of the DDT gene and the positive genotypes children (70 girls and 76 boys) were included in our study . The mean of the GSTT2 gene (Fisher, p<0 .01) . Our data provide complemen- age of CTD patients was 12,71 ±4,88 years . We detected 4a/4b gene tary evidence for chromosome 22q11 .23 as a susceptibility locus for polymorphism eNOS (4a with 27-bp repeats, 393 bp total; 4b with five schizophrenia, and suggest that CNV within this region may influence tandem repeats, 420 bp total), eNOS gene promoter T-786C SNP and risk . glu298-to-asp polymorphism eNOS in these children by PCR . The distribution of 4a/4b polymorphism has revealed significant differ- P06.064 ences (p=0,025) in genotypes frequency between CTD and healthy A new type of hereditary corneal recurrent erosions with late boys . subepithelial fibrosis - Dystrophia Helsingiensis The distribution of eNOS T-786C SNP polymorphism has revealed sig- E. Björck1, K. Lagerstedt1, B. Hammar2, P. Fagerholm2, A. Dellby2, H. Lind3; nificant differences (p=0,015) in genotypes frequency between CTD 1Karolinska Institutet, Molecular medicine and surgery, Stockholm, Sweden, and healthy girls . 2Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University Hospital, The distribution of glu298-to-asp polymorphism eNOS has revealed Linköping, Sweden, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Hudiksvalll, Sweden. significant differences (p=0,015) in genotypes frequency between all We describe the phenotype of a large family with an autosomal domi- groups . (Dates in table) nant inherited corneal dystrophy characterized by recurrent corneal Conclusion: allele C of eNOS T-786C and allele T of glu298-to-asp erosions and late subepithelial fibrosis. The disorder was not linked eNOS, associated with vascular disturbances were frequent in chil- to any known gene causing autosomal dominant corneal dystrophies dren with CTD . with a clinical resemblance . The pedigree consisted of 342 individuals of whom 85 were affected by the disorder . The affected family mem- 4a/4b T-786C Glu298Asp bers had erosive symptoms that usually lasted from 1 to 10 days . By CTD Controls CTD Controls CTD Controls the age of 7 almost all of the affected individuals suffered from recur- n=38 n=69 n=37 n=70 n=38 n=70 rent corneal erosions . The attacks generally declined in frequency and aa: 0,0 0,07 TT: 0,16 0,44 GG: 0,29 0,54 intensity, but all individuals had developed subepithelial fibrosis by the Girls Genotype, p value ab: 0,26 0,29 TC: 0,7 0,47 TG: 0,37 0,37 age of 40.The fibrosis generally started in the midperiphery and were Alleles, p value bb: 0,74 0,64 CC: 0,13 0,09 TT: 0,34 0,09 followed in some family members by the development of gelatinous 0,2 0,015 0,002 masses or keloid-like formations . Nevertheless, only a marginal reduc- 0,17 0,026 0,000 tion of visual acuity was seen, and thus no one received corneal grafts . n=63 n=73 n=62 n=75 n=63 n=76 The affected individuals did not share haplotypes for genetic microsat- aa:0,02 0,04 TT: 0,31 0,32 GG: 0,24 0,51 Boys ellite markers surrounding the known genes (COL8A2, TGFBI, GSN, ab:0,19 0,34 TC: 0,53 0,49 TG: 0,49 0,41 Genotype, p value KRT3, DCN, KRT12) causing autosomal dominant corneal dystrophies bb:0,79 0,61 CC: 0,16 0,19 TT: 0,27 0,08 Alleles, p value with a similar phenotype and thus we conclude that the family had a 0,07 0,88 0,000 previously not describe of corneal dystrophy . A genome wide scan is 0,038 0,98 0,000 n=101 n=142 n=99 n=145 n=101 n=146 now being performed to locate the disease causing gene . aa:0,01 0,06 TT: 0,25 0,38 GG: 0,26 0,53 Total ab:0,22 0,31 TC: 0,6 0,48 TG: 0,44 0,39 Genotype, p value bb:0,77 0,63 CC: 0,15 0,14 TT: 0,3 0,08 Alleles, p value 0,025 0,11 0,000 0,009 0,15 0,000Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P06.065 P06.067 Frequency, significance and association of ACE I/D and MTHFR cARD15 gene polymorphisms in serbian patients with crohn’s c677t gene polymorhisms in turkish patients with early onset disease: Genotype-phenotype correlation coronary artery disease B. Zukic1, M. Protic2, N. Jojic2, A. Zivkovic1, M. Godjevac1, M. Radmilovic1, M. K. Ulucan1, H. S. Ozturhan2, D. Sevinc3, D. Agirbasli4, D. Kırac5, D. Javadova6, Stojiljkovic1, T. Karan-Djurasevic1, S. Pavlovic1; M. Agırbaslı2, A. I. Guney6; 1IMGGE, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Department of Gastroenterology, Zvezdara Clinical 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Dentistry, Marmara Center, Belgrade, Serbia. University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Capsase activation and recruitment domain 15 (CARD15) has been Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Biology and Ge- identified as the pivotal gene associated with Crohn’s disease (CD). netics, Faculty of Medicine, Maltepe University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department Several studies have shown that CARD15 polymorphisms increase of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, susceptibility for CD and are associated with ileal location and fibro- 5Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Yeditepe University, Istanbul, stenotic behaviour of the disease . The aim of this study was to evalu- Turkey, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Marmara Uni- ate the prevalence of CARD15 polymorphisms and their phenotypic versity, Istanbul, Turkey. correlation in Serbian patients with CD . 131 patients with well de- Introduction: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a polygenic disease . A fined CD and 88 healthy controls were genotyped for three common number of polymorhisms, including the insertion (I) or deletion (D) of a polymorphisms (R702W, G908R and Leu1007insC) by PCR- RFLP . 287 bp Alu repeat sequence polymorhism of angiotensin I converting CARD15 variant was found in 46/131 (35 .11%) patients with CD and enzyme (ACE) gene and a point mutation (C677T) of 5,10-methylene- 13/88 (14 .77%) of healthy controls (p= 0 .001) . The frameshift polymor- tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene have been implicated in the phism (L1007fs) showed a significant association with CD (15.27%) pathogenesis of CAD . We investigated ACE and MTHFR genotypes compared to control group (0 .00%) (p<0 .0001) . The frequency of in patients with angiographically documented CAD in Turkish popula- R702W was remarkably higher in control group (14 .77%) and almost tion . equal to occurrence of this particular polymorphism in patients with Methods: 184 patients (aged between 23-72, mean 45 ± 7 .5 years) CD (20.63%). Polymorphism G908R was observed significantly more were included in the study . DNAs from 89 patients with angiographi- frequent in patients with CD (5 .3%) than in control group (0 .00%) cally proven CAD (age<45 for male, <55 for female) and 95 controls (p=0 .043) . Univariate analysis established that carriers of CARD15 without CAD were amplified. common polymorphisms had a significantly higher risk of isolated ileal Results: The ACE genotype DD was present in 32 .6% of patients with location (p= 0.042; OR 1.650; 95% CI 1.04 -2.60), fibrostenotic behav- CAD as compared to 37 .9% in the controls (p = 0 .45) . Genotype fre- iour (p< 0 .0001; OR 3 .143; 95% CI 1 .58-6 .25) and surgical resection quencies in all groups for II, ID and DD were: 21 .7%, 42 .9%, 35 .4% (p=0.036, OR 2.2; CI 1.046-4.626). This study confirms that carriers of respectively . The overall frequency of the MTHFR genotypes were CARD15 polymorphisms have an increased risk of CD . The data show %70 .7 (CC), %22 .8 (CT) and %6 .5 (TT) . The MTHFR genotype TT that polymorphisms are associated with ileal, fibrostenosing disease was present in 4 .5% of patients with CAD as compared to 8 .4% in con- and a higher risk of surgery . trols (p = 0.38). Subgroup analysis showed no significant differences between CAD and CAD free subjects . Also, the ACE DD and MTHFR P06.068 TT genotypes were not found more common in patients having multi- Prevalence of iGR2230a_1 genotypes in Hungarian crohn’s vessel CAD when compared to single-vessel disease . disease and ulcerative colitis patients Conclusion: I/D polymorphism of ACE gene and C677T polymorphism L. Magyari, G. Talián, V. Csöngei, J. Bene, K. Komlósi, L. Járomi, E. Sáfrány, of MTHFR gene are not independent risk factors for CAD in the studied C. Sipeky, B. Melegh; Turkish population . Paraoxonase, PAI1 and e-NOS polymorphism de- Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, tections are in progress for these patients . Pécs, Hungary. Two main clinical presentations of inflammatory bowel disease are P06.066 Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis . IBD is caused by a combina- Quantitative trait mapping of signaling Pathways in Human tion of genetic, environmental and immunological factors . Associa- Primary cells tion has been repeatedly demonstrated between IBD and the IBD5 L. Cuninkova, S. A. Brown; locus on chromosome 5q31 (Silverberg et al; Eur J Hum Genet . 2007 Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich, Switzerland. Mar;15(3):328-35 .) . The aim of the study was to examine the preva- Thousands of mammalian cell types each express a unique comple- lence of the IGR2230a_1 intronic nucleotide polymorphism of the SL- ment of receptors, ion channels, and enzymes . Nevertheless, the sig- C22A5 gene (coding for the OCTN2 carnitine transporter protein) in naling pathways that transduce outside signals to the transcriptional Hungarian IBD patients and controls. We examined 200 patients with machinery in these cells remain exquisitely conserved . Their down- CD (97 males, 103 females, mean age 39 .4 ± 14 .6 years) and 246 pa- stream effector molecules are generally regulated by phosphorylation, tients with UC (108 males, 138 females, mean age 44 .0 ± 15 .1 years) . and bind to conserved elements in hundreds of promoters to control A group of 187 carefully selected, clinically healthy subjects (106 a variety of processes . Such elements include CRE boxes, bound by males, 81 females, mean age 37 .7 ± 10 .7 years) were collected for the CREB to mediate adenyl cyclase-dependent transcription; SRE boxes, study . For genotyping we used PCR/RFLP methods . The prevalence bound by SRF to mediate JNK- and ERK-family MAP kinase-depen- of the mutant allele A of IGR2230a_1 was 48 .5 % in the CD and 47 .1 % dent transcription; and E boxes, which are bound by CLOCK:BMAL1 in the UC patients, while it was 44 .6 % in the controls . The frequency of heterodimers to mediate circadian transcription . We are generating a the homozygous AA genotype was similar in all three groups, and the series of viral reporters for these pathways that are capable of infecting wild type GG genotype was the most frequent in the controls (31 .6 %), human primary cell cultures . The signals from these reporters can be less in the UC cohort (28 .4 %) and the least among the CD patients used as quantitative traits in association and linkage studies to iden- (23 .5 %) . None of the reasonable comparisons of genotypes resulted tify human modifier loci for these pathways. For example, using an E in statistically significant difference between patients and controls. box reporter, we have been able to explore the molecular properties of the circadian clock in people of early and late chronotype (“larks” P06.069 and “owls”) . We hope to use these cellular assays to map the genes interaction of iL23R 3’-UtR and AtG16L1 t300A in Hungarian that determine human differences in a variety of difficult-to-access crohn’s disease patients behavioral phenotypes that might include daily behavior, mood, and V. Csöngei1, L. Magyari1, E. Sáfrány1, B. Faragó1, L. Járomi1, C. Sipeky1, I. memory . Takács2, P. Orosz2, B. Melegh1; 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Sem- melweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. Recently, we found significant association between Crohn’s disease (CD) and rs10889677 (3’-UTR C2370A) of the interleukin-23 recep- tor (IL23R) gene in Hungarian patients (Faragó et al.; Ann RheumMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 Dis . 2008 Feb; 67(2):248-50 . Epub 2007 Jul 2 .) . The aim of this study ± S .D .), and 260 patients with UC (112 males, 148 females, mean was to investigate the statistical interaction of this CD susceptibility age: 48 .7 ± 15 .9) . 156 carefully selected clinically healthy, age-, sex-, factor and rs2241880 (A1338G, T300A) of the autophagy-related 16- weight- and height-matched control subjects (85 males, 71 females, like 1 (ATG16L1) gene (Hampe et al .; Nat Genet . 2007; 39:207) . 198 mean age: 45 .9 ± 10 .2) were collected for the study . The IGR2198a_1 Hungarian patients with CD and 225 healthy controls were genotyped C allele and the IGR2096a_1 T allele was present in a significantly by PCR-RFLP methods. We found significantly higher frequency for higher frequency in both CD (45 .1%, p=0 .004, OR 1 .554, 95% CI the ATG16L1 G allele and GG genotype in the CD cohort compared 1 .154-2 .093; 46 .5%, p=0 .01, OR 1 .639, 95% CI 1 .217-2 .207) and UC to controls (p=0 .008, OR=1 .454, 95% CI: 1 .106-1 .910; p=0 .0001, (42 .3%, p=0 .028, OR 1 .385, 95% CI 1 .035-1 .853; 42 .1%, p=0 .028, OR=3 .460, 95% CI: 2 .086-5 .740) . The frequencies and odds ratios of OR 1 .394, 95% CI 1 .042-1 .866) cohorts compared to controls (34 .6% rs10889677 genotypes were stratified by rs2241880 genotypes. The and 33 .6% respectively) . The IGR2198a_1 CC and IGR2096a_1 TT ATG16L1 AG genotype significantly increased the risk for CD on the genotype frequencies were also increased, comparing the CD group background of IL23R 3’-UTR CA and AA (p =0 .043, OR=2 .522, 95% to the controls (18 .6%, p=0 .043, OR 1 .865, 95% CI 1 .019-3 .415; CA CI: 1 .043-6 .097; p =0 .013, OR=4 .550, 95% CI: 1 .464-14 .145) . The 22 .1%, p=0 .009, OR 2 .178, 95% CI 1 .216-3 .902) . We concluded that AA ATG16L1 GG genotype significantly increased the risk for CD with the IGR2096a_1 and IGR2198a_1 SNPs mean susceptibility to both CD susceptibility alleles of IL23R 3’-UTR (p =0 .004, OR=4 .000, 95% CI: and UC in the Hungarian population . CA 1 .553-10 .306; p =0 .0001, OR=32 .50, 95% CI: 3 .59-294 .216) . The AA significantly highest relative odds ratios for rs2241880 were detected P06.072 on the background of the IL23R AA genotype, suggesting the risk al- 49A/G and CT60 polymorphisms of the CTLA-4 gene associated leles of these two disease-associated loci have an additive effect . with Graves‘ disease but not with Hahsimoto‘s thyroiditis and postpartum thyroiditis P06.070 A. Bicek, B. Krhin, K. Zaletel, S. Hojker; ILRL-ILR-ILRAP-SLCA and CARD loci are University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of nuclear medicine, Ljubljana, susceptibility factors for both crohn’s disease and ulcerative Slovenia. colitis Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the CTLA-4 gene have been sug- E. A. M. Festen1, A. Zhernakova2, L. Franke2, G. Trynka1, C. C. van Diemen1, gested as genetic factors in susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid dis- M. Bevova2, R. M. Nijmeijer2, R. Heijmans3, H. M. Boezen1, D. A. Van Heel4, ease (AITD) . In our case-control study Graves’ disease (GD), Hashi- A. A. van Bodegraven3, P. C. F. Stokkers5, C. Wijmenga1, B. A. Crusius3, R. K. moto’s thyroiditis (HT), postpartum thyroiditis (PPT) patients and con- Weersma1; trol subjects from the Slovenian population were genotyped for two A/ 1University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2University G single nucleotide polymorphisms (49A/G and CT60) of the CTLA-4 Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3VU Medical Centre, Am- gene . The 49A/G polymorphism was genotyped by polymerase chain sterdam, The Netherlands, 4Queen Mary’s School of Medicine and Dentistry, reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis us- London, United Kingdom, 5Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Nether- ing BseXI . CT60 was genotyped using a real-time polymerase chain lands. reaction (RT-PCR) and results were analyzed by the χ2 test. The two main phenotypes of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) - We found no significant difference, for either polymorphism, between Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) - are chronic intestinal the frequencies of AA and AG genotypes in control versus AITD pa- inflammatory disorders with a complex genetic background. tients. However, the frequency of the GG genotype was significantly We performed a functional candidate gene analysis within the innate higher in AITD patients versus controls for 49A/G (p<0 .005; 102 con- immune pathway in IBD using a three-stage design . In phase I, 354 trols, 301 AITD patients), and for CT60 polymorphism (p=0 .0096; 150 SNPs from 85 innate immunity genes were typed in a cohort of 520 controls, 345 AITD patients) . Comparing frequencies of the GG geno- Dutch IBD patients (284 CD, 236 UC) and 808 controls . In phase II, 9 type in GD, HT and PPT with controls, a significant association of 49A/ SNPs showing association at p<0 .006 in phase I were replicated in a G and CT60 polymorphism was shown for GD whereas association of second independent cohort of 545 Dutch IBD patients (326 CD, 219 these polymorphisms with HT and PPT could not be confirmed. In 123 UC) and 360 controls . In phase III, 3 SNPs with p<0 .01 in the com- GD patients the frequency of GG genotype (13.8 %) was significantly bined phase I and phase II analysis were genotyped in an additional higher (p=0 .0452) versus 102 controls (4 .9 %) . The frequency of the cohort of 786 Dutch IBD samples (452 CD, 334 UC) and 768 indepen- GG genotype at CT60 was significantly higher in the group of 150 GD dent controls . Joint analysis of 1,851 IBD patients (1062 CD, 789 UC) patients (42%; p=0 .0113), versus 150 control subjects (27 .3 %) . We and 1936 controls demonstrated strong association to the IL18RAP conclude that 49A/G and CT60 polymorphism contributes to predispo- gene for both CD and UC (p 1 .9E-8, OR 1 .35) . Association in CD is sition to GD, but not for HT and PPT . IBD independently supported by the Crohn’s disease dataset of the Well- come Trust Case Control Consortium . In addition, an association of P06.073 the CARD9 variant to CD and UC was observed (p =3 .25E-5, OR sequencing the steroid-21-hydroxylase gene and linkage IBD 1 .21) . Both genes are located in extended haplotype blocks on 2q11- analysis of the detected polymorphisms 2q12 and 9q34 .3, respectively . Our results indicate two novel IBD loci A. Szilagyi1, B. Blasko1, Z. Banlaki1, G. Gyapay2, M. Sasvari-Szekely3, G. and further support the importance of the innate immune system in the Fust1; predisposition to both CD and UC . 13rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hun- gary, 2Genoscope - Centre National de Séquençage, Evry, France, 3Institute P06.071 of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Semmelweis Prevalence of iGR2198a_1 and iGR2096a_1 genetic variants in University, Budapest, Hungary. Hungarian patients with crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis The steroid-21-hydroxylase enzyme (CYP21) plays a crucial role in L. Járomi1, V. Csöngei1, L. Magyari1, G. Talián1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, L. the synthesis of steroid hormones . Its gene is located in the MHCIII Lakner2, B. Melegh1; region in a strongly linked modular structure . This region referred to 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, as RCCX contains four genes: RP, complement C4A or C4B, CYP21 Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Medicine and Gastroenterology, Markusovszky and TNX . The number of RCCX modules may vary from 1 to 3 on a Hospital, Szombathely, Hungary. chromosome . Our previous results showed that individuals with 0 or Two major forms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are Crohn’s 1 C4B gene (i .e . C4B*Q0) have higher risk for myocardial infarction disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) . The development of these and stroke; moreover they were selected out from the healthy elderly diseases is caused by both environmental factors and complex ge- population . The aim of the present study was to reveal the possible netic predisposition . Genetic association was found between IBD and molecular genetic background of these observations . We assumed IBD5 on chromosome on 5q31 . Our goal was to analyse the possible that C4B*Q0 carrier state may result in impaired function of the neigh- influence of two variants in this region IGR2096a_1 (rs12521868) and boring CYP21 gene, associated with inadequate mobilization of ste- IGR2198a_1 (rs11739135) in Hungarian IBD patients . PCR/RFLP roid hormones during stress in critical situations . The CYP21 gene was methods were used for detecting the various genotypes . We examined sequenced in 96 healthy individuals, in whom the copy number of C4 226 patients with CD (105 males, 121 females, age: 40 .5 ± 14 .5 mean genes and the genotype of three SNPs located in the MHCIII regionMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 (RAGE -429T/C, HSP70-2 1267A/G and TNFα -308G/A) were also 0 .7% and 0 .0%; wt/wt 75 .2% and 61 .0% in healthy volunteers and PD determined. We identified 53 polymorphisms in the CYP21 gene; ten patients, respectively). There was no statistically significant difference SNPs were previously not reported. C4B*Q0 was found to significantly between these distributions . linked to two intronic SNPs (1106C/A and 1113T/C) of CYP21 . Analysis Discussion: Results of this study indicate that the allele CYP2D6*4 of 34 families confirmed that the haplotype block involving the vari- could be considered as a weak risk factor for PD, but similar study ant form of the SNPs has no C4B gene . These results indicate that should be carried out on larger sample group . the SNPs may contribute to the higher morbidity and mortality rate of C4B*Q0 carriers, presumably by influencing the expression of the P06.076 CYP21 protein . contribution of gene sequence variant cYP3A4*1B of the hepatic cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme to variability in individual P06.074 response to clopidogrel Bisphosphonate related Osteonecrosis of the jaw is associated A. N. Stolyarova, O. V. Sirotkina; with polymorphisms of the cytochrome P450 2c8 in multiple Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute Russian Academy of Science, Saint-Pe- myeloma: a genome wide single nucleotide polymorphism tersburg, Russian Federation. analysis Clopidogrel is an inactive pro-drag that requires oxidation by hepatic M. E. Sarasquete1, R. Garcia-Sanz1,2, L. Marin1, M. Alcoceba1, M. C. Chillon1, cytochrome CYP3A4 to generate active metabolite . Because genetic A. Balanzategui1, C. Santamaria1, J. Blade2, J. de la Rubia2, J. Petit2, M. T. variations are the major determinant of heterogeneity in metabolic ac- Hernandez2, J. J. Lahuerta2, M. Gonzalez2,1, J. F. San Miguel1,2; tivity of enzyme, we hypothesize that polymorphism of CYP3A4 gene 1Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Grupo Español de may influence platelet aggregation in patients treated with clopidogrel. Mieloma. Red Española de Mieloma (G03/136), Spain, Spain. We examined platelet aggregation in 100 patients with acute coro- Osteonecrosis of the jaws (ONJ) is an adverse side effect of bisphos- nary syndrome treated by clopidogrel 75mg/day according to variant phonate (BP) therapy . Patients with multiple myeloma (MM) usually re- CYP3A4*1B . Aggregation was induced by ADP 20mkM and measured ceive BPs for the treatment of bone destruction . ONJ could be caused in two points - before and on day 7 after clopidogrel treatment as level by a combination of environmental and genetic risk factors . Our aim of light transmission (LT,%) determined by optical aggregometry . For was to asses the role of genetics in ONJ development . We performed detection of the CYP3A4*1B the PCR and original endonuclease di- a genome wide association study using 500 .568 SNPs in two series gestion with PstI was used and results in patients were compared of MM patients included in the same therapeutic protocol receiving the with 83 healthy persons . Our study showed that the frequencies same BP therapy: 22 cases (MM with ONJ) and 65 matched controls of CYP3A4*1B genotypes were 89%, 10% and 1% in patients and (MM without ONJ) . 90 .5%, 8 .5% and 1% in controls for wild, heterozygous and homozy- Clinical and biological characteristics, response to treatment and gous genotypes, respectively, and these frequencies didn’t differ in two survival rates were similar in both subsets of patients . Regarding the groups. The LT was significantly lower in patients in second measuring polymorphisms, we identified four SNPs (rs17110453, rs1934951, point compared to first point - 20.59±1.58% and 34.03±1.96%, respec- rs1934980 and rs1341162) mapped within the Cytochrome P450-2C tively (p<0 .0001) . The wild genotype CYP3A4*1B was associated with gene (CYP2C8) with a singular distribution among cases and controls . significant reductions in platelet aggregation after clopidogrel treat- Rs1934980, rs1341162 and rs17110453 showed a significant corre- ment - LT was 33.41±2.06% versus 19.81±1.65% in first and second lation with ONJ (p=4 .231e-6, p=6 .22e-6 and p=2 .15e-5 respectively), measuring point respectively (p<0 .0001) . In carriers of CYP3A4*1B although the association was not significant after Bonferroni correc- mutant allele the reduction of platelet aggregation was poorly effec- tion. The SNP rs1934951 kept its statistical significant association with tive and LT was 37.96±6.26% versus 25.59±4.95% in first and second ONJ (P-value=1 .07e-06, P corrected value=0 .02) . Genotyping results measuring point respectively (p>0 .1) . In conclusion, the CYP3A4*1B displayed an overrepresentation of the T allele in cases vs . controls polymorphism may contribute to poorly clopidogrel effect on platelet (0 .475 vs . 0 .125) . Thus, individuals homozygous for the risk allele had aggregation . a likelihood of ONJ increased by 12.75 (95% confidence interval 3.7 to 43 .5) . P06.077 Our data suggest that the rs1934951 polymorphism may play a role Association of CYPs, GSTs, CAT, GPX, SODs genes as a risk factor for developing ONJ in MM patients receiving BPs ther- polymorphisms with chronic lung disease in children apy . G. F. Korytina, C. Olga, A. Leysan, V. Tatyana; Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. P06.075 To assess the role that polymorphisms of cytochrome P450 and cYP2D6 polymorphism in patients with Parkinson‘s disease antioxidant-related genes play in genetic predisposition to severe M. Lisak, M. Stefanović, M. Roje Bedeković, Z. Trkanjec, E. Topić, V. Demarin; chronic lung disease of children, the allele and genotype distributions University Hospital Sestre milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia. of CYP1A1(2455A/G, 3801T/C), CYP1A2 (-2464T/delT, -163C/À), Aim: CYP2D6 is an enzyme of cytochrome P-450 system that me- CYP2E1 (-1053C/T), GSTM1 (Del), GSTT1 (Del), GSTP1 (Ile105Val, tabolizes some of endogenous substances in central nervous system, Ala114Val), CAT (-262 C/T, 1167 C/T), GPX1 (Pro197Leu), SOD1 (3in- including metabolism of dopamine and drugs used for Parkinson’s dis- tron+35 A/C), SOD3 (Arg213Gly) genes were studied in children with ease (PD) treatment . Decreased metabolic capability of this enzyme chronic lung disease (N=188) and healthy children (N=300), living in could be associated with increased risk of morbidity and of higher risk the Republic of Bashkortostan in environment with air pollutions . for side effects of antiparkinsonian medication . The aim of this study Genotypes of cytochrome P450 and antioxidant genes that associated was determination of the incidence and comparison of non-functional with susceptibility to chronic lung disease of children were determined . alleles with the intention of detecting increased risk for PD in individu- The frequency of 1A2C genotype of CYP1A1 gene was significantly als with damaged function of enzyme CYP2D6 . higher in cases of chronic lung disease patients than in healthy con- Materials and methods: Multiplex allele-specific polymerase chain re- trol group (15 .43% vs 8 .67%; X=4 .626, df=1,P=0 .0318, Pcor=0 .0636; action (PCR) the incidence of non-functional alleles CYP2D6*3, *4, OR=1 .922 95%CI 1 .055-3 .507) . The patients with chronic lung disease *6, *7, and *8 was determined in healthy volunteers (n=145) and in showed significantly elevated frequencies of the GSTT1 gene deletion patients with PD (n=41) . (38 .83% vs 21 .33% in control; X2=16 .66, df=1, P=0 .0006; OR=2 .305 Results: In a group of healthy volunteers the incidence of CYP2D6 95% CI 1 .512-3 .515) . The distribution of the GSTP1 gene alleles was alleles was: CYP2D6*3=1 .4%, CYP2D6*4=11 .0%, CYP2D6*6=1 .0%, significantly differed from that of chronic lung disease patients and CYP2D6-wt=86 .6% . controls, there was a higher frequency of the Ile/Ile genotype in the In a group of PD patients the incidence of CYP2D6 alleles was: CY- patients than in healthy group (76 .06% vs 60 .0%; X2=12 .629, df=1, P2D6*3=1 .2%, CYP2D6*4=20 .7%, CYP2D6*6=1 .2% and CYP2D6- P=0 .0011, Pcor=0 .0022; OR=2 .119 95%CI 1 .383-3 .25) . The CC geno- wt=76.8%. Statistically significant difference was found only for allele type of CAT -262C/T locus were associated with higher risk of chronic CYP2D6*4 (relative risk=2 .10; 95% CI: 1 .113-3 .994) . airway disease in children (70 .74% vs 56 .67% in control; X2=9 .143, The relation of genotype distribution was *3/wt 2 .8% and 2 .4%; *4/wt P=0 .0034 Pcor=0 .0068; OR=1 .85 95%CI 1 .23-2 .78) . 18 .6% and 26 .8%; *4/*4 1 .4% and 7 .3%; *6/wt 1 .4% and 2 .4%; *4/*6Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P06.078 University, Athens, Greece, 7Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece. the association between gene polymorphism of cytochrome Approximately one in 1,000 children is affected by severe or profound P450 2D6 and behavioral characteristics hearing loss at birth or during early childhood (prelingual deafness) . V. A. Shleptsova1, J. Shchegolkova2, A. G. Tonevitsky3; Up to forty percent of autosomal recessive, congenital, severe to 1Faculty of basic medicine, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federa- profound hearing impairment cases result from mutations in a single tion, 2Biological faculty, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, gene, GJB2 . The 35delG mutation accounts for the majority of GJB2 3Russian research institute of sport and physical education, Moscow, Russian mutations detected in Caucasian populations and represents one of Federation. the most frequent disease mutations identified so far. Some previous The cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) enzyme is involved in the hepat- studies have assumed that the high frequency of the 35delG mutation ic metabolism of many drugs and other exogenous substances . There reflects the presence of a mutational hot spot, whilst other studies sup- are a little evidences that CYP2D6 involves in metabolism of endog- port the theory of a common founder . Greece is amongst the countries enous psychoactive substances and expresses not only in liver but presenting high frequency of the 35delG mutation (3 .5%), and a recent also in the brain. Therefore it may influence on psychological process. study raised the hypothesis of the origin of this mutation in ancient It has been shown that there are significant differences in personality Greece . We genotyped 60 Greek deafness patients homozygous for between extensive and poor metabolizers . the 35delG mutation for six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) In our investigation we investigated an association of gene polymor- and two microsatellite markers, mapping within or flanking the GJB2 phism of CYP2D6 and personality traits . 160 healthy subjects took part gene, as compared to 60 Greek hearing controls . A strong linkage in the study (women - 82, men - 78) . There were tested by different disequilibrium was found between the 35delG mutation and markers psychological questionnaires which examine aggression, impulsivity, inside or flanking the GJB2 gene, at distances of 34 kb on the cen- anxiety and others and also by psychophisiological measurements . tromeric and 90 kb on the telomeric side of the gene, respectively . We genotyped with PCR-method any gene variations of CYP2D6: Our study supports the hypothesis of a founder effect and we further CYP2D6*1, CYP2D6*2 (C2850T), CYP2D6*4 (G1934A), CYP2D6*10 propose that ethnic groups of Greek ancestry could have propagated (C100T) We showed that CYP2D6 poor metabolizers (CYP2D6*4, CY- the 35delG mutation, as evidenced by historical data beginning from P2D6*10) had significantly higher level of verbal aggression (p=0.04) the 15th century BC . and inability of stopping aggression (p=0 .04) and had more pleasure of aggression (p=0 .02) than extensive metabolizers (CYP2D6*1, CY- P06.081 P2D6*2) . Furthermore, this relationship expressed to the same extent Detoxification system gene variants and small-for-gestational- both at men, and at women . age births Association between CYP2D6 gene polymorphism and personal- N. Nabieva1, T. Ivashchenko2, N. Shabalov1, V. Baranov2; ity characteristics can indicate on influence cytochrome activity on 1Medical Pediatrics Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s insti- neuromediator`s metabolism in brain . tute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. Small-for-gestational-age (SGA) is defined as birth weight below the P06.079 10th percentile according to gestational age and sex based on national cytokine genes polymorphisms are associated with essential standards. Little is known about the role of detoxification system gene hypertension in tatars from Bashkortostan, Russia variants as risk factors for SGA births . Only a few studies have consid- Y. R. Timasheva1, T. R. Nasibullin1, A. N. Zakirova2, O. E. Mustafina1; ered the direct role of polymorphic xenobiotic-metabolizing genes in 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir fetal growth . GSTM1 and GSTT1, in the GST family, are both involved State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. in the biotransformation of a wide range of reactive toxic and muta- Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the Western genic compounds, including ROS oxygen species and components of world . Recently inflammation was proved to be the main substrate un- tobacco smoke . GST enzymes are present in large amounts in the derlying the development atherosclerosis . Cytokines mediate interac- placenta in early pregnancy and are expressed early in embryonic tions of all cells participating in atherogenesis . However, the role of development . The polymorphisms of xenobiotic-metabolizing genes certain cytokines genetic variants on disease risk is not well under- (GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2) responsible for xenobiotics conjugating en- stood. We tested the hypothesis that specific genetic polymorphisms zymes of Phase II detoxification system were studied by PCR-RFLP in of some cytokines are associated with increased risk of essential hy- SGA infants and control group newborns . pertension (EH) and its cardiovascular complications . The genotypes distribution for NAT2 gene was identical in controls 355 patients with EH and 343 unrelated normotensive individuals group and in group of SGA patients . The analysis of genotypes distri- without family history of cardiovascular disease were enrolled in the bution for polymorphism and GST M1 in patients and in controls has study . Both patients and control originated from Tatar ethnic group not revealed significant differences. from Bashkortostan, Russia . DNA was isolated from peripheral ve- The frequency of GSTT10/0 genotype was significantly higher in nous blood . Genotyping was performed using polymerase chain reac- group of patients compared to controls (34% versus 10% respectively, tion and restriction analysis . Statistical analysis was performed using p=0 .003) . Concordance of both GSTT1 0/0 and NAT2 S/S genotypes Fisher’s exact test. Odds ratios with 95% confidence interval were also were found in 17 .2% of patients and was almost 4 times more com- calculated . pared to only 4% in control (p=0 .01) . The 37% of patients had at least We have shown that IL-10 -627*C/*C genotype is associated with de- two functionally impaired genotypes for studied genes . creased hypertension risk (OR=0 .53, CI: 0 .22-0 .78). TNFA -308*G/*G The study provides new information on the role of polymorphic detoxi- was found to be protective against stroke in hypertensive patients fication genes in development of SGA. (OR=0 .48, CI: 0 .24-0 .97) . 1159*A/*A IL12B genotype was also associ- ated with lower stroke risk (OR= 0 .43, CI: 0 .21_0 .9) . P06.082 We demonstrate that common genetic variants of IL10, TNFA and Analysis of the association between LEcAm-1 P213s IL12B genes are associated with the risk of EH and its complications . polymorphism and EsRD in diabetic patients Our data suggest a role for cytokine genes polymorphisms in cardio- C. M. Tecuceanu, D. Cimponeriu, P. Apostol, M. Stavarachi, M. Toma, L. vascular disease . Gavrila; Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania. P06.080 Mutations in lyam-1 gene (1 q23-q25) may predispose to phenotypes strong linkage disequilibrium for the frequent GJB 35delG that can aggravate the evolution of vascular complications in diabetic mutation in the Greek population patients, including renal disease . H. Kokotas1, L. Van Laer2, M. Grigoriadou1, V. Iliadou3, J. Economides4, S. The purpose of this case-control study was to estimate the association Pomoni1, A. Pampanos1, N. Eleftheriades5, E. Ferekidou6, S. Korres6, A. Gi- of LECAM P213S polymorphism with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) annoulia-Karantana7, G. Van Camp2, M. B. Petersen1; in diabetic patients . 1Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Clinical information and biological samples were collected from dia- Belgium, 3AHEPA Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece, 4‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s lyzed type I diabetic patients (n=100, M:F = 50:50) and healthy sub- Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5St. Loukas Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece, 6Athens jects (n=200, fasting glycemia 93 .2±8 .2 mg/dl) . Healthy subjects wereMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 selected to be matched for age, gender and with subjects with T1DM In the remaining PD patients, we did not detect any pathogenic DJ-1 patients . All subjects selected for this study were unrelated Romanian mutation. Our findings indicate that the mutant alleles are expressed Caucasians . DNA samples were used for genotyping LECAM-1 P213S at a lowered level, or that their corresponding mRNAs are partially polymorphism using restriction of amplicons with Hph1 endonucle- degraded. Although the finding of a single size cDNA fragment is not ase . suggestive of the activation of any alternative cryptic splice site, this The distribution of LECAM P213S in all lots is in agreement with Har- cannot be fully excluded . Further studies are in progress . dy - Weinberg equilibrium . When compare the distribution of LECAM genotypes in patients and control lots we observed only a trend of as- P06.085 sociation with ESRD in T1DM patients . The sex or age at ESRD onset A genome-wide association study in schizophrenia using DNA seems to not modify these observations . The lack of association with pooling on 574 parent-offspring trios ESRD in T2DM seems to be not similar with results reported for other G. Kirov1, I. Zaharieva1, L. Georgieva1, V. Moskvina1, I. Nikolov1, M. Owen1, M. populations . O’Donovan1, S. Cichon2, A. Hillmer2, D. Toncheva3; In conclusion, our study showed only a trend of association between 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University of Bonn, Bonn, Ger- LECAM P213S polymorphism and IRC in DM 1 patients . many, 3University Hospital “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria. We conducted a genomewide association study (GWAS) on schizo- P06.083 phrenia with DNA pooling in order to reduce the cost of the project . We On the choice of an exposure to test for gene-environment used a parent-offspring trios design in order to avoid the potential prob- interactions in type 2 diabetes: A new genotype-free method! lems of population stratification. We constructed pools from 605 unaf- R. Kazma1,2, C. Bonaïti-Pellié3,1, J. M. Norris4, E. Génin2,1; fected controls, 574 SZ patients and a third pool from all the parents 1Univ Paris-Sud, Paris, France, 2INSERM U794, Paris, France, 3INSERM UMR- of the patients . We hybridised each pool 8 times on Illumina Human- S535, Villejuif, France, 4Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics, Hap550 arrays . We estimated the allele frequencies of each pool from University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO, United States. the averaged intensities of the arrays. The significance level of results Gene-environment interactions might be involved in the susceptibility in the trios sample was estimated on the basis of the allele frequencies to multifactorial diseases but are difficult to detect. Available methods in cases and non-transmitted pseudocontrols, taking into account the to test for gene-environment interactions usually concentrate on some technical variability of the data . We selected for individual genotyping particular genetic and environmental factors . Rather than focusing on the highest-ranked SNPs, after excluding poorly performing SNPs and a known genetic factor, we applied a new method to determine whether those that showed a trend in the opposite direction in the control pool . or not a given exposure is susceptible to interact with unspecified ge- We genotyped 63 SNPs in 574 trios and analysed the results with the netic factors, using the degree of familial aggregation as a surrogate . transmission disequilibrium test (TDT). 40 of those were significant at The Odds Recurrence Ratio (ORR) is an indirect measure of interac- p<0 .05, with the best result at p=1 .2x10-6 for rs11064768 . This SNP is tion since it contrasts recurrence risks in sibs of affected indexes when within the gene CCDC60, a coiled-coil domain gene . The most inter- stratifying on the exposure of indexes . A Wald chi-square test based esting result was for the third-best SNP: rs893703 (p = 0 .00016), within on the estimate of the ORR and its variance tests for the gene-environ- RBP1, a candidate gene for schizophrenia . ment interaction, while accounting for a possible confounding bias if indexes and their sibs are correlated for the exposure . An application P06.086 on a sample of 588 nuclear families ascertained through one index DNase1 Exon2 analysis in tunisian patients with Rheumatoid affected with type 2 diabetes is presented where gene-environment in- Arthritis, systemic Lupus Erythematosus and sjögren syndrome teractions involving obesity, physical activity and dietary fat intake are and healthy subjects investigated . An association with obesity is clearly evidenced and a po- S. Belguith-Maalej1, H. Hadj Kacem1, N. Kaddour2, Z. Bahloul2, H. Ayadi1; tential interaction involving this factor is suggested (p=0 .06) . Multiple 1Cibles pour le Diagnostic et la Thérapie, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, sibships have been used to increase sample size but a permutation Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service de Médecine Interne, CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisie, procedure is needed to account for dependency of sibpairs . Results Sfax, Tunisia. of this undergoing work will also be presented . The method proposed AutoImmune Diseases (AID) are caused by the loss of immunological here might be of particular interest prior to genetic studies to help de- tolerance against self-antigens . The DNASE1 seems to participate in termine the environmental risk factors that will need to be accounted the genetic susceptibility of some AID, particularly the Systemic lupus for and select the most appropriate samples to genotype . erythematosus (SLE). Deficiencies in the normal rate of removal of chromatin or chromatin-protein complexes contribute to the develop- P06.084 ment and severity of SLE . In fact, two mutations were reported among compound heterozygosity in DJ- gene non-coding portion SLE patients from Japan and Spain (the 172 A→T mutation (K5X) and related to parkinsonism the 46-72 deletion respectively) . In the aim to evaluate the DNASE1 P. Tarantino1, D. Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, E. De Marco1, F. Rocca1, P. Pugliese2, contribution in the genetic susceptibility of Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), G. Nicoletti1,2, I. Cirò Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, G. Provenzano1, G. Annesi1, A. Sjögren syndrome (SS) and SLE in Tunisia, we studied these two muta- Quattrone1,2; tions by PCR RFLP and by fragment size analyses on 3% agarose gel 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone electrophoresis respectively . In order to achieve this work, DNA from (Csenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uni- 151 patients affected with RA, 55 patients affected with SS, 34 patients versity Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. affected with SLE and 232 healthy control subjects were explored . Mutations in DJ-1 gene cause a clinically characteristic autosomal Both mutations were absent among patient and control subjects . In ad- recessive juvenile onset form of Parkinson’s disease (PD) . We se- dition, by direct sequencing, the DNASE1 exon 2 was analysed among quenced the DJ-1 gene in 40 sporadic patients with early onset Par- 26 control subjects to identify a possible new polymorphic variations . kinson’s disease and 100 appropriate controls, originated from south- Five known SNPs were explored (rs8176921, rs8176922, rs8176927, ern Italy. We identified a single patient with age at onset of 38 years rs8176930, rs34907394). The 2113 G→T SNP (rs8176927:Arg2Ser) is carrying two novel heterozygous mutations, both located in non coding the only polymorphic functional nonsynonymous SNP . By PCR-RFLP, regions. The first mutation (g. 159 C/G ), located in the promoter re- patient and healthy subjects DNAs were genotyped for rs8176927 for gion, was inherited from his mother whereas the second mutation , an a case-control design. The statistical analysis showed no significant insertion in the intron 4 splice site (IVS4+3 insA), was transmitted from differences between patients and controls genotype data . his father . The DJ-1 cDNA level both in the patient and in a control sub- In conclusion, by analysing DNASE1 Exon2 gene, our study showed ject was normalized with the GAPDH gene and a significant reduction no particular genetic involvement of this gene in SLE, RA and SS de- (P= 0 .027) was found in the patient . Moreover, we obtained a single velopment . size of DJ-1 cDNA fragments in both wild type and mutated individuals . Of interest, no family member carrying only one of the two new muta- tions manifested symptoms of EOPD . Genomic rearrangements were excluded . Both mutations were absent in 200 control chromosomes .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P06.087 mere in 122 individuals with free trisomy 21 and in their parents . Our Genetic effect of DAt1 and DRD2 gene polymorphisms on DNA marker studies of parental origin were informative in 119 families personality traits in healthy individuals from Russia with overwhelming majority 89 .91% being maternal and 10 .09% is pa- A. Kazantseva1, D. Gaysina1,2, E. Khusnutdinova1; ternal . Only cases of maternal origin were included in our analysis . 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Centre of Russian Acad- The distribution of nondisjunction in maternal meiotic I and meiotic II emy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC SGDP Centre, Institute of stages were 81 .19% and 19 .81% respectively . The mean maternal age Psychiatry, King’s College, London, United Kingdom. of nondisjunction in our Indian population sample is 27 .58±6 .4 which is Psychobiological model proposed by Cloninger supposes that socia- significantly lower than that of Caucasians.We created a genetic map, bility related personality traits are mediated by dopaminergic system using maternal meiotic I nondisjunction data . The female genetic map functioning. We aimed to define a single genotype effect of DRD2 was restricted to 21q .The distribution of chiasma shows a difference TaqIA and DAT1 MspI polymorphisms and to check possible epistatic throughout the length of chromosome arm(21q) with more recombina- effect between them and personality traits (assessed with the EPI and tion towards telomeric end in comparison to control data . The telo- TCI questionnaires) . 602 healthy individuals (men-206, women-396) meric exchange is a significant risk factor for meiotic I nondisjunction, of Caucasian origin (Russians-214, Tatars-388) were recruited from irrespective of the age of the mother . Analysis of crossover events indi- Russia (mean age±SD, 19 .85±2 .43 years) . cates that in younger mother (< 29) there was an increase in both zero- MANOVA (carried out with gender and ethnicity as second fac- and one exchange events, suggesting reduction of recombination . The tors) revealed the influence of DRD2*gender interaction on Novelty linkage map of 21q(39.58cM) was significantly shorter than the control Seeking (NS) (p=0 .017;F=5 .734) and Reward Dependence (RD) female linkage map, indicating an overall reduction of recombination . (p=0 .039;F=4 .298) . Multiple comparisons explained this interaction Thus, reduced recombination may be responsible , at least in part, for by the differences in NS and RD scores between female carriers of the etiology of nondisjunction in trisomy 21 . A1-allele and male carriers of A2/A2-genotype (p=0 .001;F=11 .208 and p=0 .000;F=16 .464 correspondingly); in NS scores between females P06.090 with A2/A2-genotype and males with A1-allele (p=0 .000;F=18 .678) . Identification of a new locus for autosomal recessive Demonstrated effect could be partly due to higher NS and RD in Dyschromatosis universalis hereditaria on chromosome 12q21- women compared to men (p=0 .000;F=26 .643 and p=0 .001;F=21 .102) . q23 Moreover, association of A1-allele with lower NS (p=0 .040;F=4 .278) K. Brakensiek1, H. C. Hennies2, I. A. Bukhari3, G. Nürnberg2, C. Becker2, and higher RD (p=0 .029;F=4 .814) was demonstrated in men . J. Huebener1, M. Cabrera Miranda1, H. Frye-Boukhriss1, S. Knothe1, J. The effect of DAT1*ethnicity interaction was observed on RD Schmidtke1, E. A. El-Harith1, M. Stuhrmann1; (p=0 .018;F=5 .615) caused by the differences in RD of G/G-genotype 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, carriers from Tatar and Russian population (p=0 .001;F=10 .752) . As- 2Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, sociation between DAT1 A-allele carriers and higher extraversion 3Department of Dermatology, King Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. (p=0 .045;F=4 .030) and NS (p=0 .042;F=4 .148), lower Persistence Background: Dyschromatoses are a group of pigmentary dermatoses (p=0 .020;F=5 .401) was demonstrated . characterized by the presence of small and irregularly shaped hyper- Our findings suggest single DAT1 gene effect on extraversion and Per- and hypopigmented maculae . There are two major forms of the dis- sistence, while differences in NS and RD are caused by DRD2*gender ease: Dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria (DSH), where the mac- and DAT1*ethnicity interaction . ulae are restricted to the dorsal aspects of the extremities, and Dys- This work was supported by RSCI grant 06-06-00163à and «Russian chromatosis universalis hereditaria (DUH), where patients are affected Science Support Foundation» (to A .Kazantseva, D .Gaysina) . by a generalized distribution of the maculae over most of their body . Usually, both disorders show autosomal dominant inheritance, but in P06.088 some cases autosomal recessive inheritance was reported . Autosomal the t-Allele of the Dopamine transporter core Promoter dominant DSH was mapped to chromosome 1q21 .3, and mutations in Polymorphism and Risk of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity the ADAR- (DSRAD-) gene were identified. A second dyschromatosis Disorder locus was mapped on chromosome 6q24 .2-q25 .2, but the two ana- M. Ohadi1, A. Aghajani Refah1, E. Shirazi2, N. Moghimi1, H. Najmabadi1; lyzed families, which were initially reported to be affected with DSH, 1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation were later suggested to have autosomal dominant DUH . Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2- Iran University of Medical Sci- Patients and methods: We investigated whether one of the two known ences, Mental Health Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Dyschromatosis-loci is involved in the development of DUH in a con- Pharmacological and genetic findings implicate the DAT1 gene in the sanguineous family from Saudi Arabia (four siblings were affected, development of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. In this study, three siblings and the parents were unaffected) . we examined whether either allele of the DAT1 core promoter -67 func- Results: After confirmation that neither of the two known loci is linked tional polymorphism is associated with ADHD in a case/control study . to the disease in this family, a SNP-based genome-wide linkage analy- The allele and genotype frequencies of the polymorphism were stud- sis was performed and a new locus for dyschromatosis was identified ied in 110 patients and 120 controls, which were matched on the basis on chromosome 12q21-q23 . The candidate region (LOD score of 3 .4) of sex, age and ethnicity . The genotype frequencies in the patients contains 125 known or predicted genes . group were as follows: AA 19 .2%; AT 65 .2%; TT 15 .4% vs . the geno- Conclusion: We have identified a new locus for DUH, and obtained type frequencies in the control group: AA 47 .5%; AT 43 .3%; TT 9 .2% evidence that DUH and DSH are distinct disorders with different ge- [χ2=20 .73, df = 2] The T-allele of the -67A/T polymorphism revealed a netic origins . ~1 .56-fold excess in the patients group comparing with the controls [χ2=14.50, df = 1].For the first time, these findings provide tentative P06.091 evidence of the contribution of the DAT1 gene core promoter poly- Frequency of the coding polymorphisms in the PARK2 gene morphism to the etiopathophysiology of ADHD at least in the Iranian - characterization of the polish group with Parkinson disease of population that we have studied. Further work is warranted to confirm the early onset this finding and to assess its generalization to other ethnic groups. D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, D. Koziorowski2, J. Bal1, A. Friedman2; 1Institute of Mother and Child, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, Poland, P06.089 2Faculty of Health Science, Medical University in Warsaw, Dept. of Neurology, Origin of nondisjunction in trisomy 21 Down syndrome Warsaw, Poland. S. K. Dey, S. Ghosh; Parkinson disease (PD; OMIM 168600) is the second most frequent West Bengal University of Technology, Kolkata, India. neurodegenerative disease in the elderlity . Among the PD patients Down syndrome due to trisomy 21 is the most common human chro- there is less common group of age of onset before 50 years classified mosomal abnormality . In order to gain further insight into the mecha- as a early-onset PD (EO-PD) with mutations in parkin gene (PARK2; nism underlying nondisjunction, we investigated the association be- OMIM 62544) as a common cause . The prevalence of this form of PD tween reduced recombination and nondisjunction .We genotyped 12 is not known . However, in Europe, parkin type of EO-PD accounts for microsatellite markers spanning along 21q from centromere to telo- approximately 50% of autosomal recessive parkinsonism and 18% ofMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 individuals without a family history with onset before age 45 years . novel mutations were found in one patient in heterozygous state but A variety of deletional and point mutations has been described in not in 700 ethnically matched control chromosomes . conclusions PARK2 gene as well as a few coding polymorphism being a possible Parkin was the most frequently mutated gene in EOPD, followed by risk factors for sporadic and familial PD . The role of this polymorphisms DJ-1 and PINK1 . The low overall mutation frequency observed indi- is still unclear and published results contradictory . cates that caution has to be taken with the extrapolation of mutation We present the analysis of the frequency of the four coding polymor- frequencies found in other studies and populations and suggests that phism detected in the group of EO-PD sporadic patients of Polish ori- other genes and risk factors for PD remain to be discovered . gin (Ex4 S167N, Ex10 V380L, Ex 11 D394N and R402C) in compari- son with the group of control subject . P06.094 Presented results are preliminary as the groups are not big enough to DNER, a neuronal transmembrane protein is dispensable for be conclusive (70 EO-PD patients, 100 control subjects) but they indi- gross cellular morphology and sensory nerve fiber excitability cate no difference in frequency of analysed polymorphisms in both of U. Brandt-Bohne1,2, D. R. Keene3, B. Erdmann4, G. Lewin4, M. Koch2; them . We can conclude there is no association of any of polymorphism 1Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute for Biochemistry II under consideration with sporadic EO-PD form . University Clinics Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Shriners Hospital for Children Research Center, Portland, OR, United States, 4Max Delbrueck Center for P06.092 Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany. Genetic association of single sNPs and a LD-Haplotype at DNER is the first transmembrane protein expressed in the brain con- PsORs6 in patients with early onset psoriasis and evidence for taining only multiple epidermal growth factor (EGF) - like repeats in its epistasis with PsORs1 risk locus extracellular domain . DNER further contains a signal peptide, a serine U. D. Hüffmeier1, J. Lascorz1, T. Becker2, A. Ekici1, S. Endele1, C. Thiel1, F. rich stretch, a transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmatic C-termi- Schürmeier-Horst3, R. Mössner4, K. Reich5, W. Kurrat6, T. F. Wienker2, H. nus . Since its close relation to Notch and Delta it has been named Traupe3, A. Reis1; Delta/Notch-like-related receptor . Structural homology to other EGF- 1University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2University of Bonn, Bonn, Ger- bearing proteins involved in extracellular signalling events and in neu- many, 3University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4University of Göttingen, Göt- ronal development, point out a possible involvement of DNER in such tingen, Germany, 5Dermatologikum Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 6Asklepios processes . Klinik, Westerland/ Sylt, Germany. The extracellular domain of DNER was cloned and recombinant pro- Psoriasis is a genetically complex, chronic inflammatory skin disease. tein was used for polyclonal antibody production . Recombinant and We have previously performed a genome wide linkage study in a set of full length protein is larger than the theoretical calculated mass and psoriasis families and have identified a susceptibility locus on chromo- glycosidase digestion indicate that DNER is glycosylated . Distribution some 19p13 (PSORS6) . In a follow-up linkage disequilibrium (LD) study analysis by semi quantitative RT-PCR show that almost no mRNA was in an independent family based cohort, we found evidence for associa- present in non-neuronal tissues . In mouse embryos, DNER mRNA is tion to two newly discovered microsatellites at this locus (D19SPS20: detectable at day 9 .5 of gestation in the neural tube, dorsal root gan- P < 2 .7*10-2, D19SPS21: P < 5 .3*10-5) . An association scan in 300 glia, ear placode, anterior and posterior zones of the developing fore- trios, based on the LD structure of the region, revealed association to limb, and in different cell types of the retina . The distribution of DNER several single SNPs in one LD block. When we stratified this cohort for protein is also mainly restricted to neuronal tissues and can also be carrying the PSORS1 risk allele at the HLA-C locus on chromosome detected in peripheral ganglia and nerves . A knock-out targeting vec- 6p, evidence for association became much stronger at single SNP tor was generated and the homozygote animals are being analyzed . and haplotype levels (p-values between 2 .0*10-4 and 9 .0*10-4) . In a In the homozygote knock out animals no DNER protein was detected . population based replication study of 1,114 psoriasis patients and 937 Surprisingly, the mice are viable and show no obvious phenotype . The control individuals, evidence for association was observed again after gross cellular morphology appears unchanged and further analysis of stratification to the PSORS1 risk allele. In both study groups, logistic the peripheral nerve functions, reveal no effects in excitability of spe- regression showed evidence for interaction between the risk alleles at cific A-fibers. PSORS1 and PSORS6 . The associated LD block did not comprise any known genes . Interestingly, an adjacent gene, MUC16, coding for a P06.095 large glycosylated protein expressed in epithelia, could be shown to be Polymorphisms in ESR and ESR genes are associated with also expressed in tissues relevant for pathogenesis of psoriasis such susceptibility to endometriosis as skin and thymus. In summary, we confirmed and refined the sus- M. Lamp1, M. Peters1, H. Karro1,2, Ü. Kadastik2, E. Reinmaa3, K. Haller1,3, A. ceptibility locus at PSORS6 which seems to be restricted to patients Metspalu3, A. Salumets1,3; with early onset psoriasis carrying the PSORS1 risk allele . 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital’s Women’s Clinic, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of P06.093 Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Parkin, DJ- and PINK mutations in Dutch patients with early- Estonia. onset Parkinson’s disease Introduction. Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endome- M. G. Macedo1, D. Verbaan2, Y. Fang1, B. Anar1, A. Uras1, J. L. Groen1, P. trial-like tissue outside the uterus . It affects about 5-10% of women of Rizzu1, J. J. van Hilten2, P. Heutink1; reproductive age and causes dysmenorrhoea, abdominal pain, dys- 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Univer- pareunia and infertility . Endometriosis is considered to be an estro- sity Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. gen-dependent disease with a genetic background . The aim of this Objectives Recessively inherited early-onset Parkinson’s disease study was to evaluate possible associations between endometriosis (EOPD) has been associated with mutations in the Parkin, DJ-1 and and polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor α (ESR1) and β (ESR2) PINK1 genes . In order to assess the genetic contribution of all known genes . recessive genes in EOPD in the Dutch population we investigated Materials and methods . 123 women (age: 18-44 years) with surgically the prevalence and nature of mutations in the PROPARK (PROfiling confirmed endometriosis were enrolled in the study. 200 fertile women PARKinson’s disease) patient cohort . methods A total of 186 unre- (at least two children; age: 30-50 years) from general population were lated Dutch EOPD patients (mean age at onset: 41 .1 ± 6 .6 years, 130 used as controls. The 397 T/C polymorphism in the first intron of the sporadic, 56 familial) with an age at onset (AAO) ≤ 50 years were stud- ESR1 gene was determined by PCR-RFLP analysis, using the restric- ied . The genetic screening was performed by direct sequencing and tion endonuclease PvuII. The number of CA repeats in the fifth intron dosage analysis of the three genes . Results Mutations were found in of the ESR2 gene was detected with fragment analysis . 9% (16/186) of the patients however PD may be explained in only six Results . The distribution of ESR1 TT/TC/CC genotypes was (3%) patients who carried homozygous or heterozygous compound 17 .9/54 .5/27 .6% among patients and 30 .0/51 .0/19 .0% in the control mutations in Parkin (n=5) or DJ-1 (n=1) . No homozygous or compound group (p=0.028; χ2-test) . The T/C allele frequencies were 45 .1/54 .9% heterozygous mutations were detected in PINK1 gene . In addition, 6 and 55 .5/44 .5%, respectively (p=0 .008) . The number of CA repeats in (3%), 3 (2%) and 2 (1%) patients carried a single heterozygous muta- the ESR2 gene ranged from 14 to 26 . The ESR2 alleles were classified tion in Parkin, DJ-1 and PINK1 genes, respectively . Interestingly, two as short and long, with ≤21 and >21 repeats, respectively. Endome-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 triosis patients had short (CA)n alleles more frequently than healthy P06.098 controls (61 .4% vs 51 .5%, p=0 .018) . This difference was even more Genetic analysis of autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe remarkable in case of stage IV disease (80 .8% vs 51 .5%, p=0 .007) . epilepsy (ADNFLE) Conclusions . The C-allele of PvuII polymorphism in ESR1 gene and R. J. Camacho-Garcia1, D. Florea2, T. Escobar Delgado3, A. Macaya4, M. Lu- short ESR2-(CA)n alleles could be associated with susceptibility to cas5, M. L. Avendaño-Kunstmann6, J. Rodriguez Uranga3, A. Martinez-Mir1; endometriosis . 1Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. School of Medicine. University of Seville, Seville, Spain, 2Neurology and Neurophysiology, Hospital P06.096 de Carabineros, Santiago, Chile, 3Neurology, Virgen del Rocio University Hos- Genetic polymorphisms and physical performance in endurance pital, Seville, Spain, 4Pediatric Neurology, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, sports Barcelona, Spain, 5Molecular Biology Service, Virgen Macarena University D. Varillas1,2, J. J. Telleria1,2, Á. Martín-Pastor1; Hospital, Seville, Spain, 6Pediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology, Hospital de 1Facultad de Medicina. Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Instituto Carabineros, Santiago, Chile. de Biología y Genética Molecular (UVa/CSIC), Valladolid, Spain. Epilepsy is a heterogeneous group of disorders affecting 0 .5-1% of Genes determine the potential for developing many of the structural the population worldwide . Among them, autosomal dominant noctur- and functional characteristics important in determining sports perfor- nal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is an idiopathic epilepsy character- mance. So, the genetic constitution defines innate qualities. The genes ized by nocturnal motor seizures that typically begin during childhood . also determine the speed and extent to which the performance char- Familial cases follow an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance acteristics of the individual respond to training, diet, and other environ- with reduced penetrance . Disease-causing mutations have been de- mental factors . The effects of genes on response to training to endur- scribed in the genes encoding the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine re- ance sports seem to be moderate to large . ceptor subunits CHRNA2, CHRNA4, and CHRNB2 . A fourth locus has Here we study the correlation between endurance sports and the fol- been identified on chromosome 15q24, and putative susceptibility loci lowing polymorphisms: isertion/deletion in intron 16 (I/D) within ACE mapped to chromosomes 3 and 8 . These genes/loci account for only a gene; p .C282Y and p .H63D in HFE (hemocromatosis) gene and minority of ADNFLE cases, indicating genetic heterogeneity . p .R577X within ACTN3 (alpha3-actinin) . We have ascertained two new pedigrees segregating ADNFLE . Fam- We have genotyped samples of two groups of endurance sportsmen ily 1 is a five-generation pedigree originating from Chile, with twelve (runners n=48 and cyclists n=60) and control population (n=66) . affected subjects and three obligate carriers . Patients present with We have observed that the D allele of the ACE gene were more focal, motor seizures or secondary generalized attacks . Family 2 is frequent in sportsmen as a whole (72%) than in control population a three-generation Spanish family with four affected relatives, includ- (42 .4%) p=0 .0001 . For runners the frequency were 70 .7% p=0 .003, ing one patient with concomitant early-onset Parkinson disease and a and for cyclist 72 .9% with p=0 .004 . second patient with West syndrome . In order to identify the underlying p .63D allele of HFE was present in 60 .3% of the cyclist and in 41 .3% disease-gene(s), we are currently performing cosegregation analysis of the controls (p=0 .006) . There werre no differences between run- using markers spanning all known ADNFLE loci . In addition, we are ners and controls . The frequency of the p .282Y allele is very low in also studying other acetylcholine receptor genes (CHRNA3, CHRNA5, our population, nevertheless, it was more frequent in cyclist than in CHRNA7 and CHRNB4), and loci on chromosomes 10 and 22, re- runners p=0 .015 sponsible for partial epilepsy with auditory features and familial partial Th study of ACTN3 gene did not show diferences between the epilepsy with variable foci, respectively . In the event that all loci are groups . excluded as the underlying cause of disease, we will perform a ge- We conclude that genetic constitution contributes to the talent to prac- nomewide scan to identify a novel gene responsible for the ADNFLE tice endurance sports, and that the “predisposing” genes seem to be phenotype in family 1 . sport-specific. P06.099 P06.097 Association between genetic polymorphisms and pediatric Analysis of AcE and eNOs gene polymorphisms in hemodialysis essential hypertension patients S. Stangler Herodez, B. Zagradiznik, K. Zerjavič, N. Marčun Varda, N. Kokalj T. M. Damnjanovic1, I. Novakovic1, B. Jekic1, N. Maksimovic1, V. Bunjevacki1, Vokač, A. Gregorič; S. Simic2, L. Djukanovic2, L. Lukovic1; University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. 1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Ne- Recent whole genome association studies identified a number of loci phrology , CCS, Belgrade, Serbia. associated with the development of different complex trait life style Polymorphisms in genes encoding for angiotensin I converting enzyme diseases, i .e . coronary heart disease, diabetes type 2 and many oth- (ACE) and NO syntase (eNOS) have been reported to be associated ers . Because these diseases increasingly affect children it can be as- with increased susceptibility to renal failure . The aim of the study was sumed that similar genetic factors may contribute to their development to investigate allelic distribution of eNOS (4a4b, G894T) and ACE (I/ in pediatric cases . This study presents association analysis for three D) gene polymorphisms in hemodialysis patients (n=128) and control common SNPs reported to be associated with coronary heart disease/ group (n=101) and to find possible association of mutant allele with this obesity/diabetes type 2 in adults in a sample of children diagnosed disorder in Serbian population . The polymorphic variants were anal- with essential hypertension . ysed using PCR-RFLPS and PCR-VNTR method . A total of 166 families were included in the study (514 individuals) . . . Al- The allele frequencies of two eNOS gene polymorphsms were: 0 .27 lele specific PCR was adopted for the study. Polymorphism rs9939609 894T, 0 .21 4a, in the group of patients and 0 .31 894T, 0 .17 4a in con- from the gene FTO, polymorphism rs7566605 from the gene INSIG2 trol group . The frequencies of G894T polymorphism genotypes were and polymorphism rs10757278 were selected for the analysis . 0 .56 GG, 0 .35 GT, 0 .09 TT in the group of patients and 0 .50 GG, 0 .38 Weak association between polymorphisms rs10757278, rs9939609 GT, 0 .11 TT in the control group . The genotype frequencies of eNOS and pediatric essential hypertension was observed . Also strong as- inton 4 polymorphism were 0 .65 bb, 0 .28 ba, 0 .07 aa in the group of sociation for polymorphisms rs7566605 was present in our sample of patients, and 0 .70 bb, 0 .26 ba, 0 .04 aa in the control group . The differ- families with children affected with pediatric hypertension . ence between allelic and genotype frequencies (patients/control) is not Our results suggest that the three polymorphisms might be associ- statistically significant. The allele frequencies of ACE gene were 0,71 ated with the development of essential hypertension in children . The D (genotype: 0 .58 DD, 0 .28 ID, 0 .14 II) in the group of patients and rs7566605 from the gene INSIG2 may be involved in the pathogenesis 0,62 D (genotype: 0 .45 DD, 0 .34 ID, 0 .21 II) in the control group . The of pediatric essential hypertension . D allele frequencies in a group of patients is significantly higher than in control group ( χ2=3.96, DF=1, p<0.05). Thus, ACE D allele can be considered as genetic marker associated with renal failure, independently of alleles 4a or 894T .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.100 P06.102 An association between essential tremor and Etm2 locus in FADs genotypes and desaturase activity estimated by Latvian population arachidonic to linoleic acid ratio are associated with I. Inashkina1, I. Radovica1, E. Vitols2, L. Smeltere3, E. Jankevics1; inflammation and coronary artery disease 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins E. Trabetti1, G. Malerba1, N. Martinelli2, D. Girelli2, P. Guarini2, T. Illig3, M. San- University, Department of Neurology, Riga, Latvia, 3Paul Stradins University dri2, S. Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, L. Schaeffer3, J. Heinrich3, R. Corrocher2, O. Olivieri2, Clinical Hospital, Riga, Latvia. P. F. Pignatti1; Essential tremor (ET) is one of the most common neurological disor- 1Section of Biology and Genetics - Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Univ ders in humans . An autosomal dominantly inherited form of ET is ge- Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ Verona, netically linked to two loci on chromosomes 3q13 (ETM1) and 2p24 .1 Italy, Verona, Italy, 3GSF-National Research Center for Environmental and (ETM2) in families from different parts of the world . Numerous of can- Health, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany, Neuherberg, Ger- didate genes for ET disorder - HS1-BP3, HCLS1, DRD3 - have been many. suggested during last years . Background: The delta-5 and delta-6 desaturases, encoded by FADS1 Here we report study analysing a group of 104 unrelated Latvian pa- and FADS2 genes, are key enzymes in the conversion of linoleic acid tients with ET for a genetic association with loci in candidate regions (LA) to arachidonic acid (AA) . AA is the precursor of a cascade of ETM1 and ETM2. Out of them, 52 were classified as familial on the mediators, such as eicosanoids, with inflammatory properties. Single bases of familial history . All patients were genotyped using sixteen in- nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in FADS1 and FADS2 have been formative STR markers within two loci associated with ET (9 markers associated with different levels of AA and LA, with possible functional for ETM2 and 7 for ETM1) and statistically analysed . Allele frequencies consequences on desaturase activity . were estimated on 97 normal controls, matched by age and gender . Methods and Results: Thirteen FADS SNPs and AA/LA ratio on red The one concrete allele frequencies were significantly different be- blood cell (RBC) membranes, a marker of desaturase activity, were tween familial ET samples in case of marker D2S220 (p=0 .0281) and evaluated in 876 subjects with (n=610) or without (n=266) angiographi- total ET samples in case of marker D2S2201 (p=0 .0385) in comparison cally documented coronary artery disease (CAD) . AA/LA ratio was to control samples. Other loci did not show significant allele frequency higher in CAD patients (2 .17±0 .41 versus 1 .99±0 .36; P=2 .5×10-10), differences between familial cases, total ET cases or control groups . and an increased AA/LA ratio resulted an independent risk factors for In addition, 7th exon of HS1-BP3 gene containing A265G substitution CAD (OR 2 .22, 95%CI 1 .37-3 .61 for higher versus lower ratio tertile) . and 1st exon of DRD3 gene containing S9G substitution were anal- Furthermore, hs-CRP levels increased progressively across AA/LA ra- ysed in all ET patients and control samples . Analysed data did not re- tio tertiles . In a linear regression model including all the 13 SNPs anal- veal any association between known variants of HS1-BP3 and DRD3 ysed, 4 resulted to be independent predictors of AA/LA ratio variability . genes and ET phenotype . The subjects carrying the highest number of alleles associated with a Our data suggest an association between ETM2 locus and familial es- raised ratio, as well as haplotypes with the highest number of such al- sential tremor in Latvian population . leles, presented proportionally more elevated hs-CRP concentrations and an increased probability of having CAD . P06.101 Conclusions: An increased desaturase activity is associated with an Lysyl Oxidase-like 1 gene Polymorphisms in Exfoliation elevated hs-CRP and, in turn, with an increased risk for CAD . Subjects syndrome, Exfoliation Glaucoma and Primary Open Angle carrying FADS genotypes associated with an higher desaturase activ- Glaucoma in the Finnish Population ity may be prone to a proinflammatory response favouring atheroscle- S. Lemmelä1, E. Forsman2, H. Nurmi1, H. Laivuori1, T. Kivelä3, P. Puska3, E. rotic vascular damage . Vesti3, A. Eriksson2, H. Forsius2, I. Järvelä1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, P06.103 2Population Genetics Unit, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, mLPA PcR-analysis for registration of the most frequent 3Department of Ophthalmology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. mutations in mEFV gene indigenous to Armenians Exfoliation syndrome (XFS) is an age-related ocular disorder and a risk V. A. Kadnikova, O. A. Schagina, A. V. Polyakov; factor for the development of glaucoma . XFS is characterized by abnor- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. mal accumulation of greyish fibril-like material in the anterior segment Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease of the eye . Similar material has also been found in extraocular tissues . particularly common in several populations of Mediterranean extraction, XFS is prevalent worldwide but the prevalence varies widely in differ- and affecting mainly Turks, Jews, Armenians, and Arabs . It is charac- ent populations; being even 20%-40% among individuals >80 years in terized by recurrent short episodes of fever, sterile peritonitis, arthritis, Scandinavian countries . Familiar aggregation studies suggest genetic and pleurisy . The gene responsible for FMF, MEFV(MIM# 608107), contribution to XFS . In a recent genome-wide association study, three was identified by positional cloning in 1997. The product of the MEFV SNPs, (rs2165241, rs1048661 (R141L) and rs3825942 (G153D)) on gene, named pyrin/marenostrin, is expressed in polymorphonuclear lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) gene were found to be strongly associ- cells and monocytes and it is proposed that it regulates inflammatory ated with XFS and XFG, in Icelandic and Swedish patients . Together responses at the level of leucocyte cytoskeletal organisation . Thirty two non-synonymous SNPs accounted for 99% of XFG in this popula- six mutations located in the MEFV gene have been identified so far, tion . These two SNPs were in complete LD and three haplotypes were mostly in exon 10, followed by exons 1, 2, 3, 5 and 9 . observed . Haplotypes G/G (OR=27 .05) and T/G (OR=8 .90) were risk We elaborated the multiplex system for MLPA PCR-analysis for most haplotypes relatively to G/A with lowest estimated risk . In this study frequent mutations indigenous to Armenians M694V, M680I, V726A, we investigate whether three LOXL1 SNPs are associated with XFS/ F479L, R761H, and E148Q in MEFV gene in exons 10, 5 and 2 . The XFG in Finnish population . SNPs are screened by direct-sequencing in MEFV probe mix contains 18 different probes with amplification prod- XFS-, XFG- and POAG- patients (100/group) and as controls in ~120 ucts between 82 and 145 bp . Length difference between consecutive individuals without any sign of XFS/XFG/POAG and ~300 Finnish amplification products is 3 or 4 bp. blood donors . In preliminary results 59% (30/51) of XFS patients, 69% DNA sample from 57 unrelated Armenian FMF patients were exam- (40/58) of XFG patients and only 18% (10/55) of POAG patients were ined by this multiplex system . 83 chromosomes with different muta- homozygous for the highest risk haplotype GG . Likewise in Icelandic tions were revealed So, calculated nformative of this system more then and Swedish population about 25% (82/325) of general population in 73% for Armenians living on the Russian Federation territory . Finland were homozygous for the haplotype GG . Studies are ongoing Advantages of this method are: specificity; possibility to work with and more XFS/XFG/POAG patients will be analyzed . small quantity of researching material- method speed; for all mutation types used two universal ferments: ligase and polymerase; detection with help of PAAG or capillary electrophoresis; quantitative analysis genes copy or stripes of genes .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.104 P06.106 Association study of candidate genes in the chromosome Association of Fc gamma receptors (FcγRs) polymorphisms 5p13.1-q11.2 linkage region for familial primary cutaneous with susceptibility of systemic Lupus Erythematosus (sLE) in amyloidosis Hong Kong Chinese M. W. Lin1,2, C. T. Hsu1, C. C. Huang3, Y. F. Liu4, D. D. Lee5, T. T. Liu4, C. K. P. Ng, Y. L. Lau, W. L. Yang; Wong5, S. F. Tsai6; Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Hong Kong, 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China. 2Department of Medical Research & Education, Taipei Veterans General Hos- Systemic Lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease char- pital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Biomeical Informatics, National Yang-Ming acterized by immune dysregulation, leading to high-level autoantibody University, Taipei, Taiwan, 4VYM Genome Research Center, National Yang- production and immune complex deposition . Both genetic and envi- Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans ronmental factors are known to contribute to the complex etiology of General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Division of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, SLE . Fc gamma receptors, which constitute a clustered gene family lo- National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, Taiwan. cated on chromosome 1q23, are low-affinity receptors for IgG and play Primary cutaneous amyloidosis (PCA) is a relatively common skin dis- important role in immune complex clearance. Abnormalities in FcγR order in South America and Southeast Asia . The pathogenesis of PCA mediated immune complex clearance could be involved in the disease remains unclear . Most cases of PCA are sporadic but familial aggrega- and polymorphisms of FcγRs may affect the susceptibility and sever- tion has been reported from South America and Taiwan . The different ity of SLE . In this study, we have examined SNP rs1801274 and SNP susceptibility among ethnic groups suggests that genetic factor may rs396991, two non-synonymous variations coding for amino acids lo- play an important role in its pathogenesis . cated in the extracellular domain of FcγRIIa and FcγRIIIa, respectively. In our previous study, we performed genome-wide linkage analysis of 430 SLE patients and 387 healthy controls of Hong Kong Chinese were familial primary cutaneous amyloidosis using both microsatellite and genotyped for these two SNPs. The G allele of rs1801274 in FcγRIIa Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Mapping 10K Array and identified sig- codes for R131, which was shown to have low-binding affinity to IgG. nificant linkage evidence (maximum LOD=4.50) for a portion of FPCA Our study found that the G/G genotype for this site was more frequent families on chromosome 5. In the candidate region identified by SNP (14 .2%) in SLE patients in our population compared to healthy con- linkage mapping, there are 12 known genes . trols (10.1%). No significant difference was seen in FcγRIIIa polymor- To characterize the susceptibility genes for FPCA, we applied the Il- phisms in Hong Kong Chinese . We are planning more extensive stud- lumina GoldenGate® Assay to genotype large amounts of functional ies on this important locus and hypothesize that loss of balance among SNPs and tagSNPs selected from the HapMap project within or around the receptors with opposing functions in this locus may confer disease candidate genes of significant linkage region on chromosome 5. A to- susceptibility to SLE in Hong Kong Chinese . tal number of 23 FPCA families with 75 affected and 72 phenotypi- cally normal subjects and 94 normal control subjects were genotyped P06.107 in the study . Several SNPs on NNT, FGF10, HCN1, ITGA1, ITGA2, study of linkage to FEB1 and FEB2 loci in serbian families with NDUFS4, SNAG1 genes demonstrated statistically significant results febrile seizures (p-value <0 .05) . N. Maksimovic1, D. Perovic2, M. Djuric2, I. Novakovic1, T. Damnjanovic1, B. In conclusion, our study found positive association between several Jekic1, L. Lukovic1, Z. Krcunovic1; candidate genes on chromosome 5 and FPCA . Independent study and 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Mother functional study are required to confirm our findings. and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, Serbia. Introduction: Febrile seizures (FS) represent the most common form of P06.105 childhood seizure . It is well known that genetic factors play an impor- High prevalence of familial pulmonary fibrosis in Newfoundland tant role in susceptibility to FS. Although specific genes that affect the suggestive of a novel genetic etiology majority of FS cases have not yet been identified, genetic loci for FS L. A. Edwards, B. A. Fernandez, B. Noble, M. O. Woods; on chromosomes 8 (FEB1), 19 (FEB2), 2 (FEB3), 5 (FEB4), 6 (FEB5), Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada. and 18 (FEB6) have been reported recently . However, the mode of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) is a form of interstitial lung disease inheritance still remains unclear . Polygenic, autosomal dominant and that is progressive and often fatal . This devastating disease is limited autosomal recessive models have received support . to the lungs, and the only treatment that improves survival is a lung Aim: Our aim was to investigate the mode of inheritance in familial FS, transplant . It is usually diagnosed between ages 50-70 years . Without to conduct the linkage analysis to FEB1 (8q13-21) and FEB2 (19p13 .3) treatment, mean survival ranges from 2-4 years . Up to 3% of IPF pa- loci in Serbian population and to investigate the correlation between tients have the familial form of the disease (familial pulmonary fibrosis the specific locus and seizure type. or FPF) . In 2001, autosomal dominant mutations in Surfactant Protein Methods: We investigated ten nonconsanguinous families with at least C (SFTPC) were shown to cause familial forms of lung disease, in- three members whose diagnosis of FS was established by the stan- cluding FPF . Also, in 2006, mutations in genes encoding telomerase dard diagnostic criteria . The mode of inheritance was determined by components, Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase (TERT) and an RNA pedigree analysis . In order to investigate the linkage of FS to FEB1 component (TERC) were shown to increase susceptibility to FPF . and FEB2 loci we analyzed microsatellite markers D8S1840, D8S530, There is an unexpectedly high prevalence of FPF in Newfoundland . D19S209, D19S216, D19S591 . Alleles were determined after PCR There are presently 14 identified FPF families with 54 affected indi- and gel-electrophoresis and linkage was estimated by LOD score cal- viduals . The minimum prevalence of FPF in Newfoundland is 54 cases culation . per 400,000, which is approximately 135 cases per 106, compared to Results: In ten investigated families we found the autosomal domi- the FPF prevalence in the UK which is only 1 .34 cases per 106 . Muta- nant mode of inheritance with reduced penetrance . Linkage analysis tions in the SFTPC gene have previously been excluded in the FPF showed no significant correlation between febrile seizures and exam- Newfoundland families . As well, mutations in the TERT and TERC ined loci in our sample . Maximum LOD score of 0 .98 at recombination genes have also been excluded in our 14 FPF families . In these fami- fraction of θ=0.00 was obtained at locus D19S209. That confirmed pre- lies we are currently performing genome-wide scans to identify the viously presumed genetic heterogeneity of the disorder . causative gene(s) involved . P06.108 Familial Hemiplegic migraine: linkage to chromosome 14q32 in a large spanish kindred E. Cuenca-Leon1, R. Corominas1, M. Montfort2,3, J. Artigas4, M. Roig1, M. Bayés2,3, B. Cormand5,6, A. Macaya1; 1Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil i Psiquiatria Genètica, Hospital Univer- sitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), UPF, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER Epidemio- logía y Salud Pública, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CRG), Barcelona, Spain,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  4Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 5Departament de Genètica, frataxin gene on chromosome 9 (X25 at 9q13) . In this paper we pres- Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6CIBER En- ent our results from the molecular analysis of frataxin gene (X25) gene fermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. in total of 40 patients with spinocerebellar ataxia from the Republic of Objective: To map the disease-causing gene in a large Spanish kin- Macedonia . Fifteen of the patients have an early onset of progressive dred with familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), migraine with aura (MA) ataxia (before 25 years), while 25 patient were more than 25 years old and migraine without aura (MO) . at the time of diagnosis. We amplified the FRDA associated expand- Methods: DNA samples from 20 family members were obtained . Pa- ed fragment using a long range PCR technique . PCR product were tients were classified according to ICHD-II criteria for specific migraine analyzed by agarose and/or PAG electrophoresis . Mutation analysis subtypes . After ruling out linkage to known migraine genetic loci, a shown that 14/15 patient with typical early onset of the simptoms were single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based, 0 .62 cM density ge- homozygous for a GAA expansion in intron 1 of frataxin gene . No ex- nomewide scan was performed . pansion of the GAA repeat were found in 25 patient with ataxia more Results: In 13 affected subjects, FHM was the prevailing migraine than 25 years old . In 35 normal individuals the number of GAA repeat phenotype in six, MA in four and MO in three . Linkage analysis re- were in normal range . vealed a disease locus in a 4 .15 Mb region on 14q32, with a maximum two-point LOD score of 3 .1 and a multipoint parametric LOD score of P06.111 3 .8 . This genomic region does not overlap with reported migraine loci molecular characterization of two variants of GAtA4 in patients on 14q21-22 . Several candidate genes map to this region . Sequence with congenital Heart Defects analysis of one of them, SLC24A4, encoding a potassium-dependent F. Giacopelli1, M. Marini1, E. Damato2, A. Baban1, G. Trocchio3, G. D’Annunzio2, sodium/calcium exchanger, failed to show disease-causing mutations M. Lerone1, G. Pongiglione3, R. Lorini2, R. Ravazzolo1; in our patients . 1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, Genoa, Italy, 2Pediatric Clinic, G. Conclusions: The finding of a new genetic locus in FHM underscores Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 3Unit of Cardiology,G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, its monogenic character and hints to greater genetic heterogeneity Italy. than previously suspected . While several genes conferring increased Congenital Heart Defects (CHDs) are among the most common de- susceptibility to migraine seem to reside on 14q, the underlying dis- velopmental anomalies that affect around 1% of newborns . One of the ease-causing gene in our family remains unidentified. genes described as causative of CHD is GATA4, a zinc finger trancrip- tion factor, important regulator in heart development . Mice lacking this P06.109 gene have defects in the formation of heart tube and are lethal . GATA4 Association study of tOR1A gene polymorphisms with the risk mutations have been found in families with Atrial and Ventricular Sep- of primary focal dystonia tal Defects and rarely associated with Tetralogy of Fallot . E. Sarasola1, F. Sádaba2, B. Huete2, A. Rodríguez-Antigüedad2, A. M. Pérez- In this study we report two different variants in the non coding sequence Miranda1, M. J. García-Barcina1; of GATA4 gene found in two patients with Atrial Septal Defect: c784-3 1Unidad de Genética. Hospital de Basurto. Osakidetza - Servicio Vasco de C>T and c998-4C>G . Interestingly, in one of the two cases neonatal Salud, Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología. Hospital de Basurto. Osakidetza permanent diabetes was present in the patient and her mother . - Servicio Vasco de Salud, Bilbao, Spain. These variants were not detected in more than 100 healthy controls, The most frequent cause of early-onset primary generalised dystonia, while one of the two was also detected in the apparently patient’s unaf- which is dominantly inherited, is a deletion of a GAG triplet from exon fected mother . Both patients were screened also for TBX5 and NKX2 .5 5 of TOR1A gene (c .907delGAG) . This gene encodes torsinA protein, genes and no mutations were found . whose role has been suggested to be involved in regulating nuclear These GATA4 variants are located at acceptor splicing sites in intron 3 envelope and endoplasmatic reticule organization . This 3-bp deletion and 5, respectively, and predicted to be potentially able to affect splic- removes a codon in the C-terminus of torsinA that normally encodes a ing on the basis of specialized software analysis . glutamic acid residue, producing an altered protein, with reduced or no Since the gene is not expressed in lymphocytes and fibroblasts, the activity, which forms perinuclear inclusions . effect on splicing cannot be directly tested on cDNA . Therefore an in A recent study described the effects of a new polimorphism in position vitro assay to verify the effect of both nucleotide variants using an exon c .646 (G>C) which causes the development of inclusions similar to trapping model has been set up . those described for deltaGAG deletion . Moreover, this D216H amino- The Health e Child IST-2004-027749 project is acknowledged . acid change reduced the number of torsinA inclusions in cultured cells with deltaGAG deletion . Many groups have studied the implication of P06.112 this and other polymorphisms in this gene in primary dystonia but re- the distribution of s19W and -1131 t>c gene apolypoproteid sults are controversial. In this work we will try to find a risk haplotype A5 (ApoA) polymorphism in children with innate risk factors of for primary focal dystonia . metabolic syndrome We analyzed 6 different polymorphisms in individuals with focal dys- A. P. Khmyrova1, A. N. Voitovich1, P. A. Sinicin2, O. A. Kononova1, M. Y. Scher- tonia (n = 60) and a control healthy population (n = 50) . None of them bacova2, V. I. Larionova1; presented the GAG deletion in TOR1A exon 5 . For genotyping, real- 1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Rus- time PCR followed by allelic discrimination or PCR and automated se- sian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. quencing was performed . Statistical analysis was carried out using a The risk factors of cardiovascular disorders there are in children and haplotype-based approach . adolescence and sometimes may be cause of metabolic syndrome . One of metabolic syndrome criteria is atherogenic dyslipidemia with P06.110 high level of triglyceride and low level of high density lipoprotein’s cho- molecular diagnosis of Friedreich‘s ataxia in macedonian lesterol . The detecting of molecular markers of this dyslipidemia is one patients of the important problems . S. A. Kocheva1,2, S. Vlaski-Jekic3, M. Kuturec2, G. D. Efremov1; The aim of our study was to investigate genotype and alleles distri- 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic En- bution S19W and -1131 T>C ApoA5 gene polymorphism in children gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace- with risk factors of cardiovascular disorders and compare it with control donia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic group . of Macedonia, 3Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former We included 187 children with risk factors of coronary artery disease Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. (CAD) from 5 to 17 years old . Control group consisted of 150 children Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is a progressive neurodegenerative disor- and adolescence with same age . der of autosomal recessive inheritance, in which gait ataxia followed by For detecting S19W and A-1131T>C ApoA5 gene polymorphism we upper limb ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus, areflexia, loss of joint posi- used PCR with restriction assay by the method, described Talmud P . tion sense, and spastic paraparesis develop from the second decade J . et al ., 2002 . of life . It is the commonest hereditary ataxia, with a prevalence of 1 in We have revealed significant differences in genotype distribution (SS- 50 000 and a deduced carrier frequency in European populations of 1 90,4% and 81,9%, SW - 9,6% and 16,8%, WW - 0,0% and 1,3%, in 120 . Friedreich’s ataxia has been associated with mutations of the p=0,05, relatively) and alleles distribution (S-95,2% and 90,3%, W-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  4,8% and 9,7%, relatively, p=0,025) of S19W of ApoA5 gene polymor- P06.115 phism between children with risk factors of CAD and control group . We Cross-validation filtering for genome-wide association scan haven’t significant differences in genotypes and alleles distribution of Z. Vitezica1,2, M. Martinez1,3; A-1131T>C of ApoA5 gene polymorphism in boys, girls and total group 1INSERM U563, Toulouse, France, 2Université Paul Sabatier III, Toulouse, between children with risk factors of CAD and control group .conclu- France, 3Université Paul Sabatier III, Toulouse, France. sion: children with risk factors of metabolic syndrome had more fre- Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) with hundreds of thousands quent SS genotype and S allele S19W of ApoA5 gene polymorphism of markers are now feasible . In a one-stage study design, stringent than in healthy children . significance thresholds are used because of the multiple-test problem. Hence, GWAs have low power to detect uncommon disease genes P06.113 with low effects, even in relatively large datasets (several thousands Influence of TNF (G-308A) polymorphism on level of a tNF-alpha of cases and controls) . Alternative approaches have been proposed in blood at chronic diseases of lungs and liver (Satagopan et al., 2002; Skol et al., 2005). Briefly, the full set of mark- I. A. Goncharova1, G. N. Seitova2, E. V. Beloborodova2, O. P. Bukreeva2, I. L. ers is tested in a fraction of the dataset only . A set of “best” markers, Purlik2, V. P. Puzyrev1; to be followed-up in either an independent (two-stages design) or an 1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, increased (joint-analysis design) sample, is identified from pointwise 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. P-values. Yet, relaxing the significance thresholds may not compen- Polymorphism in TNF (G-308A) gene was studied for association with sate decrease in power due to the sample size reduction in stage-1 . tumor necrosis factor alpha level in blood of patients with chronic viral Here, we propose to use the consistency in the “associated” allele as a hepatitis (n=60) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) new criterion to select the “best” markers . The Consistency Rate (CR) (n=72) . The patients were from Tomsk population . It has been shown is the number of times that allele 1 is found to be the risk allele out of that level of TNF-alpha in patients with chronic viral hepatitis depends n sub-samples . Each marker is ranked according to its CR value . Non- on TNF (G-308A) genotype: GG - 137 .9±222 .49; AG - 48 .7±58 .16; disease markers are expected to have CR values of 50% . Thus, in our AA -31.0±1.41 (p=0.018). The finding suggests that in patients with approach, the “best” markers are those with CR values significantly chronic viral hepatitis allele A is associated with smaller intensity of different from 50%. We study the statistical properties of our filtering an inflammation and fibrosis in a liver. In the patients with COPD, car- approach by simulations, using a panel of 30,000 SNPs from HapMap riers of genotype AG had lower level TNF-alpha in blood at exacer- data, and under different conditions (disease gene effects; sample siz- bation (60,1±20,68) and during remission (75,1±16,56) in comparison es; number of sub-samples n) . We report type I error and power rates with carriers of a genotype GG (193,8±50,65; 370,3±109,4) (p=0,041; of our filtering and of other approaches. p=0,026) . Genotype AA has not been revealed . Thus, at patients with COPD allele A is associated with low level TNF-alpha in blood, like in P06.116 patients with chronic viral hepatitis . These results are discordant with Identification of novel susceptibility loci 7q31 and 9p13 for known data on association of allele A with increased level of produc- bipolar disorder in an isolated population tion of TNF-alpha . There might be several explanations of the discrep- O. M. Palo1, P. Soronen1, K. Silander1, T. Varilo1, K. Tuononen1, M. Perola1, T. ancy, including population specificity of genetic predisposition to vari- Kieseppä2, T. Partonen2, J. Lönnqvist2,3, T. Paunio1,4, L. Peltonen1,5; ous diseases and different LD structure in adjacent regions of genome 1FIMM, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland and National Public Health In- (including 3’-UTR region of the gene) in different populations, as well stitute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Mental Health and Alcohol Research, as different environmental factors that can influence realization of a National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Psychiatry, “genetic background” . Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Psychiatry,, Helsinki, P06.114 Finland, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United King- somatic genome structural variations dom. V. Sgaramella, J. L. Williams, F. Salamini; We performed a linkage analysis on 23 Finnish families with bipolar CERSA, Lodi, Italy. disorder and originating from the North-Eastern region of Finland, by The notion that cells of common ancestry harbour genomes different using the Illumina Linkage Panel IV (6K) Array . The Panel IV had an from each other is strengthening . The differences may be either sched- average intermarker spacing of 0 .64 cM across the entire genome . uled (e . g ., immune response), or unscheduled (e .g ., damage effects), One phenotypic model, broad mood disorder including bipolar I disor- and alter DNA structures . Simple repeats, interspersed sequences, der and recurrent depressive disorder, was used in the analyses . We (retro)transposons, pseudogenes, transgenes, etc, may assume un- found genome-wide significant evidence of linkage to chromosomes usual non-B conformations, affecting recognition by DNA-metabolizing 7q31 (LOD = 3 .20) and 9p13 .1 (LOD = 4 .02) . Analyzing the best mark- enzymes . This may trigger a crescendo of variations, from base substi- ers on the full set of 179 Finnish bipolar families supported the findings tutions to aneuploidy. Epigenetics modifies chromatin and modulates on chromosome 9p13 (maximum LOD score of 3 .02 at position 383 transcription in somatic cells, but can be erased in germ cells . The Mb immediately upstream of the centromere . This region harbors sev- resulting RNA may activate novel priming and retrotranscription thus eral interesting candidate genes, including contactin associated pro- concurring to genome rearrangements, competent to drive evolution tein-like 3 (CNTNAP3) and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1B1) . and contribute to development . The resulting somatic genome struc- For the 7q31 locus, only one extended pedigree and seven families tural variations (SGSV) may accelerate cell duplication and favour originating from the same late settlement region of Finland provided clonal amplification, occasionally optimizing some functions, but often evidence of linkage, suggesting that a gene predisposing to bipolar deranging growth . Consequently, multicellular organisms are bound to disorder is enriched in that region of Finland . The loci on the centro- be eventually genomic mosaic . meric region of 9p13 and telomeric region of 7q31 may represent novel We report on: 1. the amplification of the genome of as few cells as susceptibility loci for mood disorder in the Finnish population . possible of diverse somatic tissues, as a prerequisite for detecting SGSV; 2. their identification and characterization. For step 1, we have P06.117 developed a modified isothermal whole genome strand displacement mapping of a locus for Geroderma Osteodysplasticum to amplification based on the circularization of restricted genomes. For chromosome 1q23-q25 step 2, we are investigating two approaches, based on AFLP and dif- F. Brancati1,2, V. Fodale3, G. Zampino4, M. Tartaglia3, B. Dallapiccola1,5; ferential 2D-gel electrophoresis; others are being considered such as 1IRCCS CSS Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Ce.S.I. e Dipartimento di Scienze mass sequencing and comparative genome hybridization. Benefits are Biomediche, Fondazione G. d’Annunzio, Chieti, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Biologia expected in basic sciences (soma-germline-environment crosstalk, Cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 4Istituto di mechanisms of gene copy and chromosome number variations, evo- Clinica Pediatrica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 5Diparti- devo), as well as applications (diagnosis, therapy, stem cells, transge- mento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. netics, cloning, plant and livestock breeding) . Geroderma Osteodisplasticum (GO; OMIM%231070) is a rare auto- somal recessive condition described so far in less than 30 patients whose molecular defect is still unknown . GO is characterized by pre-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  mature aging, skin laxity and generalised osteoporosis with sponta- and manifestations of GD . neous fractures . Craniofacial dysmorphism include a prominent fore- A cohort of 98 patients, and 50 healthy controls were used to genotype head, ptosis, large protruding ears, droopy cheeks, flat malar region these three SNPs by PCR-RFLPs . and prognathism . Results from +49A/G showed significant differences for the genotypes We ascertained a Libanese family in which 3 individuals presented between Graves’ patients and controls . The frequency of GG is higher with GO . The proband aged 1 ½ years is born from sixth-degree con- than in controls, a 6% of the controls were homozygous for the G al- sanguineous parents, while in his 2 maternal uncles (born from a ma- lele, while for the patients group we found 22%. Furthermore, signifi- ternal uncle who married his second-degree cousin) the diagnosis was cant increase in the frequency of the G allele was found in Graves’ posed at 21 and 18 years, respectively . A genome-wide search was patients compared with controls (X²= 6 .04, P=0 .0140) performed by genotyping the 3 affected individuals for microsatellite No statistically significant association has been found with the -318 markers spaced around 10-15 cM from the ABI PRISM® Linkage Map- A/G and CT60 3’UTR polymorphism (X² = 17 .8, P =0 .1815; X² = 0 .79, ping Set seeking for adjacent homozygous markers . Among 6 positive P=0 .3729 respectively) . regions, haplotype reconstruction and genotyping of other family mem- bers allowed the identification of a unique informative 47 centimorgan P06.120 region of homozygosity, shared only by the 3 patients . We generated 9 5 base pair deletions in Rab27a gene as hot spot in exon 6 in novel microsatellite markers in order to refine this region and outlined a Griscelli syndrome (type ii) locus for GO spanning from 155 .15 to 174 .71 megabases on the long S. Shahkarami1, Z. Pourpak2, M. Houshmand3, A. Hamidieh2, M. Moin2; arm of chromosome 1 (max Lod score 3 .2) . Sequencing of candidate 1Immunology, Asthma and Allergy Institue (IAARI), Tehran, Islamic Republic genes within the linked interval is still in progress . of Iran, 2Immunology, Asthma and Allergy Institue (IAARI),, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, P06.118 and Medical Genetic Lab, Special Medical Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Large deletions in 9q22.21-9q22.33 region of Gorlin syndrome Republic of Iran. patients Griscelli syndrome (GS), an autosomal recessive disorder, is charac- V. Musani1, P. Gorry2, A. Basta-Juzbašić3, S. Levanat1; terized by a silver-gray sheen of the hair and the presence of large 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Laboratoire de Génétique, Déve- clusters of pigment in the hair shaft . GS can be associated to neu- loppement & Cancer, Université V. Ségalen, Bordeaux, France, 3Department rological impairment (GS1), immunodeficiency (GS2), or be isolated of Dermatovenerology, University School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, (GS3) . Zagreb, Croatia. GS2 is caused by a mutation in the small GTPase RABA gene . The Gorlin syndrome, also known as Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syn- aim of this study was to investigate mutations in RABA gene, in a drome (NBCCS) or Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome (BCNS), is an autoso- 3 year-old boy who was referred to our center with immunodeficiency mal dominant disorder that is characterized by various developmental and silver gray sheen of the hair . abnormalities, like cysts of the skin, jaw cysts, bone malformations and Material and method: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral different tumors like basal cell carcinomas (BCC) as most frequent, blood cells by salting out method. Five coding exons were amplified by and also medulloblastomas, meningiomas, fibromas of the ovaries and PCR-Sequencing methods and sequenced to detect probable muta- heart . The prevalence is estimated at one per 57000 . Phenotypical tions in RABA gene . and genotypical diversity in Gorlin syndrome is referring to inactivating Result: A homozygote deletion was found in exon 6 of the RABA mutations in only one gene, PTCH, the human homologue of the Dro- gene . sophila segment-polarity gene patched . PTCH is a tumor suppressor Discussion: This deletion leads to a frame shift mutation in exon 6 and gene, located at 9q22 .3, encoding a 12-pass transmembrane glyco- a premature stop codon. Clinical manifestations and immunodeficien- protein that acts as an antagonist in the Hedgehog signaling pathway . cy help physician to suspect diagnosis of GS II . As molecular analysis The 34 kb gene contains 23 exons and there are several hundred has provided an exact way to investigate mutations in immunodeficient mutations, spanning the whole gene . Although there are some recur- patients like GS, it can be considered as a very useful method for ring mutations, there are no apparent hot spots . Nonsense, frameshift, definite diagnosis. in-frame deletions, splicesite, and missense mutations all have been Because of an amino acid deletion and frame shift in this exon, we described in the Gorlin syndrome patients . In some cases large dele- conclude that this new deletion is pathogen . Other deletions were tions in PTCH region have been reported . We developed semi-quan- found and reported in the same exon as causative mutation . We be- titative fluorescent multiplex PCR with polymorphic markers surround- lieve that this region may be a hot spot for GS II and suggest that the ing PTCH and analyzed the whole 9q22 region in 50 Gorlin syndrome first analysis for other patients must be done in this region. cases from France and Croatia . In three cases we found large dele- tions from 4-7 megabases in length, giving some depth and additional P06.121 indications for phenotype diversity of the Gorlin syndrome . Association study of the glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3beta) gene with Mood Disorders P06.119 M. Gratacòs1, V. Soria2, E. Saus1, F. Vivarelli1, J. R. González3, J. Valero4, È. Analysis of CTLA Gene Polymorphisms in spanish Martínez-Amorós2, M. Bayés1, A. Gutiérrez-Zotes4, J. M. Crespo2,5, L. Martorell4, Graves`Patients E. Vilella4, A. Labad4, J. M. Menchón2,5, J. Vallejo2,5, X. Estivill1,6, M. Urretaviz- M. Piñeiro-Gallego1, P. Álvarez-Vázquez2, L. Constela3, R. García -Mayor2, D. caya2,5; Valverde1; 1CIBERESP (CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública), Genes and Disease 1Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología., Vigo, Spain, 2Com- Program and CeGen Barcelona Genotyping Node, Center for Genomic Regula- plejo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo., Vigo, Spain, 3Complejo Hospitalario tion, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 2Mood Disorders Clinical and Research Unit, Universitario de Vigo, Vigo, Spain. CIBER-SAM, Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, L’Hospitalet Graves’ disease (GD) is a common organ-specific autoimmune dis- de Llobregat, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 3CREAL, Center for Research in ease that affects 0 .5%-1% of Western population . It is a multifactorial Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 4Grup d’Investigació disease that develops as the result of a complex interaction between en Psiquiatria. Hospital Universitari Institut Pere Mata, Rovira i Virgili University, genetic susceptibility genes and environmental factors . GD is charac- Reus, Tarragona, Catalonia, Spain, 5Department of Clinical Sciences, Bellvitge terized by diffuse goiter, ophthalmopathy, and anti-thyroid-stimulating Campus, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 6Experimental and hormone receptor antibodies . Health Sciences Department, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Catalonia, Numerous studies have demonstrated the linkage to several polymor- Spain. phism of the CTLA4 gene . The CTLA4 gene is placed on chromosome Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) is a key component of 2q33 and codifies the T cell receptor, which negatively modulates the the Wnt signaling pathway and is known to regulate such critical cel- immune response disabling the T cells . The aim of the present work lular functions as structure, gene expression, mobility and apoptosis . was to determinate the contribution of C/T dimorphism in the promoter Recent findings support that GSK3beta may play a role in the patho- at position -318, the A/G dimorphism at position + 49 in exon 1, and physiology and treatment of Mood Disorders (MD) . We hypothesize the C/T60 dimorphism in the 3’UTR of the CTLA4 gene to the severity that genetic variants, including SNPs and CNVs (Copy Number Varia-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  tions) in the GSK3beta gene could partially underlie the susceptibility and bolus vs . intravenous infusion of FVIII . to mood disorders, just as much to unipolar major depression as to Results . Between January 1997- 2002, inhibitors frequency was 47 .5%, bipolar disorder . We performed a genetic case-control study including whereas after January 2002 only 19 .19% of patients had inhibitors due 440 screened control subjects and 445 patients with MD (257 Unipolar to reactants and methodology change . The majority of inhibitors were Major Depressive Disorder, 188 Bipolar Disorder) . First, we selected in severe haemophilia (78 .95%), 15 of these patients being positive for a set of 11 TagSNPs polymorphisms representative of the patterns of intron 22 inversion . common variation identified in European population in the genomic Family history and exposure to FVIII were important risk factors of in- region containing the GSK3beta gene and genotyped them using SN- hibitors development . Hepatitis C or B infection, Interferon alpha ther- Plex Genotyping System . Moreover, we are replicating the experiment apy, surgical interventions and intravenous infusion of FVIII haven’t of Lachman et al . in our Spanish sample of MD patients . They found been significantly correlated with inhibitors’ development. a statistical significant increased number of gains in a CNV partially Conclusions . In our patients, we found only the following risk factors for overlapping GSK3beta in bipolar patients compared with control indi- inhibitors development: exposure to FVIII, type of FVIII gene mutations viduals . All the results were analyzed using SNPassoc package, from and familial predisposition . Accuracy of technique and experience of R software . Regarding TagSNPs analyses, nominal associations were laboratory technician is decisive for inhibitor evaluation . found once stratified by polarity, even though they did not remain sig- nificant after correction for multiple comparisons. Overall, although ge- P06.124 netic variants in GSK3beta gene might be a contributing factor to the Association of the iL4R single-nucleotide polymorphism s411L development of mood disorders, further studies in larger samples are with Hand Osteoarthritis needed to obtain more conclusive results . M. Vargiolu1, T. Silvestri2, E. Bonora1, P. Dolzani2, L. Punzi3, A. Fioravanti4, G. Romeo1, R. Meliconi2,5; P06.122 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi via Massarenti, Bolo- Study of an association of deletion/insertion polymorphisms gna, Italy, 2Laboratorio di Immunologia e Genetica, Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli, of GSTM and GSTT genes with a risk of development of Bologna, Italy, 3Rheumatology Unit, University of Padova, Italy, Padova, Italy, endometriosis 4Rheumatology Unit, Policlinico “Le Scotte”, Siena, Italy, 5Rheumatology Unit, E. Kamenec1, O. A. Schagina1, L. F. Kurilo1, L. M. Michaleva2, A. V. Polyakov1; Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy. 1Reseach Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institu- Primary osteoarthritis (OA) is a common late-onset arthritis that dem- tion of Human Morphology RAMN, Moscow, Russian Federation. onstrates a complex mode of transmittance with both joint-site and Endometriosis is a common disease defined as a growth of endometri- gender-specific heterogeneity. In OA anti-inflammatory and anabolic al tissue outside the uterine cavity that often results a vast array of gyn- cytokines which are usually responsible for the control of cartilage aecological problems including dysmenorrhoea, pelvic pain, infertility . homeostasis are altered or inadequate . Hitherto, functional study had Endometriosis is regarded as one of the multifactorial diseases caused been mainly focused on the IL13/IL-4/IL-4R system which has a strong by an interaction between the environment and multiple genes . chondroprotective role and it is reasonable to speculate that polymor- Glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs) are enzymes involved in the phase phism within these genes may be risk factors for OA . We therefore II detoxification process of xenobiotics including carcinogens and mu- investigated polymorphisms in these genes as potential OA suscep- tagens . Gene polymorphisms of members of the GSTs family might tibility loci by genotyping fifteen SNPs using TaqMan® Technology in impair detoxification function and increase the risk of the disorder. The 413 patients (26 male, 387 female) with hand OA and 326 healthy present study was carried out to investigate if deletion/insertion poly- controls (14 male, 312 female) .Although the majority of these SNPs morphisms of GSTM1, GSTT1 and there combination are useful mark- had already shown an association with OA in previous studies, in our ers for predicting endometriosis susceptibility . case-control study only one SNP (dbSNP rs1805013) was associated DNA was extracted from blood of 40 patients with reliable diagnosis of with P-values of 0 .0125 . This association was attributable to an in- endometriosis and 50 healthy women (control group) . DNA samples creased frequency in the probands of the minor T allele regardless of were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and detected by elec- gender and disease severity . This SNP results in the substitution of a trophoresis . The relative frequencies of the GSTM1 wild/null and the serine with a leucine in the codon 411 of IL4R and consequently of an GSTT1 wild/null genotypes between both groups were compared . aliphatic hydrophobic residue for a polar hydrophilic one, a change that The proportion of individuals with GSTM1 null mutation was 45% in could have effects on protein function . Further functional studies for the endometriosis group and 30% in the control group (P > 0 .05), the the S411L substitutions will clarify the role of this SNP on osteoarthritis proportions of GSTT1 wild/null allels in both groups were 22 .5%/18% predisposition . accordingly (P > 0 .05) . The proportions of GSTM1(null/null) + GSTT1(null/null) genotype were 12 .5%/2% (P > 0 .05) . The distribution P06.125 of the polymorphisms and there combination was not significantly dif- tmc1 but Not tmc2 is Responsible for Autosomal Recessive ferent between the two groups . These results suggest that the GSTM1 Nonsyndromic Hearing impairment in tunisian Families and the GSTT1 null mutations aren’t associated with a risk of the de- A. Tlili1,2, I. Ben Rebeh2, M. Aifa-Hmani2, J. Tlili-Chouchène1, H. Dhouib3, J. velopment of endometriosis in Russian women . Moalla3, M. Ben Said2, I. Lahmar4, Z. Benzina5, I. Charfedine3, N. Driss4, A. Ghorbel3, H. Ayadi2, S. Masmoudi2; P06.123 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Unité Cibles Risk Factors of inhibitors Development in Haemophilia Patients pour le Diagnostic et la Thérapie , Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, M. Mihailov, M. Serban, D. Savescu, S. Arghirescu, C. Petrescu, M. Puiu; Tunisia, 3Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U.H. Bourguiba de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Service University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Romania, Timi- d’O.R.L., C.H.U. de Mahdia, Mahdia, Tunisia, 5Service d’Ophtalmologie, C.H.U. soara, Romania. H. Bourguiba de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia. Introduction . FVIII inhibitors appearance in haemophiliacs is related to Hereditary nonsyndromic hearing impairment (HI) is extremely het- several factors, like substitution with native plasma products, frequent erogeneous . Mutations of the transmembrane channel-like gene 1 changing of FVIII concentrates, high rate of HBV and HCV infection, (TMC1) have been shown to cause autosomal dominant and reces- pseudotumours and other massive muscular haematomas, etc . sive forms of nonsyndromic HI linked to the loci DFNA36 and DFNB7/ Objective . Starting from particularities of haemophilia treatment in our B11, respectively . TMC1 is 1 member of a family of 8 genes encoding country, we evaluated the variables impact on inhibitors development . transmembrane proteins . In the mouse, MmTmc1 and MmTmc2 are We assessed frequency and inhibitors titer, in correlation with risk fac- both members of Tmc subfamily A and are highly and almost exclu- tors . sively expressed in the cochlea . The restricted expression of Tmc2 in Material and method: retrospective single center study based on 219 the cochlea and its close phylogenetic relationship to Tmc1 makes it hemophilia patients registered and treated in the IIIrd Pediatric Clinic a candidate gene for nonsyndromic HI . We analyzed 3 microsatellite Timisoara, using Bethesda assay. We evaluated the influence of some markers linked to the TMC1 and TMC2 genes in 85 Tunisian families parameters on frequency and inhibitors titer: haemophilia severity, with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic HI and without mutations in gene mutations, family history, type of substitutive product used, hepa- the protein-coding region of the GJB2 gene . Autozygosity by descent titis C or B infection, Interferon alpha therapy, surgical interventions, analysis of 2 markers bordering the TMC2 gene allowed us to ruleMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  out its association with deafness within these families . However, 5 among healthy controls (p>0 .05) . The other promoter variants resulted families were found to segregate deafness with 3 different alleles of sporadic in HH and absent in controls . marker D9S1837, located within the first intron of the TMC1 gene . By In conclusion, gene mutations causing defective HAMP peptide are DNA sequencing of coding exons of TMC1 in affected individuals, we not detected in our adult HFE-negative patients . However, HAMP vari- identified 3 homozygous mutations, c.100C→T (p.R34X), c.1165C→T ants might contribute to iron overload susceptibility, in addition to other (p.R389X) and the novel mutation c.1764G→A (p.W588X). We addi- genetic and/or environmental factors . Functional studies will be neces- tionally tested 60 unrelated deaf Tunisian individuals for the c.100C→T sary to test this hypothesis . mutation . We detected this mutation in a homozygous state in 2 cases . This study confirms that mutations in the TMC1 gene may be a com- P06.128 mon cause for autosomal recessive nonsyndromic HI . cscE-based mutation analysis of NIPA gene revealed no mutations in italian patients with autosomal dominant hereditary P06.126 spastic paraplegia Genome wide association analysis in human height of A. Borreca1,2, C. Patrono1,3, C. Babalini1, P. Montieri1,2, M. L. Varlese1,2, V. Mo- European-originated monozygotic female twins schella2, G. Bernardi1,2, T. Kawarai4, A. Orlacchio1,2; J. A. Kettunen1,2, I. Lindqvist2, S. Ripatti2,3, T. D. Spector4, N. G. Martin5, L. 1Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, CERC- IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy, 2Dipar- Peltonen1,2, M. Perola2; timento di Neuroscienze, Università degli Studi di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Rome, 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2National Public Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Scienze Biomediche, Università Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 4Department of Neurology, Hyogo Brain 4Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology Unit, King’s College, London, United and Heart Center, Himeji City, Japan. Kingdom, 5Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical We set up a new method based on Conformation Sensitive Capillary Research, Brisbane, Austria. Electrophoresis (CSCE) to screen a cohort of 62 Italian families with Stature (i .e . adult height) is a quantitative trait with high heritability . autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia (ADHSP) for muta- Various interesting regions in the human genome have been linked tions in NIPA1 gene (SPG6) . Probands of all families were previously to adult stature but only few have been confirmed by later studies. excluded for known mutations in the SPG4 gene, SPG3A, SPG13 and Two genome wide association (GWA) studies have been published SPG31 genes . CSCE adapts the technique of heteroduplex analysis recently and they identified two loci (HMGA2 and GDF5-UQCC) to be on automated capillary array electrophoresis using the Applied Biosys- strongly associated to stature after extensive replication studies . In tems 3130 Genetic Analyzer . A previously published SPG6 mutation this study we report a genome wide association analysis performed on in a Japanese ADHSP patient (Kaneko et al ., 2006) was used as a 1631 European monozygotic female twin pairs from the GenomEUtwin positive control in the optimization of the analysis protocol . We ana- consortium . One of each pair was genotyped with the Illumina Human- lyzed the five coding exons and flanking intronic sequences of NIPA1 Hap300-duo chip . Whole genome association analysis was performed gene and we didn’t find any mutation in our cohort of patients. Up with the PLINK-program . Area of residence and age were used as co- to now, only four different nucleotide changes have been reported in variates in all of the analyses . Our study had two goals: We wanted the NIPA1 gene in populations from different geographic areas, two of to reduce the environmental variance by using the mean of each pair them leading to the same aminoacidic change (G106R) . Our negative as a phenotype . We observed an association (p = 3 .14*10-6) on 8q24 result shows that SPG6-linked form is a rare cause of ADHSP in the locus underlying the linkage peak identified previously in our linkage Italian people, in confirmation of another study performed on European scan on European dizygotic twins (LOD 3 .28) . The replication study is ADHSP families (Klebe et al ., 2007) . In this study, we provide a rapid, underway for the most significant findings in this GWA scan. Second, sensitive and effective protocol of automated mutation detection, also we analyzed whether we could pinpoint any regions in genome which applicable to large genes and to high-throughput screening . would be associated to the difference within each pair . This approach was aiming to find genes responsible for increasing variance in hu- P06.129 man height, thus potentially indicating for example GxE interaction or HiF1A gene polymorphism is associated with power imprinting/gene silencing. The most significant finding for variance in performance in athletes stature (p = 1 .22 * 10-5) was identified on 6q14 region. A. M. Hakimullina, I. I. Ahmetov, V. A. Rogozkin; St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian P06.127 Federation. Hepcidin gene in adult HFE-negative hemochromatosis Glycolysis is the central source of anaerobic energy in humans, and E. Marasco1, V. Mantovani1,2, P. Garagnani1,3, D. Bastia1, M. Cenci2, G. Ger- this metabolic pathway is regulated under low-oxygen conditions by boni3, D. Luiselli3, G. Romeo2; the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) . HIF-1a 1CRBA, University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, University controls a number of genes that are implicated in various cellular func- Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 3Dept. of Biology, Anthropology Unit, Bologna Univer- tions including cell proliferation (erythropoietin), glucose metabolism sity, Bologna, Italy. (glucose transporters and glycolytic enzymes), cell survival, and an- Hereditary Hemochromatosis (HH) is a disorder of iron homeostasis, giogenesis (vascular endothelial growth factor and VEGF receptors) . characterized by increased iron absorption and tissue iron deposition, A missense polymorphism, Pro582Ser, is present in exon 12 (C/T at frequently related to HFE gene mutations . Hepcidin peptide (HAMP) bp 85) . The rare T-allele is predicted to result in a proline to serine down-regulates iron absorption; decreased HAMP expression is com- change in the amino acid sequence of the protein . This substitution mon in many HH forms and HAMP gene mutations are associated with increases protein stability and transcriptional activity, and therefore, juvenile HH . improves glucose metabolism and angiogenesis . In this study, we in- Aim of this study was to investigate HAMP gene in 93 HH adult pa- vestigated whether genetic variation at the locus encoding HIF1A is tients, negative for the most common HFE gene mutations, presenting associated with elite athlete status in weightlifters, for which glycolysis >70% transferrin saturation . is crucial for power performance . The study involved 53 Russian ath- Three exons and a promoter region of the gene were screened using letes (17 sub-elite, 32 elite and 4 highly elite) and 920 controls . HIF1A DHPLC and sequencing . An additional upstream putative regulating gene Pro582Ser polymorphism was determined by PCR-RLFP . The region was also investigated . frequency of the rare Ser allele was significantly higher in weightlifters The analysis did not show any classical mutations, but many previous- than in controls (17 .9% vs . 8 .5%; P=0 .001) . Moreover, the frequency ly undescribed variants were detected: 2 synonymous (L14L and T84T of Ser allele increased with growing skill level of athletes (sub-elite found in two patients), 5 variants in promoter and 5’UTR region, and (14 .7%) - elite (18 .8%) - highly elite (25 .0%)) . Thus, HIF1A gene one in the third intron . Interspecies comparison of HAMP sequences Pro582Ser polymorphism is associated with elite power athlete status, showed that 14 and 84 codons are highly conserved . The analysis of which suggests an important role for HIF-1a in skeletal muscle adapta- mRNA secondary structure, performed by MFOLD software, showed tion to power training . that the synonymous mutations here detected considerably modified the structure, particularly the 5’ and 3’UTR regions. The novel pro- moter variant g .232C>T was found in 17% among patients and in 24%Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.130 QTL allele frequencies in each population . Furthermore, dominance Association of the RET proto-oncogene to intestinal Neuronal and inbreeding are allowed for . The updated method is based on the Dysplasia type B decomposition of trait variance into components with the consideration R. M. Fernandez1,2, M. Ruiz-Ferrer1,2, A. Sánchez-Mejías1,2, M. López-Alonso1,2, of the genetic effect conditioned by interpopulation origin and inbreed- G. Antiñolo1,2, S. Borrego1,2; ing of individuals . To estimate model parameters, namely additive and 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal, Hos- dominant effects, and the allelic frequencies of the QTL analysed, and pitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación also to define the QTL positions on a chromosome with respect to gen- Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Seville, Spain. otyped markers, we used the maximum-likelihood method . To detect Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is defined by the absence of intramural linkage between the QTL and the markers we propose statistics with ganglia of Meissner and Auerbach along variable lengths of the gastro- a noncentral chi-square distribution that provides the possibility to de- intestinal tract . Intestinal neuronal dysplasia type B (INDB) is charac- duce analytical expressions for the power of the method and therefore, terized by the malformation of the parasympathetic submucous plexus to estimate the pedigree’s size required for 80% power . The method of the gut . It seems to exist a connection between these two enteric works for arbitrarily structured pedigrees and uses the phenotypic nervous system abnormalities, supported by the fact that HSCR often values and the marker information for each individual of the pedigree includes a region of INDB-like character proximal to the aganglionic under observation as initial data and can be valuable for fine mapping segment . Because of the major role played by the RET proto-onco- purposes . The power of the method is increased if the QTL effects con- gene in HSCR, we sought to determine if this gene was also related to ditioned by interpopulation origin and inbreeding are enhanced . INDB, by both a mutational screening in a series of patients, and the evaluation of its polymorphisms/haplotypes as susceptibility factors for P06.133 this disease . We have used dHPLC techniques to screen the RET cod- clinical and genetic investigation of three kindreds with familial ing region in 23 patients presenting with INDB, and 30 patients with a hyperparathyroidism combined HSCR+INDB phenotype . In addition, a total of 11 RET SNPs G. Masi, L. Barzon, M. Iacobone, A. Porzionato, V. Macchi, G. Palù; were strategically selected and genotyped by using Taqman technol- University of Padova, Padova, Italy. ogy . Distribution of such SNPs, as well as of the haplotypes gener- We investigated three Italian kindreds referred to our Surgery Unit for ated by their combinations, was compared among the different groups familial hyperparathyroidism . One kindred was diagnosed as affected of patients (INDB, HSCR+INDB, HSCR) and controls . As a result we by hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome (HPT-JT), due to the oc- have demonstrated the involvement of RET in the pathogenesis of in- currence of a maxillary ossifying fibroma, the other two kindreds were testinal neuronal dysplasia B, although by different molecular mecha- defined as familial isolated hyperparathyroidism (FIHP) because of the nisms to those leading to Hirschsprung disease . Further investigation occurrence of hyperparathyroidism without other syndromic manifes- is warranted in order to elucidate those precise mechanisms and to tations . Clinical investigation demonstrated that all kindreds shared clarify therefore the genetic nature of INDB . other clinical features besides hyperparathyroidism, i .e ., high frequen- cy of uterine polyposis and thyroid neoplasms . Since germline HRPT2 P06.131 mutations are detected in HPT-JT kindreds, but also in 7% of FIHP kin- First Dutch founder mutation in Hereditary spastic Paraplegia dreds, we tested patients for HRPT2 mutations and performed immu- W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams1,2, S. G. M. Frints1,2, M. Gerards1,2, E. L. C. Jongen1,2, nohistochemical analysis of parafibromin, encoded by HRPT2, in all R. G. Janssen1, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1,2, C. T. R. M. Schrander-Stumpel1,2, available tumor tissues . Germline HRPT2 inactivating mutations were H. J. Smeets1,2; identified in the HPT-JT kindred and in both FIHP kindreds. A HRPT2 1department of clinical genetics, university hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The somatic mutation was also demonstrated in a parathyroid adenoma Netherlands, 2The Netherlands Research Institute GROW, Maastricht Univer- from a FIHP patient, in agreement with HRPT2 tumor-suppressor role . sity, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Moreover, loss of nuclear parafibromin expression was demonstrated Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is characterized by clinical and in all parathyroid tumors, at variance with findings in biopsies from nor- molecular heterogeneity . In autosomal dominant (AD) spastic paraple- mal parathyroid glands . In addition, immunohistochemistry performed gia (SPG), SPASTIN (SPG4) and ATLASTIN (SPG3A) gene defects on a HPT-JT-related uterine polyp did not show any nuclear anti-parafi- account for approximately 40% and 10%, respectively . bromin reactivity, as compared with five sporadic polyps in which al- We performed parametric linkage analysis, using the Affymetrix 10K most all stromal cells exhibited nuclear parafibromin immunostaining. SNP array, to identify the SPG locus in a ten-generation Dutch pedi- Overall, our results indicate that FIHP and HPT-JT associated with gree . A maximum LOD score of 5 .03 was obtained at the SPG31 lo- HRPT2 mutations do not to have a distinct genetic signature, but may cus (2p11-p12) . Mutation analysis of the receptor expression-enhanc- represent variants of the same genetic disease. Loss of parafibromin ing protein 1 gene (REEP1) was performed in 10 additional AD SPG expression in polyps supports the pathogenetic role for parafibromin in families from the South-East part of the Netherlands . A truncating four uterine polyposis associated with this syndrome . basepair deletion in exon six (c .537_540delCGGC p .Ser179ArgfsX43) was identified which co-segregated with the disorder in the large linked P06.134 family and in two other small unrelated families, suggesting a found- investigation the role of -344c>t polymorphism in cYP11B2 er effect in our region. A founder effect was confirmed by haplotype gene among Bulgarian hypertensive patients analysis using polymorphic markers surrounding REEP1. The clinical R. Saraeva1, J. Matrozova2, R. Bogeska1, I. Kremensky1, S. Zacharieva2, R. features within these families ranged from normal to severe spasticity Kaneva1; of legs and the age of onset varied from birth till >75 years of age . 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Uni- There was an inverse correlation between age at onset and severity versity Hospital of Endocrinology “Akad. Ivan Pentchev”, Sofia, Bulgaria. and progression of symptoms . Further functional studies are needed Background: The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is often inves- to identify a major modifier in REEP1 affected families. tigated in relation to the pathogenesis of essential hypertension . The In conclusion, we identified a founder REEP1 mutation in 27% (3/11) mineralocorticoid hormone aldosterone plays an important role in blood of the AD pure SPG families investigated in the South-East part of the pressure homeostasis . A key factor for its synthesis is the enzyme al- Netherlands . Thus REEP1 gene defects in HSP seem at least as com- dosterone synthase, encoded by CYP11B2 gene . The -344C>T poly- mon as ATLASTIN (SPG3A) . morphism in the 5’ regulatory region of the CYP11B2, which disrupts a putative binding site for the steroidogenic factor 1, was reported to be P06.132 associated with aldosterone excess and hypertension . Quantitative trait locus mapping in complex human pedigrees Objective: Our aim was to investigate the role of functional -344C>T with interpopulation origin polymorphism in the promoter region of CYP11B2 gene in the manifes- G. R. Svischeva; tation of hypertension, using case-control study design . Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Methods: We included 185 Bulgarian hypertensive patients and nor- We perfected the variance-components method for quantitative trait montensive control group . The -344C>T polymorphism was genotyped locus (QTL) analysis of complex human pedigrees descended from by RCR-RFLP method using HaeIII restrictase . interpopulation crosses between outbred parental lines with different Results: The genotype and allele frequencies for -344C>T variant inMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  our normotensive control group were similar to these detected in other fold increased risk for bronchiectasis development (62 .2% vs. 50%, Caucasian populations . The genotype distribution of this polymor- p=0 .013) . The OR was even greater (8 .7) for homozygous -1607GG phism did not show statistically significant differences between the two genotype (29 .7% vs. 18 .6%, p=0 .006) compared with homozygotes explored groups (p=0 .822) . The comparison of the groups, divided by for 1G allele . gender, also did not demonstrate significant differences in the geno- The MMP9 C-1562T allelic and genotype frequencies did not show type and allele distribution (p>0 .05) . significant differences between the groups. Conclusion: Our study does not support the involvement of the - According to our results MMP1 -1607GG variant might be involved in 344C>T polymorphism of CYP11B2 gene in the susceptibility to hy- pathogenesis of idiopathic bronchiectasis . This polymorphism is as- pertension in Bulgarian patients . Due the small sample size, however, sociated with higher gene expression and may influence lung paren- further studies in larger groups are warranted . chyma damage and subsequent bronchial wall destruction and devel- opment of airway dilatation . P06.135 increased frequency of the iVs4+39c>t allele of PGHD-15 gene P06.137 in group of patients with severe course of iBD Novel differentiating genetic markers for cD and Uc A. Nelke-Lozynska1, M. Podralska2, T. Banasiewicz1, R. Slomski2, W. Meisner1, Y. A. Nasykhova1, N. V. Semenov2, A. G. Kharitonov2, T. E. Ivashchenko1; E. Czkwanianc3, I. kubinska3, P. Krokowicz1, A. Plawski2; 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 1Karol Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Instyti- 2Medical Academy of Postgraduate Study, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. tute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics and Gas- CD and UC belong to the inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) with het- troenterology, Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland. erogeneous clinical manifestations, genetic factors and response to Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are autoimmunological disorders treatment . That provides increased interest for detection of differentiat- (MIM #266600) with genetic background, characterized by chronic ing factors valuable for precise early diagnostics of these diseases . inflammation of the wall of gastrointestinal tract. IBD include two clini- Five polymorphic variants of two genes (Gly908Arg, Arg702Trp, Leu- cal entities: Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis (MIM#191390) . The 1007fins of NOD2/CARD15 gene and -308G/A, -238G/A of TNFA incidence of these diseases in Western population ranges from 100 gene) were studied in CD patients (n=102), in UC patients (n=71) and to 300 per 100 000 . The symptoms of Crohn’s disease may arise in also in control group (n=100) . The frequency of -308A allele of the any part of gastrointestinal tract, however most often the distal portion TNFA gene was increased in both groups of patients with CD and UC of the ileum and caecum is affect. Inflammatory process penetrates as compared to controls (15%, 11% and 4%, respectively) . We have through the whole thickness of the bowel wall and skip lesions are found an extremely significant difference for Leu1007fins, mutation of typical. Continuous inflammatory lesions confined only to colonic and NOD2/CARD15 gene which results in truncated protein . This mutation rectal mucosa are characteristic for ulcerative colitis . Fistulas are ab- was revealed in 15% of patients with CD and only in 2% of patients sent and the inflammation never adopts the granulomatous form. with UC (p=0 .0055) . In control group the frequency of this mutation In our research we examined the frequency of alleles in the NOD2 was 3% . The frequencies of carriers of two others genetic variants gene and 15-@hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase gene (PGDH- (Gly908Arg, Arg702Trp) were lower in UC patients (4% and 1%) as 15) in 58 patients with severe postoperative relapses of inflammatory compared to these ones in CD patients (8% and 6%) but it was not bowel diseases, 27 children with inflammatory bowel diseases and in significant. control group (100 persons) . The average age of onset was 31 years Thus that mutation Leu1007fins of gene NOD2/CARD15 plays a cruti- in the group of patients with severe disease course and 11 in the group cal role in pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease and might be treated as of children . We observed the elevated frequency of the alleles 3019- a differentiation marker between patients with CD and UC . Conse- 3020insC and 802C>T of the NOD2 gene in comparison to the control quently that may improve diagnostics of these diseases and provide group . The allele IVS4+39C>T of the PGDH-15 gene in the group of appropriate treatment . ill with the heavy course occurred two times more frequent than in the control group and three times more frequent in comparison with the P06.138 group of affected children . Associations of CARD, DLG, OCTN, TLR, IL, IL0 and Project was financed by MNiSzW 2P05A06929 TNFα genes variants with Inflammatory Bowel Disease O. A. Schagina1, P. V. Shumilov2, A. A. Polyakov1; P06.136 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscov, Russian Federation, 2Russian mmP1 G-1607GG and mmP9 c-1562t gene variants in idiopathic Government Medical University, Moscov, Russian Federation. bronchiectasis Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a multifactorial polygenic disease M. Stankovic1, A. Nikolic1, A. Divac1, L. Rakicevic1, A. Tomovic2, N. Petrovic- with probable genetic heterogeneity . It is characterized by chronic in- Stanojevic3, M. Andjelic3, V. Dopudja-Pantic3, M. Mitic-Milikic4, L. Nagorni-Obra- flammation of the gastrointestinal tract. dovic4, D. Radojkovic1; 64 unrelated patients from 6 to 14 years old with IBD and 52 controls 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, children were investigated . The aim of our research was searching 2Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland, association between IBD and nine polymorphous variants of seven 3Zvezdara University Medical Center, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute for Tuberculo- genes . The analysis for CARD15 R702W, G908R, Leu1007fs, DLG5 sis and Lung Disease, University Clinical Centar of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. R30Q, OCTN1 L530F, TLR4 D2999G, IL10 c .-1082 g>a, TNFα c .-308 Bronchiectasis is a chronic infective and inflammatory disease char- g>a variants, and IL1 VNTR polymorphism was performed by means acterized by dilatation of bronchi and sputum production . Although the of MLPA and AFLP analysis . pathogenesis of bronchiectasis is not fully undersood, destruction of Results of genotyping are presenting in the table . the bronchial wall that contributes to the development of airway dilata- Thus it is not revealed associations between carriage of the variant tion may result from excessive extracellular matrix degradation . Matrix alleles these genes and Inflamatory Bowel Disease at Russian chil- metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of proteolytic enzymes, which dren . play an essential role in tissue remodeling and repair . Genetic vari- Allele frequencies of the minor alleles (%) ants of genes involved in extracellular matrix remodeling may drive the gene CARD15CARD15CARD15 DLG5OCTN1TLR4IL1 IL10 TNFa pathological processes that could lead to the development of bronchi- allele 702W 908R c .3020 insC30Q 503F 299G574 c .-1082ac .-308a ectasis . The aim of this study was to analyse MMP1 G-1607GG and IBD group 2,3 3,9 5,5 5,5 46,7 15,3 4,7 0,8 7,0 MMP9 C-1562T promotor polymorphisms in development of idiopathic Control group 2,9 2,9 4,0 5,9 39,6 11,7 0 0 9,7 Fisher exact test (P) 1,00 1,00 0,76 1,00 0,43 0,65 0,161,00 0,57 bronchiectasis . The genotypes of 37 patients with idiopathic bronchiectasis and 102 controls were determined by conformation sensitive gel electropho- resis for MMP1 G-1607GG gene variant and PCR-RFLP for MMP9 C-1562T polymorphism . The distribution of -1607GG allele was significantly higher in patient group (p=0 .014) . Heterozygote carriers of -1607GG allele had a 5 .3-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 P06.139 pneumocyte-derived cell lines as well as the regulation of IRAK-M ex- cARD15, tNF-alpha, iL23R and AtG16L1 genes polymorphisms pression are in progress . in Lithuanian patients with inflammatory bowel disease J. Sventoraityte1, A. Zvirbliene1, R. Kwiatkowski2, G. Kiudelis1, L. Kupcinskas1, P06.141 S. Schreiber2; Genetic polymorphisms of the insulin receptor substrate-1 (iRs- 1Department of Gastroenterology, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, 1) gene and profiles of clopidogrel-induced antiplatelet effects in Lithuania, 2Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian – Albrechts – Univer- type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with coronary artery disease sity, Kiel, Germany. M. Zanoni1, P. Prandini1, D. J. Angiolillo2, E. Bernardo3, A. Fernandez-Ortiz3, C. Background . Numerous genome-wide and linkage studies have identi- Macaya3, T. A. Bass2, E. Trabetti1, P. F. Pignatti1; fied and replicated significant association between inflammatory bowel 1Department of Mother and Child and of Biology-Genetics, Section of Biology- disease (IBD) development and polymorphisms of genes attributed to Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Division of Cardiology, University recognition of bacterial products (CARD15), innate immune responses of Florida College of Medicine-Shands Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, United (TNF-alpha, IL23R), and autophagosome pathway (ATG16L1) . De- States, 3Cardiovascular Institute, San Carlos University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. spite large number of studies accumulated in this field, there is only Background: Patients with T2DM have reduced responsiveness to the limited data on IBD genetic characteristics in East and Central Europe platelet P2Y receptor antagonist clopidogrel compared to non-diabet- 12 region . ics . However, variability in clopidogrel-induced antiplatelet effects has Aim and Methods . This research aimed to analyze the frequency of been observed among T2DM and those with elevated platelet reactiv- the three CARD15 polymorphisms Arg702Trp (rs2066844), Gly908Arg ity have a higher risk of atherothrombotic events . Since variation in (rs2066845) and Leu1007finsC (rs2066847); two TNF-alpha promot- insulin sensitivity modulates platelet P2Y signaling, the aim of this 12 er polymorphisms -857C>T (rs1799724) and -308G>A (rs1800629); study was to evaluate if SNPs of the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS- IL23R polymorphism Arg381Gln (rs11209026); and ATG16L1 poly- 1) are associated with variation in the response to clopidogrel in T2DM morphism Thr300Ala (rs2241880) and their contribution to the devel- patients . opment of IBD in a cohort of unrelated Crohn’s disease (CD) (n=57), Methods: A total of 7 tagSNPs (rs1801278, rs11683087, rs1801123, ulcerative colitis (UC) (n=123) patients and healthy controls (n=182) rs1896832, rs956115, rs2251692, rs6725330) were determined in 180 from the Lithuanian population . T2DM patients with coronary artery disease in a steady state phase of Results . Carriage of CARD15 variants was more common in the CD clopidogrel therapy. Patients were classified into carriers and non-car- patients than in controls and UC patients (40 .4% CD versus 17 .6% riers of the variant allele for each SNP according to a dominant model . controls and 16 .3% UC, p<0 .0001) . The single marker analysis of In addition, haplotype distribution of IRS-1 genes within our population the CARD15 mutations revealed a strong association between Leu- was assessed . Platelet function was determined by LTA following 20 1007finsC rare variant and CD (p=3.687x10-8; OR=5.54, 95% CI: μM adenosine diphosphate stimuli (ADP). Platelet aggregation accord- 2 .85-10 .75) . No genetic association was detected between other two ing to genotype and haplotype was determined . CARD15 variants (Arg702Trp and Gly908Arg), TNF-alpha promoter, Results: The 7 tagSNPs were accountable for 93% of the haplotype IL23R and ATG16L1 polymorphisms and IBD in Lithuanian popula- distribution of the IRS-1 gene . Platelet aggregation was 55±15% in the tion . overall population . Preliminary results showed an association between Conclusion . Our study has revealed a strong association only between carriers of the variant C allele of the rs956115 SNP (n=34) and the CARD15 gene variant Leu1007finsC and CD susceptibility in the Lithu- highest degree of platelet reactivity (60±14%; p<0 .05) . anian population . Conclusions: rs956115 polymorphism of IRS-1 gene is associated with lower clopidogrel-induced antiplatelet effects in T2DM patients with P06.140 coronary artery disease . Understanding the role of IRAK-M in allergic asthma: replication in European children and functional analyses P06.142 S. Naitza1, F. Anedda1, N. Olla1, G. Sole1, L. Balaci1, M. Zuncheddu1, C. Caria1, Polymorphism of insulin receptor substrate-2 gene in turkish S. Sanna1, M. Spada1, E. Melen2, M. Wickman2, G. Pershagen2, A. Scheynius3, with type 2 diabetes mellitus C. Söderhäll4, M. D’Amato4, J. Kere4, A. Cao1, M. Uda1; M. Hepdogru1, A. Arslan2, M. Gonen3, K. Gungor3, O. Dikbas3; 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia (INN)-Consiglio Nazionale delle 1Department of Medical Biology, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Department Ricerche (CNR), Monserrato (CA), Italy, 2Institute of Environmental Medicine, of Medical Biology, Gaziantep University, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3Department of Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Clinical Allergy Research Unit, De- Endocrinology, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey. partment of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Depart- Insulin receptor substrate- -2 (IRS-2) is an endogenous substrate for ment of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase, which play a key role in insulin Asthma is a multifactorial disease influenced by genetic and environ- signaling . IRS-2 gene is potential candidate for development of type 2 mental factors. Interest in finding etiologic factors has recently intensi- diabetes mellitus. In this study, we have identified IRS-2 gene polymor- fied, because of its increasing prevalence and associated mortality. phisms, evaluated their frequencies in Turkish subjects, and analyzed Analysing a cohort of allergic asthmatics in the Sardinian founder the contribution of these polymorphisms to the development of type 2 population, where limited genetic and environmental heterogeneity fa- diabetes mellitus . cilitates the study of multifactorial traits, we recently identified IRAK-M Study subjects were recruited from patients of Endocrinology Depart- as a new asthma susceptibility gene and replicated the association in ment, Selçuk University . We chose 122 unrelated, non-obese patients a genetically distant Italian population . IRAK-M, a negative regulator of with type 2 diabetes mellitus and 35 unrelated, non-diabetic subjects the TLR/IL-1R pathways and a master regulator of NF-κB and inflam- with no family history of diabetes as age and body mass index matched mation, is associated with early-onset persistent asthma and highly control subjects . The coding and non-coding sequence of IRS-2 gene expressed in lung epithelia . Thus, our data suggest a link between hy- (divided into 15 overlapping fragments) was amplified by polymerase peractivation of the innate immune system and chronic airway inflam- chain reaction and screened for the presence of single stranded con- mation, indicating IRAK-M as a new target for therapeutic intervention formational polymorphisms (SSCP) . against asthma . Five missense (Thr849→Ser, Arg1304→Gly, Lys1253→Asn, Cys1318→Arg, To better understand the role of IRAK-M in the pathogenesis of asthma, Gly1057→Asp) and six silent mutations (CCT→CCC encoding Pro483, we are carrying out a replication study in two European cohorts (the GCT→GCC encoding Ala488, GGT→GGC encoding Gly497, CCC→ PARSIFAL and the BAMSE study groups), including children affected CCT encoding Pro829, ACC→ACG encoding Thr845, TGT→TGC encod- by asthma and/or its sub-phenotypes . In these samples we are evalu- ing Cys807 ) were detected in IRS-2 gene . The Thr849→Ser (6/122) and ating the association of 6 SNPs defining the IRAK-M risk haplotype as Gly1057→Asp (8/122) mutations were more common in diabetic patients well-as gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in the predispo- for these variants . Four novel amino acid variants were described and sition to asthma . In parallel, we are analysing relevant IRAK-M variants identified in the coding region of the IRS-2 gene. There was no signifi- identified by mutation screening in 314 Sardinians affected by allergic cant association found with these variants and diabetes . asthma and 200 controls . Esperiments to evaluate the functional effect As a conclusion, IRS-2 Arg1304→Gly, Lys1253→Asn and Cys1318→Arg of the mutations on NF-κb activity and inflammation in monocyte- and mutations rare and IRS-2 Thr849→Ser and Gly1057→Asp mutations wereMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  common in our population . But may not be major determinants in ge- are also mainly related to AHI1 (~20% of cases) although CEP290 netic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . can be rarely responsible . The genes most frequently causative of cer- ebello-renal phenotypes are NPHP1 and RPGRIP1L (~10% of cases P06.143 each) . Up to 50% of cerebello-oculo-renal cases are due to mutations Association study of homocysteine metabolic regulatory genes in CEP290, while a minority relates to NPHP1 deletions . Overall, muta- with ischemic stroke risk in singapore chinese population tions in known genes are responsible of only 25-30% of JSRDs, sup- H. Low1, K. Kasiman2, C. Chen3, J. Liu4; porting further genetic heterogeneity . 1Department of Community, Occupational &Family Medicine, National Univer- sity of Singapore, Singapore, 2Centre for Molecular Epidemiology, National P06.145 University of Singapore, Singapore, 3Department of Neurology, Singapore Gen- Kir 4.1-KCNJ10 potassium channel gene polymorphisms in Type eral Hospital, Singapore, 4Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency for 2 diabetes Science, Technology and Researc, Singapore. S. Oguzkan Balcı1, E. Akarsu2, S. Aktaran2, B. Gogebakan1, M. Araz2; Moderately elevated plasma homocysteine level has been identified 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, as an independent risk factor for vascular disease, including ischemic Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department stroke . There are also substantial evidences for homocysteinaemia to of Endocrinology and metabolism, Gaziantep, Turkey. be, at least partially, influenced by genetic factors. The focus of this Potassium channels play an important role in insuline secretion . study is to investigate the association between the 25 candidate genes KCNJ10 channel protein is a member of Kir 4 .1 potassium channel of the homocysteine metabolic pathway and ischemic stroke risk in family . KCNJ10 gene is expressed in pancreatic beta cells . We there- Chinese population . We genotyped 306 polymorphic SNPs from the fore investigated whether polymorphisms in KCNJ10 gene are associ- 25 candidate genes in 376 stroke patients and 354 matched healthy ated with type 2 diabetes in Turkish population . controls from Singapore . Using genotype-based trend test, we iden- In this study 166 individuals with type 2 diabetes and 100 age-and sex- tified 3 novel polymorphic loci from 3 genes (MTRR, SHMT1 and matched healthy controls were tested for three single nucleotide poly- TCN2) which act as potential genetic risk factors for ischemic stroke . morphisms (SNPs) in KCNJ10 gene . These SNPs were G to A trans- The effects of these loci are independent from each other as well as version in intron 1 (SNP1) and G to A transversion in exon 2 (SNP2) other known risk factors including age, gender, smoking, diabetes, hy- and T to C transition in promoter (SNP3) . All SNPs were genotyped by pertension and hyperlipidemia . We also found that the association of PCR-RFLP . TCN2 variants with stroke appears to be more predominant in patients KCNJ10 gene SNP1 in intron 1 and SNP2 in exon 2 which were non- with lacunar infaction (LACI) than in other stroke subtype (non-LACI) . informative for Turkish population . The distribution of TT, TC, and CC In summary, the variants of these genes potentially affect individual genotypes for SNP3 in promoter was 56 %, 37% and 5 % in type 2 susceptibility to ischemic stroke through the homocysteine metabolic diabetes compared with 45 %, 51 % and 4 % in the controls (χ2=4 .352, pathway . Here, through genetic association study, our result supports p=0 .113) . The allele frequency of T and C was 0 .705, 0 .295 in type the importance of B12 and folate cellular availability to prevent isch- 2 diabetes compared with 0.756, 0.244 in the controls (χ2=1 .676, emic stroke in Chinese population . The growing evidence of impor- p=0 .195) . According to the “Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium” TT geno- tance of folate and B12 has significant implications for the inclusion of type was found higher in type 2 diabetes than TC genotype (χ2=4 .07, folic acid and B12 as supplement to prevent stroke . To our knowledge, p=0 .04) . this is the first comprehensive analysis of the homocysteine metabolic We conclude that KCNJ10 gene SNPs were not associated with type pathway in stroke . 2 diabetes in Turkish population . However, further studies with larger samples are needed to address the exact role of KCNJ10 gene in type P06.144 2 diabetes and its complications such as diabetic retinopathy . Prevalence and phenotypic spectrum of known genes causative of Joubert syndrome and Related Disorders: the experience of P06.146 the international JsRD study Group Association of the CALM core promoter polymorphism with E. M. Valente1,2, F. Brancati1,3, L. Travaglini1,4, M. Iannicelli1,4, E. Bertini5, F. knee osteoarthritis in patients of Greek origin Emma6, E. Boltshauser7, A. Mazzotta1, G. R. Stringini6, B. Dallapiccola1,4, J. G. M. Kaliakatsos1, M. Poulou1, A. Tsezou2, E. Kanavakis1, K. Malizos2, M. Tzetis1; Gleeson8; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Uni- 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Dept. of Medical and Surgical Paediatric versity of Thessaly, Medical School, Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Medical Sciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3CeSI, Aging Research Centre, Genetics, University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece. and Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, G. d’Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti, Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterized by focal areas of loss of articular Italy, 4Dept. of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, Sapienza University, cartilage in synovial joints, associated with varying degrees of osteo- Rome, Italy, 5Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Hospital, phyte formation, subchondral bone change and synovitis . Calmodulin- Rome, Italy, 6Dept. of Nephrology, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 1 gene (CALM1) encodes a ubiquitous eukaryotic Ca2+ binding protein 7Dept. of Neurology, Children‘s University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 8Dept. and is the principal mediator of the calcium signal thus affecting the of Neurosciences, University of California, La Jolla, CA, United States. chondrocyte’s response to mechanical load . A functional core pro- Joubert syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized moter SNP -16C/T (rs12885713) was recently associated with HOA by hypotonia, ataxia, psychomotor delay, oculomotor apraxia, neona- in the Japanese but not the British patients . In multifactorial genetic tal breathing abnormalities, and a complex midbrain-hindbrain malfor- traits, each gene contributes to disease susceptibility to some extent, mation known as the “molar tooth sign” (MTS) . The variable multiorgan but such genes may also interact with each other . The aspartic-acid involvement (mainly the retina and kidneys) defines several pleiotropic D14 repeat allele of the asporin gene (ASPN) is a susceptibility al- conditions (Joubert Syndrome Related Disorders, JSRDs) sharing the lele for both HOA and KOH in the Japanese and Caucasians . Our MTS. The nosological definition of JSRDs has long remained prob- case-control study (158 KOA and 193 controls) focuses on genotyp- lematical, and a recently proposed classification is now based on the ing Greek KOA patients for rs12885713, and investigating its role as extent of retinal and renal involvement. Two loci (JBTS1-2) and five a risk factor for the development of KOA . Our previous work on the genes (NPHP1, AHI1, CEP290, MKS3, RPGRIP1L) have been identi- same case-control group indicated that both the D14 and D15 alleles fied so far. All genes encode for ciliary proteins, and JSRDs present increased risk for KOA therefore we additionally investigate whether a clinical and genetic overlap with other ciliopathies, such as nephro- combined effect of the ASPN D14/D15 alleles and CALM1 TT exists nophthisis and Meckel syndrome . in Greek KOA patients. No significant differences were found in geno- Over the past 3 years, on behalf of the International JSRD Study type frequencies for the -16T/C SNP of CALM1 gene between cases Group, we have performed mutation screening of known genes in and controls (p=0 .581) . Our data implied that the -16TT (rs12885713) large cohorts of about 100-150 patients representative of all JSRD CALM1 core promoter genotype is not a risk factor for KOA etiology phenotypes . These allowed estimating the prevalence of gene mu- in Greek Caucasians on its own but associated with the ASPN D14 or tations in different subgroups and drawing preliminary gene-pheno- D15 risk allele it could influence KOA susceptibility. type correlates . Pure JS is mostly caused by AHI1 mutations (~10% of cases), and occasionally by MKS3 . Cerebello-retinal phenotypesMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.147 P06.149 A haplotype of the lipopolysaccharide-binding protein gene is A study of LRRK2 mutations in Parkinson‘s disease patients associated with susceptibility to severe sepsis from the Volga-Ural region of Russia C. Flores1,2, E. Espinosa3, L. Pérez-Méndez1,2, N. Maca-Meyer1, R. Sangüesa3, I. Gilyazova1, E. Simons2, E. Khusnutdinova1, I. Khidiyatova1, G. Breedveld2, B. A. Muriel4, J. Blanco2,4, M. Muros2,5, J. G. N. Garcia6, J. Villar2,7; Oostra2, R. Magzhanov1, V. Bonifati2; 1Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 2CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, (CIBERes), Federation, 2Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands Antilles. Spain, 3Department of Anesthesia, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene have been Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 4Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitario shown to cause both autosomal dominant and sporadic Parkinson’s Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain, 5Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital disease (PD) . The common G2019S mutation shows wide geographi- Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 6Pulmonary cal distribution while G2385R and I2020T variants are suggested to and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, be risk factors for sporadic PD in Asian populations . The frequency IL, United States, 7Multidisciplinary Organ Dysfunction Evaluation Research of these mutations in the Volga-Ural region of Russia remained to be Network, Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran established . To determine the prevalence of G2019S, G2385R, I2020T Canaria, Spain. mutations in the Volga-Ural region, we recruited 341PD patients (129 The lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP) is an acute phase pro- Russians, 156 Tatars and 56 Bashkirs) and 360 controls (103 Rus- tein that plays a dominant role in the genesis of sepsis by initiating sians, 131 Tatars, 126 Bashkirs) and conducted genetic analysis of signal transduction pathways leading to the activation of the inflam- these mutations . All patients exhibited at least two of the four principal matory host response . A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the signs of PD: resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, or postural-reflex im- LBP gene has been previously associated with an increased risk for pairment . Exclusion criteria included prior history of multiple cerebro- sepsis but gene-wide association studies are lacking . Here we evalu- vascular events or other causes of parkinsonian symptoms . Controls ated the association of common variants across the entire LBP gene were matched for age, ethnic origin and area of residence . Hetero- with susceptibility to severe sepsis by genotyping 10 selected SNPs, zygous G2019S was detected in one late-onset Bashkir patient with including a subset of tagging SNPs that efficiently captured common akinetic-rigid-trembling form (1 .79%) . Interestingly, that this patient variation across the gene, in 176 severe cases of sepsis and 364 doesn’t carry a SNP in intron 13 (IVS13+104 G/A) which is in strong population-based controls . Although individual SNPs resulted non-sig- LD with the mutation and tags the commonest haplotype shared by all nificantly associated after adjusting for multiple testing, a haplotype patients with this mutation in the Mediterranean populations . extending ~1.2 kb in the 5’-flanking region of LBP gene, crucial for The “Asian” risk factor, G2385R, was rare, but found in 2 Tatar PD pa- in vitro gene inducibility by cytokines, showed a significant associa- tients (1 .28%) . We observed no I2020T mutations in this study sample . tion with susceptibility to severe sepsis (p=0 .001, permuted p=0 .025) . All mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing. These data have Homozygous carrier patients of the haplotype had an elevated risk for implications both for understanding the molecular mechanisms of PD, severe sepsis (odds ratio: 2.21; 95% confidence interval: 1.39-3.51; and for directing the genetic screening in clinical practice . p=0 .0006) and this result was unaffected by covariate and population stratification adjustments. These patients also showed a consistent P06.150 elevation of mean serum LBP concentrations across days examined . Genetic Diagnosis and investigations of Disease LHON and Taken together, these results support that common variation in LBP cPEO gene contributes to susceptibility to severe sepsis .Supported by grants M. Houshmand; from FUNCIS (37/02) and Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, Spain NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (SAF 2004-06833) Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited form of retinal ganglion cell degeneration leading to optic atrophy in P06.148 young adults . To investigate any possible association between LHON Effects of LcAt polymorphisms on HDL-c levels in turkish primary mutations and population. mtDNA haplogroups, the nucleotide sequence of the HVS-I region of D. Agirbasli1, M. A. Agirbasli2, M. Sumerkan2, C. Aral1, S. Aksoy3, S. Karabu- mtDNA was determined in 30 unrelated Iranian patients with LHON lut1, B. Cirakoglu1; harboring one of the primary mutations and 100 normal controls with 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Marmara University Medical the same ethnicity . Our analysis revealed a relatively high proportion of School, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Cardiology, Marmara University Medi- haplogroup J in LHON patients (53 .3%) compared to normal controls cal School, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Siyami Ersek Cardiovascular Hospital, Istanbul, (20%). In addition, a slightly significant increase of normal controls of Turkey. haplogroup L has been confirmed (14% in normal controls vs. 0% in High density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) protects from vascular LHON patients at p 5 0 .03), whereas other haplogroups did not show diseases. Genetic and environmental factors influence HDL-C levels. contribution to LHON contingency. We identified twelve nucleotide Low HDL-C is common among Turks . Nearly 50 % of the population substitutions . Eleven of twelve nucleotide substitutions had already has HDL-C levels below 35 mg/dl . Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase been reported as polymorphism . One of the nucleotide substitutions (LCAT) takes part in reverse cholesterol transport and HDL-C matura- (A14290G) has not been reported . The A14290G nucleotide substitu- tion. The objective of our study is to evaluate the effects of 3 polymor- tion does not change its amino acid . Different sizes of mtDNA deletions phisms in LCAT gene on HDL-C levels . Study consists of 50 subjects were detected in 16 patients (69 .6%) . Each of the 5 .5, 7, 7 .5 and 9 kb with low HDL-C levels (<35 mg/dl) and 50 control subjects with high deletions existed only in 1 patient . Common deletion (4977bp) and 8 HDL-C levels (>65 mg/dl) . We studied 511C/T polymorphism (exon 4), kb deletion were detected in 5 and 3 patients respectively . Multiple 4886C/T (exon 6), 608C/T (exon 5) . Although single locus effects of deletions were also present in 4 patients . Out of 23 patients included the 3 polymorphisms of LCAT gene were not significantly related to the in our study, two cases (8 .7%) had Twinkle gene mutation (G1423C) HDL levels, when combined effects are studied, the subjects with total and 5 patients (21 .7%) did not show any deletions in mtDNA or the of less than 2 high risk alleles had significantly higher HDL-C levels Twinkle gene mutation . compared to subjects with 2 or more high risk alleles (56±27 vs 44± 23, p=0.04). Multiple linear regression was performed to find the pre- P06.151 dictors of HDL-C . The variables were body mass index (BMI), glucose, A visual aura locus for migraine on chromosome 9q31 age, smoking (number of pack years), number of high risk alleles . Age P. Tikka-Kleemola1, S. Vepsäläinen1,2, V. Artto1,2, M. Kaunisto1,3, V. Anttila1,4, E. and smoking were the strongest predictors of HDL-C . However, af- Hämäläinen1,4, M. Färkkilä1,2, M. Kallela1,2, M. Wessman1,3, A. Palotie1,4; ter controlling for age and smoking, there was a negative correlation 1University of Helsinki, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of between the number of high risk alleles and HDL-C levels with border- Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Folkhälsan line statistical significance (p=0.07). Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 4The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, These 3 genetic polymorphisms are susceptibility loci and are neither Hinxton, United Kingdom. necessary nor sufficient for prediction of HDL-C, but co-existence of Migraine is the most common cause of chronic episodic severe head- high risk alleles may contribute to low HDL-C levels . ache affecting approximately 15 % of the adult population . It has aMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  well-recognized genetic component based on family and twin studies . which may be involved in total cholesterol (TC), low-, and high-density However, no genetic variants have been convincingly established for lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c and HDL-c) levels . Quantitative multi- common forms of migraine . In about 30% of all migraine attacks vi- point linkage analyses of the four populations were performed individu- sual, sensory or dysphasic symptoms precede the headache phase ally, utilizing an integrated map, with SOLAR . LOD scores were com- manifesting migraine with aura (MA) . Here, we present the results of a bined post-hoc, and adjusted thresholds were calculated to account genome-wide linkage scan on 37 Finnish migraine families having vi- for multiple testing . Diabetics and subjects receiving lipid-lowering sual aura symptoms . The families were extracted from a large Finnish therapy were excluded from analysis . Two models were implemented: migraine patient collection ascertained from neurology clinics nation- age- and sex-adjusted; and age-, sex-, BMI-, alcohol consumption- wide during the last 15 years . For this study the families presenting , and smoking-adjusted . Numerous regions surpassed a suggestive with migraine with typical aura (according to the International Head- linkage threshold corresponding to LOD=1 .9 in either the combined ache Society (IHS) criteria) were selected. Data on IHS defined attack sample or in an individual population . For TC, regions centered on symptoms as well as other clinical features were collected using the 1q21 .3 (LOD =3 .21) and 9q31 .1 (LOD =2 .54) were determined; max max validated Finnish Migraine Specific Questionnaire for Family Studies the chromosome 9 region was also suggestive for LDL (LOD =3 .22) . max and by a neurologist’s examination of index patients . We genotyped HDL peaks exceeded the threshold at 2p21 (LOD =3 .77), 10q21 .1 max 372 individuals using microsatellite markers with an intermarker dis- (LOD =2 .50), 16q12 .2 (LOD =3 .54), and 21q21 .1 (LOD =3 .66) . max max max tance of 10 cM. We detected a locus on 9q31 with significant evidence The HDL peak on chromosome 2 was also detected for TC/HDL-c ra- of linkage (HLOD 4 .5 at 104 cM) using two-point parametric linkage tio (LOD =2 .48), as was a peak located at 1p31 .2 (LOD =3 .74) . max max analysis . Multipoint parametric and non-parametric analyses support The latter was also identified for LDL-c/HDL-c ratio (LOD =3 .70), in max this finding. An additional set of microsatellite markers is currently gen- addition to a peak at 22q11 .2 (LOD =3 .03) . These peaks, many of max otyped to maximize linkage information across the region . In conclu- which are novel, contain numerous promising candidate genes . The sion, our finding indicates a locus for visual aura on 9q31 region previ- EUROSPAN Consortium is currently analysing dense sets of single ously linked to epilepsy in a Belgian family also suffering from MA . nucleotide polymorphisms underlying these peaks . P06.152 P06.154 Haplotype analysis for 12 loci in 11 small Portuguese families Linkage based on a single family--family size requirement with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss W. Yang, Y. Lau; H. Teixeira1,2, T. Matos1, F. Moreno2, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,3, I. del Castillo2; University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,, Hong Kong. 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Por- Determination of required family size for linkage studies is not a simple tugal, 2Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, task . With genotyping of high-density single nucleotide polymorphism 3Higher College of Health, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Setúbal,, Portugal. (SNP) markers replacing that of microsatellite markers in linkage stud- Mutations in DFNB1 were shown to account for ~19% of the cases of ies, it is possible to accurately determine the genomic regions shared congenital deafness in the Portuguese population . The cause of deaf- by family members, including remote relatives . This may allow linkage ness in the remaining cases, including the GJB2/GJB6 monoallelic studies to be conducted in a more deterministic fashion . Based on ones, has to be elucidated . We have thus performed linkage analysis this advancement, we developed a simple method to allow the us- in order to investigate the spectrum of genes/mutations responsible for ers to evaluate the inheritance information that can be extracted from hearing impairment in the Portuguese population . their diseased family collection in linkage studies . This includes the This study was conducted in eleven small families with apparent non- total number of linked regions expected to be identified for the family syndromic congenital deafness . Haplotype analysis was performed for under study, the expected sizes for the linked regions, and the por- DFNB1, DFNB4, DFNB7/11, DFNB8/10, DFNB9, DFNB12, DFNB18, tion of the genome that can be excluded from consideration . We pre- DFNB28, DFNB35, DFNB49, DFNB59 and DFNB67, using at least sented a detailed discussion on family size requirement for linkage three microsatellite markers for each locus . Sequencing analysis of studies by analyzing some typical family structures, and demonstrated the related genes was carried out in the case of compatibility with link- the feasibility of linkage studies on smaller families which are thought age . not sufficient by classical linkage analysis methods. Simulation results In a consanguineous family we found compatibility with linkage to by our program showed that the linked regions containing true muta- DFNB4 with autozygosity for this region . Sequencing of the SLC26A4 tions are usually larger than regions linked due to random chance . We gene revealed a novel mutation, c.1615 -2 A>G (IVS14 −2 A>G), in have made use of this feature in our program to allow evaluation of the homozygosity in the severely deaf siblings . In a non-consanguineous linked regions through a Bayesian probability calculation . family, we found compatibility with linkage to DFNB8/10 in heterozy- gosity . Sequencing of the TMPRSS3 gene revealed a known mutation, P06.155 c .646C>T (p .Arg216Cys), in compound heterozygosity with a novel Genetic diversity and structure of linkage disequilibrium in the mutation that affects the LDLA domain of the protease, c .346G>A mtHFR locus (p .Val116Met), in the profoundly deaf siblings . In both families, the E. Trifonova, M. Spiridonova, V. Stepanov; genotype is likely to be the cause of deafness . Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical These are the first DFNB4- and DFNB8/10-related cases of deafness Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation. described in Portuguese families, which also provide a first evidence of Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a key ferment of folate the genetic heterogeneity of deafness in the Portuguese population . cycle, which catalyzes for the conversion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofo- late to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate . The reduction to activities of this enzyme, P06.153 often conditioned presence of the certain combinations of alleles of MTH- combined linkage analyses of four isolated populations suggest FR gene, brings to increase the concentrations of homocystein in blood . novel loci for plasma lipid concentrations In the presented work we explored genetic differentiation and structure A. Isaacs1, H. Campbell2, U. Gyllensten3, T. Meitinger4, B. Oostra1, P. Pramstall- of linkage disequilibrium in MTHFR gene in population of the Russians, er5, I. Rudan6, A. Wright7, Y. Aulchenko1, C. van Duijn1; Tuvinians, north and south Kirghizes, using the set of SNPs: rs17037397, 1Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2University of Edin- rs4846052, rs1801133, rs1801131 and rs1537516 . In the total sample burgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden, 19 out of 32 possible haplotypes were found (from 10 + 16 per popula- 4Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine, tion) . The majority of genetic diversity is comprised by 8 main haplotypes, Eurac Research, Balzano, Italy, 6University of Split Medical School, Split, Croa- which accounted for 78% of all chromosomes. The population-specific tia, 7Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD) at MTHFR locus was revealed . In Despite considerable progress in elucidating genetic influences un- populations of the Russians, Tuvinians and north Kirghizes 2 LD blocks derlying circulating lipid levels, large proportions of the variance of were found, where as south Kirghizes demonstrates strong linkage of these traits remain unexplained . In this study, data from four geneti- all SNPs, within the single block. The significant genetic differences are cally-isolated populations, located in the Netherlands (n =1218), Italy discovered between population south Kirghizes and all explored group, eff (n =918), Sweden (n =409), and Croatia (n =537) were synthesized as well as between Russians and Tuvinians . Genetic and demographic eff eff eff in an effort to increase statistical power to detect genomic regions mechanisms of LD formation in local populations are discussed .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.156 tes Center, Leibniz Institute at Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. increasing power of variance component linkage analysis of Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) regulates numerous genes of large pedigrees glucose and lipid metabolism and genetic variants in the USF1 gene T. I. Axenovich, I. V. Zorkoltseva, G. R. Svischeva; show association with familial combined hyperlipidemia, which shows Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. phenotypic overlap with the metabolic syndrome (MetS) and type 2 Most methods of linkage analysis of quantitative traits are based on diabetes mellitus (T2DM) . The aim of our study was to approve the the variance component approach . IBD calculation is the most com- hypothesis that polymorphisms in the USF1 gene are associated with putationally intensive step of this approach . The size of IBD matrix for MetS and related metabolic traits . We genotyped eight single nucle- large pedigrees and especially for those coming from isolated popu- otide polymorphisms in the USF1 gene in 1,653 individuals of the lations is too large for practical calculation . To solve this problem a population-based German Caucasian KORA study in the age range pedigree is split on smaller non-overlapping fragments and then the between 55 and 74 years . Because of high correlation only six poly- fragments are analyzed as independent pedigrees . The split leads to morphisms were statistically analyzed . The association with T2DM and increase the number of IBD matrix elements with zero values . This in the MetS was analyzed by logistic regression in 1,462 subjects and the turn decreases the linkage power . To diminish this effect we suggested quantitative parameters were analyzed in 1,231 fasting non diabetic to increase the number of non zero elements of IBD matrix by addi- subjects by linear regression respectively by Kruskal-Wallis test . None tional alternative splitting of the pedigree, for example, on overlapping of the analyzed genetic variants (rs2774279, rs10908821, rs1556259, fragments . Using the pedigree with 207 members in 6 generations, we rs2516839, rs3737787, rs2774276) show significant association with estimated the expected linkage power when IBDs were calculated for T2DM and MetS . The results for the metabolic traits like triglycerides, a) pairs of genotyped members of each non-overlapping fragments of total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, percent body fat, size no more than 18 bit and b) for (a) plus additional pairs of geno- waist to hip ratio, ureic acid, fasting glucose, 2 hour plasma glucose, typed relatives from overlapping fragments of size no more than 18 bit . fasting insulin, blood pressure give also no evidence for any associa- The results demonstrated the effectiveness of our method: the power tion with USF1 . In our large population based study no association be- for variant (b) based on 964 IBDs was 1 .2 - 1 .7 times greater than for tween single genetic variants in the USF1 gene and T2DM, MetS and variant (a) based on 844 IBDs . Such once calculated IBD matrix can related metabolic parameters was found . We conclude that the single further be utilized by various programs (for example, SOLAR) for link- genetic variants in USF1 have no major effect on lipid and glucose age analysis of different traits . parameters in German Caucasians . P06.157 P06.159 A genome-wide association analysis of HDL-cholesterol in the Genome-wide linkage analysis for identifying quantitative trait population-based KORA study sheds new light on intergenic loci involved in the regulation of lipoprotein a (lpa) levels regions S. Lopez1, A. Buil1,2, J. Ordoñez3,4, J. C. Souto1, L. Almasy5, M. Lathrop6, J. I. M. Heid1,2, E. Boes3, M. Mueller1,2, B. Kollerits3, C. Lamina1, S. Coassin3, C. Blangero5, F. Blanco-Vaca3,7, J. Fontcuberta1, J. M. Soria1,2; Gieger1,2, A. Doering1, N. Klopp1, R. Frikke-Schmidt4, A. Tybjærg-Hansen4, A. 1Haemostasis and Thrombosis Unit, Department of Hematology, Hospital de la Brandstätter3, T. Meitinger1, H. Wichmann1,2, F. Kronenberg3; Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Bioinformatic of Complex Diseases 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Ludwig-Maximilians- Unit. Research Institute of Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Innsbruck Medical University, Inns- Spain, 3Department of Biochemistry. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Bar- bruck, Austria, 4Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. celona, Spain, 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Universitat Objective: High-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLC) is a strong Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Population Genet- risk factor for atherosclerosis and assumed to be under considerable ics. Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio, TX, United genetic control. We aimed to identify gene regions influencing HDLC States, 6Centre National du Genotypage, Paris, France, 7CIBER de Diabetes y levels by a genome-wide association (GWA) analysis in the popula- Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, Barcelona, Spain. tion-based KORA Study . Lipoprotein Lp(a) levels are highly heritable and are associated with Methods: In KORA S3/F3 (n=1,643), we analyzed the 377,865 quality- cardiovascular risk . We performed a genome-wide linkage analysis checked single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the 500K Affyme- to delineate the genomic regions that influence the concentration of trix SNP array, complemented by the publicly available GWA results Lp(a) in families from the Genetic Analysis of Idiopathic Thrombophilia from the Diabetes Genetics Initiative (DGI, n=2,631) and by replication (GAIT) Project . Lp(a) levels were measured in 387 individuals belong- studies in KORA S4 (n=4,037) and the Copenhagen City Heart Study ing to 21 extended Spanish families . A total of 485 DNA microsatellite (n=9,205) . markers were genotyped to provide a 7 .1 cM genetic map . A variance Results: Among the 13 SNPs selected from the KORA S3/F3 500K p- component linkage method was used to evaluate linkage and to detect value list, three SNPs showed consistent associations in subsequent quantitative trait loci (QTLs) . The main QTL that showed strong evi- replications: two from so far unreported regions 50 kb downstream of dence of linkage with Lp(a) levels was located at the structural gene LIPG or upstream of CETP and one from already reported regions of for apo(a) on Chromosome 6 (LOD score=13 .8) . Interestingly, another the LPL . The SNP in CETP and several SNPs downstream of LIPG QTL influencing Lp(a) concentration was located on Chromosome were independent from already reported SNPs and might be of func- 2 with a LOD score of 2 .01 . This region contains several candidate tional relevance . The other 10 as well as further 13 SNPs selected genes . One of them is the tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), which from the combined GWA p-value list of KORA S3/F3 and DGI failed has antithrombotic action and also has the ability to bind lipoproteins . consistent replication . However, quantitative trait association analyses performed with 12 Conclusions: Our GWA study identified two new HDLC-relevant re- SNPs in TFPI gene revealed no association with Lp(a) levels . Our gions, which generally motivates to extend the focus of future genetic study confirms previous results on the genetic basis of Lp(a) levels. association studies on long-range effects of intergenic regions . Fur- In addition, we report a new QTL on Chromosome 2 involved in the thermore, our study reinforced CETP and LPL as strong HDLC genes quantitative variation of Lp(a) . These data should serve as the basis and thereby underscores the power of our study and of the GWA ap- for further detection of candidate genes and to elucidate the relation- proach in general to pinpoint strong effects from common polymor- ship between the concentration of Lp(a) and cardiovascular risk . phisms . P06.160 P06.158 Identification of a novel autosomal recessive locus on Genetic variants in the UsF1 gene are not associated with mets, chromosome 5q31-34 for the long Qt syndrome T2DM, and related parameters in Caucasians (KORA study) Z. N. Al-Hassnan, S. Majid, M. Al-Fayyadh, N. Dzimiri, Y. Mallawi, W. Al Ma- N. Klopp1, C. Holzapfel1, H. Grallert1, C. Huth1, C. Gieger1, C. Meisinger1, K. nea, M. Al-Owain, B. Meyer; Strassburger2, G. Giani2, H. Wichmann1, C. Herder2, W. Rathmann2, T. Illig1; King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 2German Diabe- It is estimated that a significant percentage of sudden deaths are due to the long QT syndrome (LQTS) which is an inherited arrhythmogenic disorder that is characterized by locus heterogeneity . Mutations inMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  several genes that code for ion channels have been implicated in the from Bashkortostan region (belonged to Russian and Tatars ethnic LQTS which exists in two main forms: (i) Romano Ward syndrome groups). No significant differences were demonstrated for genotype or inherited as autosomal dominant, and (ii) Jervell and Lange-Nielsen allele frequency of the M23 and of M15 polymorphic loci of G72 gene syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder which is associated with comparing the MDD and control group . The patient and the control sensorineural deafness . samples were not divided according ethnicity, because genotype and Here we present result of genetic linkage analysis on a family with a allele frequencies were coincide in patient and control sample . Haplo- history of sudden death in three children at the age of 7 to 8 years . type analysis was conducted to assess the association between the Screening the other four living children and their consanguineous par- two markers within the G72 gene . The results showed that these two ents revealed that two sons were affected with prolonged QT intervals markers are in no linkage disequilibrium (LD): D’ (patient sample) = with unremarkable hearing assessment . Whole genome scan using 0.056, D’ (control sample) = 0.064. Our findings suggest that M23 and Allegro software identified a locus on chromosome 5q31-34 with a M15 polymorphic loci of the G72 gene do not play a major role in the maximum positive LOD score of 2 .05 . This locus has not been de- susceptibility to MDD . However, further studies with a larger sample scribed in association with the LQTS . Further analysis of the region are required to confirm the obtained results. with sequencing of potential candidate genes is in progress . In this work, we report on the identification of a novel locus for the P06.163 LQTS . In the absence of hearing loss, the autosoml recessive pattern search for genetic mechanisms involved in malaria infection in of inheritance in our family suggests a new form of the LQTS . Further- Amazon more, identifying the causative gene on this locus may provide insight R. G. M. Ferreira1, L. M. Garrido1, C. E. M. Kawamata1, L. M. A. Camargo2, H. into the genetic susceptibility to unexplained sudden death in general . Krieger1; 1Departmento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade P06.161 de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade São Lucas, Porto Velho, LRP1, a candidate gene for risk modulation of premature Brazil. cardiovascular disease in heterozygous familial The biochemical pathways involved in the pathogenesis of the para- hypercholesterolemia site infection that causes malaria and the human host mechanisms of R. Aledo1, V. Llorente-Cortés1, R. Alonso2,3, P. Mata2,3, L. Badimon1,4; defense against it are still not entirely know . Epidemiologic studies, 1Cardiovascular Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundación Jiménez as well genetic studies, suggest the existence of genetic components Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 3Fundación Hipercolesterolemia Familiar, Madrid, Spain, related to the host innate resistance or susceptibility to malaria (Hill 4CIBEROBN-Instituto Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain. A .V .,2006) . Based on results obtained by our group in a genome-wide Heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (hFH) is characterized by scan in 182 individuals from Portuchuelo (8o37’S, 63o49’W), Rondonia severely elevated LDL-cholesterol levels and premature atheroscle- state, Brazil (Ferreira R .G .M . et al.,2007) . The following STRs markers rosis and cardiovascular disease (PCVD) . Genetic alterations of the in the short arm of chromosome 4 spanning from 0 to 57cM where se- LDL-receptor gene are the main cause of this disease . However, there lected to be genotyped in a distinct population, Monte Negro (10o15’S, is a substantial variation in the onset and severity of the disease . This 63o18’W), at the same Brazilian state . variability might be due to atherogenic risk factors of environmental, The sample, 452 individuals from nuclear families, was genotyped us- metabolic and genetic origin modulating the phenotype of hFH dis- ing 7 SRTs markers (D4S412 - 4 .74cM, D4S2983 - 17 .5cM, D4S403 ease . LDL-receptor-related receptor (LRP1) is a multiligand binding - 25cM, D4S419 - 30cM, D4S3022 - 36cM, D4S391 - 43 .6cM, D4S405 receptor that acts as a pivotal lipoprotein receptor for the atherotrom- - 57cM) along short arm of chromosome 4, with a mean distance of botic transformation of the vascular wall . The aim of this study was 8 .74cM from each other . The software SimWalk2 (Sobel E . et al .,2002) to analyse the association of LRP1 polymorphisms with premature was used to check mendelian segregation of the alleles in the fami- cardiovascular disease in 339 hFH-patients (262 PCVD and 77 non- lies . PCVD) from the Spanish FH Register . The polymorphisms c .1-25 C>G, The reported number of malarial episodes, corrected by age and sex, rs715948, rs1799986, rs1800127, rs7968719, rs1800176, rs1800194, was used as the quantitative trait phenotype . This phenotype showed rs1800181, rs1140648, rs1800164 distributed along the whole gene expected association with Fy- individuals as well as familial aggrega- were used in the study . The polymorphism rs1799986 showed a sig- tion in conformity with genetic mechanisms, indicating its epidemiolog- nificant association with PCVD in the codominant model for the hetero- ical importance . Linkage analysis were conducted using the software zoygous genotype CT (nominal P = 0 .0126, OR 2 .07 . CI 1 .14-3 .74) Solar 2 (Almasy L . et al .;1998) . 95 .The functional effect of rs1799986, that apparently is a synonymous No evidence of linkage was found both in multi-point and two-point mutation (Asp100Asp), was analyzed by the web interface http://pu- analysis . (FAPESP,CNPq) pasuite .bioinfo .cipf .es . This polymorphism completely abolishes an Exonic Splicing Enhancer sequence . This may results in splicing aber- P06.164 rations as exon skipping and therefore in a deficient transcription of the matrix metalloproteinase-3 gene polymorphism and dilatative gene. Although further studies are needed to confirm the rs1799986 pathology of ascending thoracic aorta association with atherosclerosis and cardiovascular risk and to clarify G. Sinkunaite, V. Lesauskaite, R. Benetis, A. Smalinskiene, S. Simonytë, G. its physiological role, our results suggest that this polymorphism is a Jariene, V. Tatarunas, J. Petkeviciene, J. Klumbiene; biological plausible risk factor for PCVD . Institute of Cardiology, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania. The aim of the study was to identify whether the mutation in the pro- P06.162 moter region of MMP3 gene might be a determinant of dilatative pa- No association between polymorphic loci of the G gene and thology of ascending thoracic aorta (DP ATA) . major depressive disorder. Material and methods . We studied 76 (55 males, 21 females) patients A. Gareeva, T. Noskova, E. Khusnutdinova; with DP ATA, the age ranged from 31 to 81 years (median, 64 years) Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific center of Russian acad- and a random sample of the population ((244 males and 366 females) emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. aged 25-64 yrs ., all from Lithuania . Analysis was done on DNA using Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common and highly heteroge- real-time polymerase chain reaction to genotype polymorphism 5A/6A neous psychiatric disorder encompassing a spectrum of symptoms at a position -1171 of the MMP3 gene promoter . involving deficits to a range of cognitive, psychomotor and emotional Results . The prevalence of MMP-3 genotypes was similar between processes. The flavoprotein D-amino acid oxidase (DAO) degrades the group of DP ATA and random sample of population . The frequency of gliotransmitter D-Ser, a potent activator of N-methyl-D-aspartate-type 5A allele did not differ between both groups and was 0 .506 and 0 .514, glutamate receptors . A body of evidence suggests that DAO, together respectively. Male patients carrying 5A/5A genotype were significantly with its activator, G72 protein, may play a key role in the pathophysi- younger compared with those with the 6A/6A genotype . ology of MDD The present study tested the hypothesis that the M23 In conclusion, the frequency of MMP-3 promoter 5A/6A genotypes did and M15 polymorphic loci of the G72 gene are associated with major not differ between the group of patients with DP ATA and the random depressive disorder (MDD) . We studied M23 and M15 polymorphic sample of population, but the males with DP ATA and 5A/5A geno- loci of the G72 gene in 163 MDD patients and in 268 normal controls type required aortic reconstruction surgery at the younger age than theMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  males carrying 6A/6A genotype in the MMP-3 promoter region . P06.167 is mannose Binding Lectin codon 54 Polymorphism P06.165 Associated With Predisposition to Acute Poststreptococcal matrix metalloproteinase-9 polymorphism in relation to Glomerulonephritis in childhood? cardiovascular disease complications in patients of type 2 A. Aykut1, F. Ozkinay1, M. Bak2, B. Durmaz1, D. Trak2, H. Onay3, C. Ozkinay3; diabetes mellitus 1Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Genetics and Teratology, Ege Uni- E. Kurvinen1,2, K. Nueganen3, M. Viigimaa4, A. Veske3, K. Aasvee1; versity, Faculty of Medicin, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Behcet Uz 1National Institute for Health Development, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tallinn Children`s Children’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Ege Uni- Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Tallinn Technical University, Tallinn, Estonia, 4North versity , Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. Estonia Regional Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. Acute Poststreptococcal Glomerulonephritis (PSAGN) is the most The process of atherosclerosis is accelerated in patients of type 2 Dia- common form of glomerulonephritis, a disorder marked by inflam- betes Mellitus (T2DM) . The traditional risk factors alone cannot explain mation of the kidneys‘ glomeruli, following a streptoccocal infection . the excess incidence of cardiovascular complications in T2DM patients . However the mechanism of renal injury in PSAGN is still not clear . On The matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) gene promoter genotype the other hand Mannose binding lectin (MBL) is a calcium dependent was considered to be related to coronary artery disease . Our study lectin that has an important role in innate immunity. MBL deficiency in- aimed to evaluate possible role of C-1562T MMP-9 polymorphism in creases the overall susceptibility of an individual to infectious disease . developing of cardiovascular complications among T2DM patients . We The aim of this study is to determine the presence of any association have studied 111 subjects with C/C (group 1) and 50 subjects with T/T between MBL gene variants and PSGAN in the child population . Co- (in 1 patient) or C/T genotype (group 2) . Fasting serum glucose and don 54 (allele B) polymorphism in the exon 1 of the MBL gene was lipid metabolism parameters, inflammatory markers and anthropomet- investigated by PCR-RFLP method in 110 children diagnosed as PSA- ric data were measured . MMP-9 genotype was detected by the PCR GN and 100 age-matched healthy controls. No significant differences method . Cardiovascular complications were proven angiographically . in the frequencies of the mutant B allele were found between the pa- Results . A cardiovascular complication was detected in 45% among tient group (5 .5%) and the control group (1%) . AB genotype was found C/C homozygotes and 48% among patients of group 2 (C/T+T/T) . to be 20% and 26% in the patient group and the healthy control group Waist/hip ratio and diastolic blood pressure were significantly higher in respectively, where the difference was statistically not significant. AA T allele carriers (p<0 .05) . In multiple regression analysis independent genotype was found in 74 .5% of the children with PSAGN and 73% of determinants of diastolic blood pressure were MMP-9 genotype, waist/ the healthy control group. In our study, we could not find any signifi- hip ratio and triglycerides level . cant association between MBL genotypes and PSAGN . We conclude Conclusion . Among diabetic patients carrying MMP-9 T allele were re- that it may be helpful to test the association between MBL genotypes vealed some and other infectious diseases in a large series of patients in order to unfavourable changes in anthropometric, lipid and blood pressure resolve the role of MBL protein in susceptibility to or protection against data, which can infections with different pathogens in certain age groups play a certain role in genesis of cardiovascular complications . P06.168 P06.166 Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease 1 - The quest for finding the Analysis of assembly of A1903G of gene polymorphism of gene chymase of CMA1/B with maximal oxygen consumption in G. Papagregoriou1, A. Soloukides1, K. Voskarides1, C. Charalambous1, A. human subject Pierides2, F. Hildebrandt3, C. Stavrou4, C. Deltas1; E. V. Lekontsev, O. V. Gumerova, V. Y. Gorbunova; 1Department Of Biological Sciences, University Of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, Bashkir State Pedagogical University from after named M.Akmulla, Ufa, Rus- 2Hippokration Private Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Pediatrics and sian Federation. Communicable Diseases, University Of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, Introduction: the chymase gene of CMA1/B locates on 14 chromo- 4Royal Artemis Medical Centre, Pafos, Cyprus. somes (14q11 .2) and the chymase is the main enzyme, controlling the Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease (MCKD) is an autosomal dominant angiotensin II generation from angiotonin I in tissues of cardiovascular disorder manifesting with interstitial fibrosis, tubular basement mem- system . The analysis of assembly of A1903G of gene polymorphism brane thickening and tubular atrophy, leading to CRF or progressing of chymase of CMA1/B with people physical characters has been car- to ESRF at ages between 30-70 years . Renal cysts at the corticome- ried out . dullary junction are a frequent finding. In certain regions of Pafos, Cy- Methods: maximal oxygen consumption (MOC) of the 100 high-skilled prus, MCKD1 patients constitute nearly 40% of total ESRF cases . The sportsman’s in the age 17-25 year had been investigated using Gu- gene responsible for the disease, MCKD1, has been mapped by our minskogo method . The group of comparison consisted of 100 healthy group on 1q21 (Christodoulou et al, 1998, Hum Mol Genet 7:905-911), individuals of appropriate age, which are not interested in sport (con- between markers D1S498 and D1S2125 . Paucity of progress in clon- trol group) . The analysis of genetic polymorphism realized by the poly- ing the gene, prompted us to re-evaluate and expand linkage analysis merase chain reaction (PCR) . data encompassing patients from nine families linked to MCKD1 . All Results: the genotypes 1)*A/*A, 2)*A/*G, 3)*G/*G chymase gene of patients were examined using global criteria in an attempt to identi- CMA1/B are the most frequent 1)26,25%, 2)60%, 3)13,75% in the fy an intermediate phenotype . Polymorphic markers were examined group of sportsman’s; 1) 50%, 2)50%, 3)0% in control group with low throughout the MCKD1 region and haplotypes helped to re-establish means of MOC . We revealed that the reliable frequency the allele the critical region, between markers D1S305-D1S336mw28, encom- *G rise till mean (43 .75% against 25% in control group was found; passing 2 .1 Mb . Genes considered as good candidates, NP12, PIAS3, P=0 .506; OR=1 .751, 95%CI 1 .102-5 .0) and the allele *A low till mean IL6R, APOAIBP, CA14, NCu-GI, FDPS, HCN3, AQP10, SHC1, PMVK, (56 .25% against 75% in control group; P=0 .0506; OR=0 .751, 95%CI SCAMP3, LOC284620 and MUC1, were re-sequenced, with negative 0 .20-0 .907) . Also revealed the genotype *A/*A low till mean 26 .25% results. Additionally, a microarray expression study using renal fibro- against 50 .0% in control group; P=0 .0886; OR=0 .525, 95%CI 0 .129- blasts from an affected kidney was designed in order to depict pan- 0 .977) . oramic gene expression, also with no considerable results . A Compara- Is known, that the presence in allele genotype of CMA*G leads to tive Genome Hybridization array experiment was performed searching the decrease of education of active pressor peptide - angiotensin for allelic copy number variations nested in the critical MCKD1 region . II .Conclusions: the genotype association of CMA*G/*G of chymase No significant difference was detected between normal and affected gene with high level of MOC was determined, that provides of full value samples . From the clinical perspective, this work revealed a putative supply of heart tissue by the oxygen on exertions . relationship between carriers of affected haplotype and hyperuricae- mia, as an early clinical finding.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.169 velopment . Serotonin turnover in the brain increases in response to Absence of causative coding variants in the mEis1 gene in 245 physical exercise . Decreased motivation, tiredness, loss of motor co- French-canadian Restless Legs syndrome patients ordination - markers of central fatigue, are associated with the rise of L. Xiong1, M. Dubé1, A. Levchenko1, J. St-Onge1, S. Girard1, C. Gaspar1, G. brain serotonin concentration . But the role of serotonin in the develop- Turecki2, J. Montplaisir1, G. A. Rouleau1; ment of mental fatigue is unclear . 1University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2McGill University, Montreal, In the current study we investigate associations of serotonin system QC, Canada. genes polymorphism with the mental fatigue . In the study students Introduction: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common sensorimo- of Moscow State University took part (N=160, male=78, female=82) . tor disorder with a substantial genetic contribution . Recently, a ge- Volunteers were exposed to intensive mental workload (logical tasks nome-wide association study reported significant association between and monotonous persistent completion of psychological tests) during common variants within the MEIS1 gene and the RLS phenotype . The 3 hours . Before and after workload the psychophysiological state was odds ratio of the risk allele ranges from 1 .8 to 3 .0 . The MEIS1 gene estimated with the help of “NS-Psychotest” (Neurosoft, Russia) . Ad- encodes a homeobox protein involved in limb development, establish- ditionally volunteers completed self-ratings of mental fatigue and of ment of the intrasegmental spinal motor neuron identity and connec- functional state . tivity, and patterning of sensory organs in the embryonic peripheral It was detected that carries of both ss-genotype of the 5HTTLPR and nervous system, as well as hematopoiesis . CC-genotype of the 5-HT2A polymorphism (T102C) reported higher Patients and methods: We systematically sequenced 245 clinically level of mental fatigue after performing fatigue task compared with car- well-defined RLS patients for the entire coding and UTR regions of ries of ll(5HTTLPR) genotype and of TT(T102C) genotype . the MEIS1 gene . All samples were Caucasians with 95% of French- ss-genotype of the 5-HTTLPR as well as CC-genotype of the 5-HT2A Canadian (FC) origin; and 77% were severe or very severe cases with are associated with reduced expression of both genes and therefore mean age of 53±12 yrs and disease onset 30±16 yrs . 77% of patients could cause increasing concentrations of extracellular serotonin in the had positive family history and 83% were also positive for periodic brain. These findings suggest a role of serotonin transmission efficien- leg movements during sleep . In total, 13 exons/17 fragments (NM_ cy in mental fatigue . 002398 .2, 3180 bps) were sequenced . All sequence variants detected in patients were genotyped in 285 FC controls . P06.172 Results: In total, 19 variants were detected, five intronic and 14 exonic, Joint analysis of individual-level data data from 17 studies on including 13 variants within the 3’UTR region and one synonymous the association of the IL promoter polymorphism -174G>c with SNP (rs13005707) in exon 7 . Eight rare variants and eleven common glucose levels, interleukin-6 levels, and body-mass index variants showed no association with the disease phenotype . C. Huth1,2, T. Illig1, C. Herder3, C. Gieger1,2, H. Grallert1, Y. H. Hamid4, O. Peder- Conclusion: No causative coding variants were found in the MEIS1 sen4, T. Hansen4, V. Lyssenko5, L. Groop5, H. Ireland6, J. W. Stephens7, I. Wer- gene in 245 RLS patients . Further deep-sequencing of the non-coding nstedt Asterholm8, J. Jansson8, H. M. Stringham9, M. Boehnke9, J. Tuomileh- region and studies of the expression and function of the MEIS1 gene to10,11, J. Fernandez-Real12,13, A. Lopez-Bermejo12,13, L. Gallart14, J. Vendrell14, S. are underway . E. Humphries6, F. Kronenberg15, H. E. Wichmann1,2, I. M. Heid1,2; 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Ger- P06.170 many, 2Institute of Biometry and Epidemiology, University of Munich, Munich, Effect of polymorphisms in the dopaminergic system genes on Germany, 3German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Institute at Heinrich Heine Univer- the mental fatigue sity Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, M. A. Kulikova, M. A. Timofeeva, N. V. Maluchenko; Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Sciences, University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation. Sweden, 6Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Royal Free and University Col- Mental fatigue (MF) represents a failure to initiate and sustain tasks lege Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 7Medical School, University of that require self-motivation and internal cues in the absence of demon- Wales, Swansea, United Kingdom, 8Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, strable cognitive failure or motor weakness . So development of the Sahlgrenska Academy at Gothenborg University, Gothenburg, Sweden, 9De- mental fatigue is the significant problem for people who work with big partment of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, amount of data and constantly need focused attention . 10Diabetes Unit, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 11Department Molecular mechanisms of MF origin still are not clear . It is known that of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 12Section of Diabe- basal ganglia play a key role in the development of MF (Chaudhuri et tes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Girona, Spain, 13CIBER “Fisiopatología de la al ., 2000) . Dopamine is one of the most prevalent neurotransmitters in Obesidad y Nutrición” CB/06/03/010, Girona, Spain, 14Research Unit, University the basal ganglia . Therefore we suppose that alterations in the func- Hospital Joan XXIII, Tarragona, Spain, 15Division of Genetic Epidemiology, tioning of dopamine system provided by genes variations may influ- Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. ence the development of the MF . We tested the hypothesis that allelic Background: Several studies have investigated associations between variation of the DRD2 and DAT genes located mostly in the striatum the -174G>C polymorphism (rs1800795) of the IL6 gene and pheno- could be associated with differences in the onset of MF . types related to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but presented incon- In current investigation 160 volunteers (78 males and 82 females) par- sistent results . This joint analysis aimed to clarify whether IL6 -174G>C ticipated . Subjects were genotyped for TaqI A RFLP of the DRD2 gene was associated with the quantitative phenotypes circulating glucose, and 40-bp VNTR polymorphism of the DAT gene . Psychophysiologi- body-mass-index (BMI), and circulating interleukin-6 (IL-6) . cal indexes were measured before and after mental load consisted Methods: Individual participants’ data from all published and unpub- in the monotonous passing of personality questionnaires during three lished studies of the IL6-T2DM consortium on Caucasian subjects with hours . available BMI were collected. As study-specific estimates did not show Case-control analyses suggested a strong association between the heterogeneity (P>0 .1), they were combined by using the inverse-vari- A1+10/10 genotype and increased mental fatigue (P < 0 .05) . In con- ance fixed-effect model. clusion, mental fatigue seems to be related to allelic variations within Results: The main analysis included 9440, 7398, 24,117, or 5659 non- the DRD2 and DAT genes . diabetic and manifest T2DM subjects for fasting glucose, 2-h glucose, BMI or circulating IL-6, respectively . The IL6 -174 CC- and GC-geno- P06.171 types were significantly associated with -0.091mmol/L (P=0.014) lower Effect of genes from the serotonin system on the mental fatigue fasting glucose . There was no evidence for association between IL6 M. Timofeeva1, M. Kulikova2, N. Maluchenko2; -174G>C and BMI or IL-6 levels . In an additional analysis of 641 sub- 1Russian Research Institute of Sport and Physical Education, Moscow, Russian jects known to develop T2DM later on, the IL6 -174 CC-genotype was Federation, 2Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation. associated with higher baseline IL-6 levels (+0 .75pg/mL, P=0 .004), Fatigue is an important factor affecting sporting and mental perfor- which was consistent with higher IL-6 levels in the 966 manifest T2DM mances . It is complicated process which includes peripheral and cen- subjects (+0 .50pg/mL, P=0 .044) . tral components . Central fatigue occurs in central nervous system as a Conclusions: Our data on the widely debated IL6 -174G>C polymor- result of mental as well as physical activity . phism suggest an association with quantitative glucose, and explor- There are evidences that serotonin is implicated in central fatigue de- atory analysis indicated modulated IL-6 levels in pre-diabetic subjects,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  being in-line with this SNP’s previously reported T2DM association and P06.175 a role of circulating IL-6 as intermediate phenotype . This large joint Genetic analysis of autosomal recessive primary microcephaly analysis underscores that a consortium-based approach is well-suited in Pakistani kindreds to investigate small genetic effects . M. S. Hussain1,2, S. M. Baig1, M. Farooq1, I. A. Inayat1, E. Kirst2, M. Aslam1, M. Wajid1, M. R. Toliat2, J. A. Qureshi1, P. Nürnberg2; P06.173 1Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory (HMG), National Institute for Biotech- Apolipoprotein A5 gene APOA5*2 haplotype variant confers risk nology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan, 2Cologne for the development of metabolic syndrome Center for Genomics (CCG), Institute of Genetics, University of Cologne, Co- P. Kisfali1, M. Mohás2, A. Maász1, F. Hadarits3, L. Markó2, I. Késői2, T. Orosz- logne, Germany. lán4, Z. Bagosi4, Z. Bujtor4, J. Rinfel5, B. Gasztonyi4, I. Wittmann2, B. Melegh1; Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare genetic 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, disorder in which the affected individuals have head circumference >3 Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, Uni- SDs below the age and sex-related mean . The reduced head circum- versity of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, Markusovszky County ference is due to small but architecturally normal cereberal cortex . This Hospital, Szombathely, Hungary, 42nd Department of Medicine, Zala County disorder is genetically heterogeneous with six loci and four genes (Mi- Hospital, Zalaegerszeg, Hungary, 53rd Department of Medicine and Family crocephalin, CDK5RAP2, ASPM and CENPJ) have been identified. Its Medicine Institute, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. incidence is ranging from 1/30,000 to 1/2,000,000 . The metabolic syndrome may affect 18-30 per cent of the adult popu- Eleven families of autosomal recessive primary microcephaly were as- lation in the industrialized countries and is considered a veritable certained from various areas of Pakistan . By PCR (Polymerase Chain epidemic . Metabolic syndrome is a clustering of abdominal obesity, Reaction) based genotyping linkage was performed using highly poly- increased triglycerides, low levels of high density lipoprotein choles- morphic fluorescently labeled microsatellite markers. Homozygosity terol, high blood pressure, and elevated fasting glucose levels and mapping revealed linkage of seven families to MCPH5 locus (ASPM consists of multiple risk factors that are increasing the cardiovascular gene), one to MCPH2 locus, one to MCPH4 locus and one with MCPH6 mortality . The etiology is complex, determined by the interplay of both locus (CENPJ) and one was excluded to all known MCPH loci . MCPH5 genetic and environmental factors . Naturally occurring variants of the linked families were subjected to screen the ASPM (Abnormal Spindle- apolipoprotein A5 gene have been associated with increased triglyc- like Micocephaly Associated) gene with direct DNA sequencing . Four erides and have been found to confer risk for cardiovascular diseas- previously reported (p .Y3163X, p .R1019X, p .Y3353X, p .W1326X) and es . In our study four haplotype-tagging polymorphisms, the T-1131C, two novel mutations (p.L333fs, p.Q2880X) were identified in ASPM IVS3+G476A, T1259C, and C56G alleles, and the haplotype profiles gene. One known mutation (p.T6fsX3) was also identified in CENPJ were studied in 343 patients with MS and 284 controls . Minor alleles of (Centromere-associated Protein J) gene . All these mutations are pro- all apoA5 variants, except the C56G variant, were associated with in- tein truncating so it is more likely that they are governing the same creased triglyceride levels both in the MS patients and in the controls . phenomenon of nonsense mediated mRNA decay . The ultimate ob- The serum total cholesterol levels did not show allele-dependent dif- jective of our study is to identify the novel locus in a family which is ferences. The prevalence of the apoA5*2 haplotype, defined by the si- excluded to all known MCPH loci and to identify the genes responsible multaneous presence of -1131C, IVS3+473A and 1259C variants, was for autosomal recessive primary microcephaly in MCPH2 and MCPH4 13 .4% in MS patients and 4 .91% in the controls (p<0 .001) . Multiple linked families . logistic regression analysis revealed that this haplotype confers risk for the development of MS (OR=2 .913; 95% CI: 1 .564-5 .426; p<0 .001) . P06.176 To our surprise, the apoA5*5 was significantly less frequent in the MS Genetic Variation in miRNA Genomic Regions: Association with patients compared with the controls (0 .87 vs 5 .26%, p<0,05), and this Eating Disorders haplotype was found to confer strong protection against the develop- M. Muinos-Gimeno1, J. M. Mercader1,2, M. Montfort1, M. Bayes1, F. Fernandez- ment of MS (OR=0 .158; 95% CI: 0 .045-0 .553; p=0 .004) . Aranda2, X. Estivill1,3, Y. Espinosa-Parrilla1; 1Genes and Disease Program, CeGen and CIBERESP, Center for Genomic P06.174 Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBEROBN and Psychiatric Service, Ciutat Polymorphisms of methyl-group pathway genes in spontaneous Sanitaria Bellvitge, L´Hospitalet, Spain, 3Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, abortions Spain. M. S. Nazarenko, V. P. Puzyrev, I. N. Lebedev, E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashe- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are posttranscriptional regulators involved in the varova, E. A. Sazhenova, N. N. Sukhanova; regulation of at least a third of mammalian genes . Association studies State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in miRNA genomic re- It’s believed that altered methyl-group pathway provides a potential gions might help to evaluate the contribution of functional miRNA allele mechanism which influence the DNA methylation of specific genomic variants to complex disease susceptibility . We constructed a panel of regions . Thereafter aberrant methylation can lead to the induction of 768 SNPs covering 164 miRNA regions and spanning 2 Mb of ge- genomic instability in a manner that have developmental consequenc- nomic DNA including 326 known human miRNAs precursor sequences es including embryo death . The purpose of current work was to investi- (MiRBase, 7 .1) and at least 5 kb upstream and downstream of the gate the effect of fetal functional polymorphisms of methyl-group path- miRNA regions . For an optimal selection of informative SNPs we used way genes (C667T and A1298C MTHFR, A2756G MTR, G66A MTRR tagSNPs and included 18 SNPs located inside premiRNA sequences . and C46359T DNMT3B) on spontaneous abortions . First-trimester Genotyping of 340 unrelated Spanish controls was performed using spontaneous abortions with normal karyotype (n=151), with mosaic a custom Golden Gate assay (Illumina) . Nine out of the 18 SNPs lo- chromosomal constitution (n= 34) and induced abortions (n=33) were cated in premiRNAs were monomorphic, which is suggestive of se- analyzed for chosen polymorphisms by PCR-RFLP . Nothing differ- lective constraint on miRNA sequences . A high correlation (R2=0 .86) ences between alleles and genotypes frequencies in studied groups was shown between allele frequencies in the Spanish and HapMap were found, except DNMT3B . Carriers of 46359T allele predominated CEU sample confirming the applicability of our SNP panel to study the in the group of induced abortions (64%) in compare with spontaneous Spanish population . Further, we performed association analysis in a abortions (47%; P=0 .01) . The 46359TT genotype was more prevalent sample of 294 patients with different types of eating disorders and 340 in the group of induced abortions than spontaneous abortions (42% controls . A nominal association (p<0 .005) was found for at least two vs . 17%, respectively; P=0 .002) . Consequently, further studies are SNPs per miRNA in the case of two miRNAs and 2 clusters contain- needed to clarify the influence of embryo genotype for polymorphisms ing 2 and 3 miRNAs each . When stratifying for bulimia and anorexia C46359T DNMT3B in the process of human spontaneous abortion . phenotypes, association for another 3 and one miRNAs was respec- tively shown . These results indicate a possible role for miRNAs in the aetiology of eating disorders . Supported by Spanish Government and Generalitat de Catalunya .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.177 Compostela, Spain, 5Hospital General de Manresa, Manresa, Spain, 6Servicio sequence analysis of circadian clock modulators miR-132 and de Neurología, Hospital Clínco de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, miR-219 and their targets RFX4 and PHLPP in mood Disorder 7Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Patients Barcelona, Spain. E. Saus1, V. Soria2, F. Vivarelli1, J. M. Crespo2,3, J. M. Menchón2,3, M. Urretaviz- Migraine is a common neurological disorder with a complex inheri- caya2,3, X. Estivill1,4, M. Gratacòs1; tance pattern . Although the pathophysiology of the disease is not well 1CIBERESP (CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública), Genes and Disease understood, several studies suggest that serotonin-related genes may Program and CeGen Barcelona Genotyping Node, Center for Genomic Regula- participate in its pathogenesis . The involvement of some of these tion, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 2Mood Disorders Clinical and Research Unit, genes has been studied in different migraine populations with conflict- CIBER-SAM, Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, L’Hospitalet ing results thus far . de Llobregat, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 3Department of Clinical Sciences, In the present study we aimed to evaluate the possible role of 19 genes Bellvitge Campus, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 4Experi- involved in serotoninergic neurotransmission in the susceptibility to mi- mental and Health Sciences Department, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, graine in a Spanish population using a case-control approach based Catalonia, Spain. on SNPs . A total sample of 528 unrelated patients were recruited and It has been widely supported that circadian rhythms are involved in the diagnosed following the IInd International Criteria of Headache Disor- pathophysiology of mood disorders (MD). Two brain-specific miRNAs ders from the IHS (308 patients had migraine without aura and 220 (microRNAs) have been recently reported as modulators of endog- had migraine with aura) and compared to 528 sex-matched controls enous circadian clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus in mice . in which migraine was ruled out . All individuals were Spanish of Cau- The authors have functionally characterized miR-132 and miR-219 casoid origin from Catalonia and Galicia . SNP selection was based within the context of circadian clock and gave experimental evidences on genetic coverage parameters and genotyping was performed using of genes Rfx4 and Phlpp as respective targets. We first explored the SNPlex technology . Chi-square tests were used for the comparison conservation between species for both miRNAs and once the exis- of allele and genotype frequencies between the patient and control tence of hsa-miR-132 and hsa-miR-219 was corroborated in humans, groups for each single SNP . Preliminary data of nominal associations we used different prediction programs to check the experimentally suggest a contribution of HTR1E, HTR2B, HTR3B, MAOA and DDC in supported target sites RFX4 and PHLPP in humans. Specifically, mi- the genetic predisposition to migraine . Randa predicted hsa-miR-132 to target RFX4 and TargetScan pre- dicted PHLPP as a target site for hsa-miR-219, consistent with previ- P06.180 ous work in mice . Once both miRNAs with their respective target sites Genetic diagnosis of Ataxia telangectasia and role of were confirmed in humans, we questioned whether these two miRNAs mitochondria on it and their target genes RFX4 and PHLPP are altered in mood disorder M. Houshmand; patients . Thus, we re-sequenced both miRNAs and their respective NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. target sites at RFX4 and PHLPP genes in a sample consisting of 365 Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder in unrelated patients (218 Unipolar Major Depressive Disorder and 147 1/40,000 to 1/100,000 in reported populations . There is a 25% pos- Bipolar Disorder) diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria . All patients sibility for having an affected child when parents are carrier for the completed the Spanish versions of the Seasonal Pattern Assessment ATM gene mutation . There is no cure available for this disease and Questionnaire and the Horne-Östberg Morningness-Eveningness prenatal testing is strongly recommended for prevention of this dis- Questionnaire. This is the first time that the circadian clock regulation ease . Although the preferred method is the direct mutation analysis of by miRNAs is explored in mood disorder, representing a first step to the ATM gene, the large size of the ATM gene with 63 exons and the elucidate the underlying mechanism of these proteins and the role of large number of possible mutations in patients considerably limit ef- these miRNAs in mood disorders . ficiency of mutation analysis as a diagnostic choice. In this study, four molecular markers: D11S2179, D11S1787, D11S535, D11S1343 are P06.178 genotyped in 19 unrelated families from different regions of Iran . All Allelic frequencies and heterozygosities of microsatellite carriers and affected patients were diagnosed accurately . This method markers covering the whole genome in the Korean is effectively useful in prenatal diagnosis of AT . J. Lee, M. Park, K. Kim, H. Lee, K. Kim, J. Jung, B. Oh, H. Kim; We also investigated mt-DNA deletions and haplogroups in AT patients . Center for Genome Science, National Institute of Health, Seoul, Republic of In this study, 24 Iranian patients suffering from AT and 100 normal Korea. controls were examined . mt-DNA was extracted from whole blood and Microsatellite markers are an essential tool for genetic linkage analysis examined by 6 primers for existence of mitochondrial deletions . We because of their high polymorphism content . Four hundred commer- also amplified and sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I by standard sequenc- cially available markers covering the entire genome were genotyped ing techniques . mtDNA deletions were observed in 54 .1% (13/24) of from 578 sib individuals from 249 Korean families . Allelic frequencies patients (8 .9 kb deletion in all samples, 5 .0 kb in one and 7 .5 kb in two and heterozygosities were determined for each marker loci and com- patients), representing mtDNA damage which may be due to oxidative pared between Korean, Taiwanese, Japanese and Caucasian popula- stress in mitochondria . Our results showed that there is no association tions . In the three Asian populations, 10-13% of the markers had less between mtDNA haplogroups and AT . This data may indicate involve- than 0 .6 heterozygosity, whereas in the Caucasian population, only ment of mitochondrial damage in the pathogenesis of AT . 0 .5% of the markers had less than 0 .6 heterozygosity . Mean identical by descent (IBD) values were calculated for 578 sib individuals .Analy- P06.181 sis of IBD values greater than 0 .5 suggested that markers with low Role of mitochondria in Friedreich Ataxia heterozygosity can also provide positive linkages, at least for the IBD M. Houshmand; sharing method of model-free linkage analysis . The data presented in NiGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. this study will be a useful reference for genome-wide screens of Kore- Friedreich’s Ataxia (FA) is the commonest genetic cause of ataxia ans and comparative studies with other ethnic populations . and is associated with the expansion of a GAA repeat in intron 1 of the frataxin gene . Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) could be considered a P06.179 candidate modifier factor for FA disease, since mitochondrial oxidative Association study of migraine and 19 candidate genes involved stress is thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of this disease . The in serotoninergic neurotransmission in a spanish population expansion (GAA) repeat in the first intron causes decreased frataxin R. Corominas1, M. J. Sobrido2,3, E. Cuenca-León1, P. Blanco4,3, B. Narber- expression by interfering with transcription .: Activity of mitochondrial haus5, M. Del Toro1, R. Leira6, J. López6, M. Ribasés1, A. Macaya1, B. Cor- respiratory chain complex I (measured as NADH ferricyanide reduc- mand7,3; tase) and intracellular ATP measurement was performed on lympho- 1Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundación Pública cyte of FA patients (n =12) and control subjects (n =25) . Common dele- Galera de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3CIBER En- tion were identified and confirmed by southern blotting in FA patients. fermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 4Grupo de Homozygous GAA expansion was found in 21 (84%) of all cases . In Medicina Xenómica, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de four cases (16%), no expansion was observed, ruling out the diagnosisMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 of Friedreich’s ataxia . In cases with GAA expansions, ataxia, scoliosis P06.184 and pes cavus, cardiac abnormalities and some neurological findings A novel mLPA technique for copy number analysis on small occurred more frequently than in our patients without GAA expansion . amounts of DNA mtDNA deletions were present in 76% of our patients representing K. M. Sorensen1, P. S. Andersen1, L. A. Larsen2, M. Schwartz3, J. Schouten4, mtDNA damage, which may be due to iron accumulation in mitochon- A. Nygren4; dria. Our findings showed that complex I activities and intracellular 1Statens Serum Institut, Kbh. S, Denmark, 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre of Func- ATP were significantly reduced (P=0.001) in patients compared with tional Genome Research, Kbh. N, Denmark, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, control . 8 .6 kb deletion in mtDNA was detected in all of patients by Rigshospitalet, Kbh. N, Denmark, 4MRC Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. multiplex PCR but Southern blot analysis confirmed the presence of Background: The MLPA technique was introduced in 2002 as a new deletion in 9 of 12 patients . sensitive technique for relative quantification of up to 40 different nu- cleic acid sequences in a single, extremely easy to perform, reaction . P06.182 Today the technique is routinely used for copy number analysis in vari- the developmental changes in mitochondrial DNA content per ous syndromes and diseases . cell in human liver and muscle tissue during gestation Aim: The aim is to exploit the potential of MLPA in areas where DNA M. Pejznochova, M. Magner, M. Tesarova, H. Hansikova, J. Zeman; material is limited . The DNA concentration required in standard MLPA Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. analysis is not attainable from dried blood spot samples (DBS) often The process of oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) matura- used in neonatal screening programs . By redesigning the MLPA probes tion is still not fully understood during the development of the fetus . we attempt to perform MLPA analysis on small amounts of DNA . Since all mammalian cells except erythrocytes depend on mitochon- Patients and methods: 7 patients with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia drial ATP production, knowledge of the OXPHOS maturation is an es- (CAH) were used in this study . DNA was extracted from both whole sential query. Our previous study demonstrated significant changes blood and DBS, and subjected to MLPA analysis using SALSA P050B of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content in cord blood leukocytes dur- probemix (normal and modified probes). Results were analysed using ing the gestation . To futher understand the role of mtDNA content in GeneMarker™ (Softgenetics) and Excel spreadsheet analysis . human prenatal development, we analyzed mtDNA amount in human Results: We found a 99 .6% concordance of the results obtained with fetal liver and muscle tissue during the gestation . DNA extracted from whole blood compared with DNA from dried blood DNA was isolated from 26 liver and 26 muscle tissue samples obtained spot samples . at autopsy from miscarriages between 13 th and 28th week of gestation . Conclusion: We demonstrate that MLPA reactions with modified probes The mtDNA amount was analyzed by the real-time PCR method using are functional and reliable at very low DNA concentrations . This broad- SybrGreen I (Chromo4, Bio-Rad) . ens the diagnostic perspectives of biobanks consisting of DBS allow- The significant positive correlations were found between the gesta- ing for CNV analysis in general and particularly testing for CAH . tional age and the relative mtDNA amount in fetal liver tissue (r = 0,56; This study is supported by the SAFE Network of Excellence p < 0,01) and mtDNA amount in fetal muscle tissue (r = 0,61; p < 0,01), respectively . P06.185 In both fetal liver and muscle tissue, mtDNA content per cell was in- is sNPs in MSX gene playing a role in the development of cleft creasing with onward fetal development . These results are in accor- palate (CP) or cleft lip/palate (CLP)? dance with the few of studies but there was never analysed as nu- B. Lace1, I. Vasiljeva2, I. Dundure1, B. Barkane3, I. Akota3, A. Krumina1; merous set of tissue samples as in our study . Presently we analyze a 1Dept. of Med.Biology and Genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Biomedical study and re- relation among changes of the mtDNA content during prenatal devel- search centre, Riga, Latvia, 3RSU, Institute of Stomatology, Riga, Latvia. opment and the transcription activation of some mtDNA maintenance MSX1 gene role in the development of cleft palate and cleft lip/palate factors (NRF1, TFAM) in the same set of tissue samples . and oligodontia has been confirmed in several studies. MSX1 (mem- This work was supported by grant GAUK 25755707, IGA MZ-NR ber of muscle segment homeobox gene family) gene expression is re- 9410,GACR 305 08 H037 . lated to transcription repression during embriogenesis and craniofacial development . P06.183 It was confirmed, that mutations in MSX1 gene approximately in 2% Duplication analysis of the DmD gene by mLPA technique can cause nonsyndromic CL/CLP . Results were replicated in studies J. Juan, M. Rodríguez, L. González-Quereda, L. Sedano, E. del Río, E. Tiz- involving different populations . zano, M. Baiget, P. Gallano; Objective of our study was to evaluate role of mutations and also SNPs Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. in MSX1 gene in Latvian nonsyndromic CP and CLP patients . Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are the Materials and methods . DNA from 101 persons with CP or CLP was most common form of dystrophinopathies, with a reported incidence of extracted from venous blood (CP- 21, CL/CLP-80) . Promoter region, 1:3500 and 1:18000 birth males, repectively . About 65% of DMD/BMD exons, introns boundaries and 3` UTR region were sequenced . cases are attributable to large deletions of the DMD gene, whereas the Results . One mutation 457G>C in exon 2 and 16 SNPs in MSX1 gene remaining cases are caused by duplications or point mutations of the was identified. Thirteen of them were described earlier and were com- gene . The exact frequency of these two last types of mutations is not monly met in Caucasian populations, three of them were not observed known . The detection of duplications in Duchenne (DMD)/ Becker mus- in previous studies . cular dystrophy (BMD) has long been overlooked . Recent techniques Interestingly two SNPs, who were localized in intron 1 451+(41-51)del such as multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) have and 3`UTR 3969 A>G showed higher frequencies in nonsyndromic simplified the detection of duplications. CLP patients (0 .41;0 .38 respectively) than in CP patients (0 .17;0 .14) . We report here 20 duplications recently detected in BMD/DMD unre- Conclusions . Considerable difference observed between SNPs in pa- lated patients using MLPA technique . Although the reading frame rule tients with CP and CLP, who had localised in the non-coding regions, could be applied in most patients, it was not applied in 2 DMD patients . raise suggestions about their possible role in the development of non- Special care was taken with one patient presenting non contiguous syndromic CLP . rearrangements: c.[2623_2950dup; 11047_11055del], a duplication of exons 21 and 22, and a deletion of exon 79 . The majority of the P06.186 duplications clustered towards 5’ end of the gene . Association of c677t and A1298c polymorphisms in the The availability of new quantitative methods including MLPA has methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (mtHFR) gene with cervical aroused interest in duplication detection analysis in DMD gene . The dysplasia in Yucatan, mexico MLPA technique enables us to test all the 79 exons, allowing the de- L. J. Gonzalez-Herrera1, P. Rodriguez-Morales1, V. Fernández-Gonzalez1, I. tection of a significant number of new duplications. We report the du- Rosado-Lopez2, T. Canto de Cetina1; plications in patients in whom a previous molecular screening did not 1Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan, Merida, Mexico, 2Clinica de displasias del show any deletion . Hospital O´Horán, Merida,Yucatan, Mexico. The influence of MTHFR activity on DNA methylation, synthesis and repair, presents MTHFR as a candidate cancer-predisposing gene .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Polymorphisms C677T and A1298C in MTHFR gene have been as- Turku, Turku, Finland, 11Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska In- sociated with a varying risk of cervical dysplasia . We evaluated the stitutet at Karolinska University Hospital-Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 12De- association of C677T and A1298C polymorphisms at the MTHFR partment of Neurology, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 13Institute of locus with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) or cervical cancer Immunology, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 14Department of (CC) in Yucatan, Mexico, where CC is the first most common cancer. Neurology, Faculty Division Ullevål University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, A case-control study was performed . Cases were 84 DNA samples of Norway, 15Department of Neurology, Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham women with CIN or CC (47 CIN I, 14 CIN II, 7 CIN III, 9 invasive cervix and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United cancer and 7 cervical cancer) and controls were 127 DNA samples of States, 16Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. women who were negative to PAP . Polymorphisms were determined MS is a chronic inflammatory disease of the CNS with complex inheri- by PCR-RFLPs . Allele and genotype frequencies were compared be- tance . The etiology of MS is poorly understood . Large case-control as- tween cases and controls in EpiInfo software (OR, IC 95%) . Genotype sociation studies primarily aim to identify common variants contributing frequencies in cases and controls were according to Hardy-Weinberg to pathogenesis of common traits . To tackle rare alleles contributing to expectations (p>0 .33) for both polymorphisms . For C677T-MTHFR the molecular background of MS, alternative strategies are needed . polymorphism, allele and genotype frequencies were not significantly One approach is to use special populations with a founder effect and different between cases and controls (p>0 .05), whereas for A1298C isolation, where one could hypothesize allelic enrichment . Such a polymorphism, frequency of allele C was significantly different be- unique high-risk region for MS is the Southern Ostrobothnia in Finland, tween cases and controls (P=0 .0325), suggesting an association of where both the prevalence and familial occurrence are exceptionally 1298C allele with a reduced risk to CIN or CC (OR 0 .51, IC 0 .25-0 .98) . high . We have performed a high-resolution genome-wide SNP study Stratification according to phenotype showed that heterozygous geno- using the Illumina HumanHap300 panel to monitor, which alleles are type AC and allele C were associated only with CIN I, p= 0 .023 and p= shared by 72 familial MS cases from this high-risk isolate . Genealogi- 0 .0180, respectively . Our results suggest that polymorphism A1298C cal studies showed that majority of these patients are distantly related . in MTHFR gene is associated to CIN I as a protective factor to develop Genotype data of 68 IBS-matched Finns was used as controls . We more severe dysplasias in Yucatan population . first focused on the 45Mb region on 5p, for which we have shown link- age in Finnish MS-families . The haplotype analysis over this region P06.187 revealed association with one haplotype, and the finding was validated mtHFR gene polymorphisms and neural tube defects - the in a larger study set from the high-risk region (OR 2 .73, p=3 .2x10-6) . incidence in slovak population. The identified risk-haplotype flanks two genes, C7 (complement com- J. Behunova1, L. Klimcakova2, D. Potocekova3, L. Podracka1; ponent) and FLJ40243 (predicted protein) . Suggestive association 1I. Department of Pediatrics, Safarik University Children Hospital, Kosice, Slo- with C7-FLJ40243 alleles and MS was also seen in more heteroge- vakia, 2Department of Medical Biology, Safarik University School of Medicine, neous populations . Interestingly, plasma C7 protein levels and total Kosice, Slovakia, 3Department of Informatics, Safarik University School of complement activity were observed to correlate with the risk-haplotype Medicine, Kosice, Slovakia. identified. Sequencing of the 31kb C7 region did not reveal an obvious Neural tube defects (NTD) belong to the most debilitating birth anoma- causative variant . Sequencing of FLJ40243 is in progress . lies . The geographical & historical differences in NTD incidence vary tremendously - from 8/1000 till 0,21/1000 . Discovery of folic acid´s pre- P06.189 ventive effect influenced the research of NTD genetic background fo- Genetic polymorphysms of iL12B and VDR in association with cusing to the genes whose products take part in the folate metabolism . multiple sclerosis in russians One of the most important enzymes involved is MTHFR - methylene- S. Babenko1, J. Orlova2, V. Alifirova2, V. Pusyrev1,2; tetrahydrofolate reductase whose common termolabile variant C677T 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State in homozygote state reduces MTHFR activity to 30-40% of norm . Low- Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. ered activity might play a crucial role in early embryonic development . We investigated genotypes and haplotypes frequencies for VDR and That is why this polymorphism has been investigated in various NTD IL12B polymorphisms in case-control studies of MS in 92 Russian populations and in some of them the mutant variant has been proven inhabitants of Tomsk region. Our results show significant differences to be a risk factor for failure of neural tube closure . of alleles and genotypes frequencies in the distribution of the poly- In Slovakia with average natality about 50 000 liveborn per year, there morphism 1188A>C IL12B between MS patients and controls (p<0 .01 are anually 10-20 children born with NTD (0,28/1000) - mostly with - for frequencies of alleles) . The CC genotype frequency was three meningomyelocele . When including stillborn and selective abortions, times higher in patients as compared to the controls (6 .7% and 2 .1%, the number of NTD pregnancies is even higher (0,35-0,52/1000) . To respectively, p<0 .01) . The allele C in MS patients was associated with evaluate genetic risk of folate metabolism variations in our population, shorter duration of the first remission (p = 0.04) which was 1.80±0.28 we investigated MTHFR gene polymorphisms C677T and A1298C in in those with the C allele and 3 .05±0 .56 in other patients . An associa- 91 Slovak children with NTD . The obtained results of genetic analyses tion of VDR T/t polymorphism with diseases were observed (p<0 .05) . are being compared with those from 300 newborns from Slovak popu- This marker was also associated with amount of eosinophils in MS pa- lation . Currently we got the results of C677T polymorphism analysis, tients (p<0 .05) . On examination of VDR haplotype, including a B/b, F/f which, however, did not show any significant difference in the preva- and T/t polymorphism, we reveal the difference between distribution lence of TT genotype or T allele between the patients and controls (OR in case and control (p=0 .03) . We demonstrate that the haplotype Bft = 1,22 [95% CI 0,5-2,9]; OR = 1,16 [CI 0,8-1,7] respectively) . significantly higher observed at MS patients and btT at healthy person (p<0 .05) . Received data allow suggests that the allele 1188*C of gene P06.188 IL12B and Bft haplotype of VDR gene could increase susceptibility to Use of a Genetic isolate to identify Rare ms Variants MS and have influence on clinical manifestation of diseases in Rus- S. P. Kallio1, E. Jakkula1,2, S. Purcell2,3, M. Suvela1, K. Koivisto4, P. J. Tienari5, sians . M. L. Sumelahti6, I. Elovaara7, T. Pirttilä8, M. Reunanen9, D. Bronnikov1, M. Viander10, J. Hillert11, F. Lundmark11, H. F. Harbo12, Å. R. Lorentzen13,14, P. L. De P06.190 Jager2,15, M. J. Daly2,3, D. A. Hafler2,15, A. Palotie1,2, L. Peltonen1,16, J. Saarela1; Association of ILRA/CD25 polymorphisms with susceptibility to 1National Public Health Institution, University of Helsinki and FIMM, Helsinki, multiple sclerosis Finland, 2The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United M. Fuencisla, M. Fedetz, D. Ndagire, A. Alcina; States, 3Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López Neyra, Armilla/Granada, Spain. and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Central Hospital of Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a prototypic idiopathic neurodegenerative Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland, 5Department of Neurology, University of Helsinki, disease of the central nervous system (CNS) whose primary mecha- Helsinki, Finland, 6School of Public Health, University of Tampere, Tampere, nism of injury is by inflammatory/autoimmune demyelination and, to Finland, 7Department of Neurology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, variable degree, axonal damage . As a complex disease both environ- Finland, 8Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Kuopio University Hospi- mental and genetic factors contribute to its pathogenesis . As part of an tal, Kuopio, Finland, 9Department of Neurology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, ongoing search for genes associated with MS we have tested the can- Finland, 10Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of didate gene IL2RA, which encodes the interleukin-2 receptor (IL2R)Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  alpha subunit of the high-affinity IL2R complex. Four polymorphisms P06.193 located in this gene that could be implicated in functional modifica- The role of the Protein Kinase C Alpha (PRKCA) gene in the tions of IL2RA activity were genotyped by PCR/RFLP in a case-control predisposition to multiple sclerosis in the italian population study . We found an association of the IL2RA4 T allele, located at the 3’ C. Dall’Osso1, G. Rizzo1, D. Gemmati2, P. Zamboni3, M. D. Benedetti4, A. Sal- untranslated region (3’-UTR) of the gene, with increased susceptibility viati4, P. Invernizzi4, S. Bonissoni5, L. Bergamaschi6, S. Duga1, M. L. Tenchini1, to MS (OR= 1 .24, 95% C .I . = 1 .01-1 .53, P = 0 .04) . The International R. Asselta1; Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium has also found an association 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, between MS and alleles of the IL2RA by a Genomewide Study . As- Italy, Milan, Italy, 2Center Hemostasis & Thrombosis, University of Ferrara, sociation of polymorphisms at the IL2RA in other diseasses of autoim- Ferrara, Italy, 3Vascular Diseases Center, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, mune origin such as type I diabetes (T1D) and Graves’ disease has 4Department of Neurological and Vision Sciences, Section of Clinical Neurol- also been reported . Functional studies will be required to uncover the ogy, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 5Department of Neurology, Ospedale causal SNPs and to determine what effects they have on the IL2RA Maggiore, Novara, Italy, 6Department of Medical Sciences and IRCAD, Eastern protein and its role in MS . Piedmont University, Novara, Italy. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic neurological disorder characterized P06.191 by multicentric inflammation, demyelination, and axonal damage. Association study of rs6897932 SNP in IL7Rα Gene with Multiple Besides the well-known HLA region, only 2 other loci (5p, 17q) have sclerosis in iranian population been so far linked and associated in at least 2 populations . The 17q M. Heidari1, M. Behmanesh1, M. Sahraiyan2; region showed the most significant association with the Protein Kinase 1Department of Genetics, School of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- C Alpha (PRKCA) gene in Finns; this association was replicated in sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Neurology, School of Canadian and UK populations, in which specific “risk haplotypes” were Medical Science, Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. identified. Moreover, PRKCA transcript levels were shown to be higher Multiple Sclerosis is an autoimmune, demyelinating disease with a in CD4- mononuclear cells of MS patients carrying the risk haplotypes, strong genetic component, affecting 1/1000 people; mostly young suggesting a contribution of PRKCA regulatory mechanisms in the adults; in western countries and about 35,000 in Iran . Previous genetic pathogenesis of MS . risk studies have failed to identify consistently linked genes outside of In this study, we analyzed the role of PRKCA in the predisposition to HLA on chromosome 6p . In recent studies allelic association of a poly- MS in a cohort of 294 Italian cases and in an equal number of age- and morphism in the gene encoding Interleukin 7 receptor α chain (IL7Rα) sex-matched controls . An association analysis was performed geno- reported as a significant risk factor in M.S. IL7Rα gene located on typing 3 STR and 12 SNP markers covering the whole gene . A weak 5p13, spans 8 exons and encodes IL7Rα protein on B and T lympho- association (P=0 .032) with the STR located in the PRKCA promoter cytes. Variable expression of IL7Rα splicing isoforms controls amount was found. This region was further analysed by sequencing the first of IL7 absorption. From 14 SNPs detected in IL7Rα gene, rs6897932 424 bp of the promoter and the entire exon 1 of the gene in all MS in exon 6 and rs987107in intron 6 seems to change the ratio of soluble cases and controls, but no genetic variants specific for MS cases were and transmembrain isoforms of receptor . In this study we investigate identified. Moreover, we identified a novel microRNA (hsa-mir-634) lo- the association of rs6897932 SNP by designed a Multiplex PCR in M .S cated in PRKCA intron 15, whose expression levels do not correlate patients and normal controls . with those of PRKCA . The potential role of hsa-mir-634 in the patho- genesis of MS is under investigation . P06.192 investigation of relationship between NDUFs1 gene and multiple P06.194 sclerosis Genome wide linkage scan for loci of musical aptitude in Finnish Z. Baratieh Najafabadi1,2, M. H. Sanati2, M. Houshmand3, M. Rezaei-Tavirani1; families: Evidence for a major locus at 4q22 1Cellular & Molecular Biology Depatment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic I. Järvelä1, K. Pulli1, K. Karma2, R. Norio3, P. Sistonen4, H. H. H. Göring5; Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Sibelius Academy, Helsinki, Finland, (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetic section, Special Medical 3The Family Welfare Federation, Helsinki, Finland, 4The Finnish Red Cross, Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Helsinki, Finland, 5Southwestern Foundation for Genetic Research, San Anto- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common inflammatory demyelin- nio, TX, United States. ation disease of the central nervous system . Preferential maternal Background: Music perception and performance are comprehensive transmission in familial cases and the occasional association of MS human cognitive functions and thus provide an excellent model sys- and LHON, suggests on involvement of mitochondrion (mtDNA, elec- tem for studying human behaviour and brain function . However, the tron transport chain enzymes) in the MS etiology . Besides, in recent molecules involved in mediating music perception and performance study, researchers found a relationship between biochemical defect in are so far uncharacterized . complex I enzyme activity and pathogenesis of MS . Objective and methods: We have applied molecular and statistical Complex I is the largest complex of mitochondrial respiratory chain genetic approaches to unravel the biological background of music that contains 43 subunits . Thirty six subunits being encoded by nuclear perception . We recruited 15 Finnish multigenerational families (with a and 7 subunits being encoded by mitochondrial DNA . As mutations in total of 234 family members) via a nationwide search and defined the NDUFS1 gene were reported previously in patients afflicted by com- phenotype of all family members using three tests used in defining mu- plex I deficiency and also biochemical defect in complex I enzyme sical aptitude: a test for auditory structuring ability (Karma Music test; was found in Iranian MS patients, we encouraged to study relation- KMT) commonly used in Finland, and the Seashore pitch and time ship between NDUFS1 gene and MS disease in Iranian MS patients . discrimination subtests (SP and ST respectively) used internationally . This gene is a nuclear gene encoding catalytic subunit of complex I We calculated heritabilities and performed a genome wide variance enzyme . So we analyzed four exons of NDUFS1 gene (8, 9, 15 & components-based linkage scan using genotype data for 1000 micro- 19) that some mutations are identified in patients with complex I de- satellite markers . ficiency. We amplified these exons by PCR and screened them for Results: The heritability estimates were 42% for KMT, 57% for SP, finding any variations by SSCP method. Suspicious samples for muta- 21% for ST and 48% for the combined music test scores. Signifi- tion were sequenced. Finally, in our samples, we could not find any cant evidence of linkage was obtained on chromosome 4q22 (LOD variation in these regions of NDUFS1 gene . To identify the relation 3 .33) and suggestive evidence of linkage at 8q13-21 (LOD 2 .29) with between NDUFS1 gene and complex I with MS disease, further ana- the combined music test scores using variance component (VC) link- lyzes should be done on other exons of this gene and also other genes age analyses . The major contribution for the 4q22 locus was obtained of complex I subunits . with KMT (LOD 2 .91) . Interestingly, a positive LOD score of 1 .69 was shown at 18q, a region previously linked to dyslexia (DYX6), using combined music test scores. Conclusion: Our results show that there is a genetic contribution to musical aptitude that is likely to be regu- lated by several predisposing genes/variants .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.195 University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 14The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Blind assessment of High Resolution DNA melting Analysis as a Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA, United States, 15Wellcome Trust Sanger tool for mutation screening Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. S. Dwyer, N. M. Williams, N. Norton, M. J. Owen, M. C. O’Donovan; Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex disease manifesting as a chronic Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. inflammation in the central nervous system. It is also commonly classi- High resolution DNA melting analysis can be used to identify DNA fied as an autoimmune disease (AID) and typical of many AIDs shows variants in PCR amplimeres . Using a LightScannerTM (Idaho Technolo- strong linkage and association to the HLA locus . In addition to HLA, gies) we have developed a single analysis protocol that allows the AIDs are likely to share also other genetic risk factors . Recently, SNPs efficient screening of all PCR amplimeres by high resolution DNA melt- in the 3’ region of the MYO9B gene have been reported to associate ing analysis to detect unknown DNA variants . In a blind assessment with celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis of our protocol we screened 14 different amplimeres in 14 individuals and systemic lupus erythematosus . The myosin IXB protein is an un- and identified 23/23 sequence variants, distinguishing 100% of those conventional myosin with a Rho-GTPase activity . It is involved in actin where an individual was heterozygous for at least one site but only cytoskeleton remodeling and is thereby a potential regulator of tight 57% of those individuals who were homozygous for a variant . In a junctions and epithelial and endothelial permeability . High expression direct comparison, analysis using the Wave® DHPLC system distin- in leukocytes also suggests an immunological function . We tested the guished 96% of the heterozygous sequence changes and only 14% association of MYO9B variants with MS in four Northern European of the amplimeres that differed by a homozygous sequence change . populations . Family-based association analyses (TDT, Gamete com- Our data suggests that high resolution DNA melting analysis using the petition) using 18 SNPs covering MYO9B in 730 Finnish MS families LightScannerTM can be a highly sensitive mutation detection, which showed no evidence for association . In order to increase the power to because of its low cost and high speed could potentially allow more detect variants with smaller effect size we further genotyped 11 SNPs, comprehensive re-sequencing analysis of candidate genes . 2 of which have previously shown association to other autoimmune diseases, in a set of 2511 MS patients and 2801 population controls P06.196 from Finland, Denmark, Norway and Sweden . However, no associa- inter-laboratory diagnostic validation of conformation sensitive tion was observed in the case-control analysis, nor when stratifying for capillary Electrophoresis. the previously identified genetic MS risk factors at HLA and PRKCA C. J. Mattocks1, G. Watkins1, T. Janssens2, G. Matthijs2, E. Bosgoed3, K. van loci . Our results thereby do not support a major role for MYO9B vari- der Donk3, H. Scheffer3, B. Pot4, J. Theelen5, T. Aspholm6, N. C. P. Cross1; ants in multiple sclerosis . 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2Center for Human Genetics (EuroGentest), Leuven, Belgium, 3Dept. Human P06.198 Genetics, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Applied Maths, Functional analysis of missense mutations in the myocyte Gent, Belgium, 5Applied Biosystems, Europe, The Netherlands, 6Applied Bio- Enhancer Factor 2A (mEF2A) gene do not support their causal systems, Europe, Norway. role in the pathogenesis of myocardial infarction Much of the work in diagnostic laboratories involves scanning for un- I. Guella1, V. Rimoldi1, P. A. Merlini2, R. Asselta1, E. M. Paraboschi1, M. Franco- known mutations in particular regions of interest . Whilst this work can lini3, F. Peyvandi4, D. Ardissino5, P. M. Mannucci4, S. Duga1; be done by sequencing, it is often faster and more economic to use an 1Dept. of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, indirect pre-screen to identify fragments containing variations . Such Italy, 2Niguarda Ca’ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Dept. of Medical Pharmacol- methods need stringent validation to ensure diagnostic accuracy . ogy, University of Milan, Institute of Neuroscience - CNR - Cell. Mol. Pharma- Conformation Sensitive Capillary Electrophoresis (CSCE) is a rapid cology Section, Milan, Italy, 4A. Bianchi Bonomi, Hemophilia and Thrombosis and sensitive method for indirect mutation scanning based on the prin- Center, University of Milan and Dept. of Medicine and Medical Specialties, ciple that homoduplex and heteroduplex DNA have different mobilities IRCCS Maggiore Hospital, Mangiagalli and Regina Elena Foundation, Milan, when subjected to electrophoresis . We have performed a two phase Italy, 5Maggiore Hospital, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. diagnostic validation of this method across three laboratories . Phase Coronary artery disease (CAD) and its most severe complication I was used to define the performance characteristics of CSCE over a myocardial infarction (MI), are the leading causes of death in Western range of critical parameters including the nature of the mutation, frag- countries . Mutations in the MEF2A gene, a member of the myocyte en- ment length and base composition, as well as a range of electrophore- hancer factor-2 (MEF2) family of MADS-box transcription factors, have sis variables . Phase II comprised a blinded and randomised investiga- been reported in patients with CAD/MI . In particular, a 21-bp deletion tion of >400 different BRCA1 and BRCA2 variations to determine the and 3 missense mutations were demonstrated to affect MEF2A activity diagnostic accuracy of both CSCE itself and a Bionumerics software either by reducing its transcriptional activity or by impairing its nuclear plug-in used for the automated interpretation of heteroduplex patterns . translocation . However, the association of MEF2A with CAD/MI was We will report the findings of these studies and discuss their general not confirmed by other studies. applicability to diagnostic mutation scanning using CSCE . In this work, we analyzed the role of MEF2A in the pathogenesis of MI in a large cohort (1785 males, 223 females) of Italian patients with P06.197 premature MI (<45 y) and in an equal number of age- and sex-matched mYO9B polymorphisms in multiple sclerosis controls . A. Kemppinen1, M. Suvela1, P. Tienari2, M. Sumelahti3, I. Elovaara4, K. Firstly, the 21-bp-del was searched in the whole study cohort: it was Koivisto5, T. Pirttilä6, M. Reunanen7, P. Baumann8, J. Hillert9, F. Lundmark9, A. found in 5 cases and was absent in controls (P=0 .027) . Mutational Oturai10, L. Ryder11, H. Harbo12,13, E. Celius13, A. Palotie14,15, M. Daly14, L. Pel- screening of exon 8 (containing all known mutations) was performed in tonen1,15, J. Saarela1; all 4016 individuals by DNA sequencing: 5 novel and 2 previously re- 1National Public Health Institute, University of Helsinki and FIMM, Institute ported missense mutations were found. All identified mutations, either for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Neurology, new or previously reported, were then functionally characterized by Helsinki University Central Hospital and Neuroscience Programme, University in-vitro expression in HeLa cells . Functional studies evidenced neither of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3School of Public Health, University of Tampere, alterations in the transactivating properties (all mutants) nor defects in Tampere, Finland, 4Department of Neurology, Tampere University Hospital, the nuclear localization (21-bp-del) . An association analysis performed Tampere, Finland, 5Central Hospital of Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland, 6Depart- on 3 STRs at the MEF2A locus showed no significant association with ment of Neurology and Neuroscience, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, premature MI. These data do not confirm the role of genetic variations Finland, 7Department Neurology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, in the MEF2A gene in the pathogenesis of MI . 8Department of Neurology, Lapland Central Hospital, Rovaniemi, Finland, 9Divi- sion of Neurology, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet P06.199 at Karolinska University Hospital–Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 10Danish Identification of a novel locus for shortsightedness (myopia) on Multiple Sclerosis Research Centre, Department of Neurology, Copenhagen chromosome 2q37 in three multigenerational Australian families University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 11Department of Clinical Immunolo- M. Schache1,2, C. Y. Chen1,2, K. K. Pertile1,2, P. Garoufalis1,2, M. Dirani1,2, A. J. gy, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 12Institute of Im- Richardson1,2, P. N. Baird1,3; munology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 13Department of Neurology, Ullevål 1Centre for Eye Research Australia, East Melbourne, Australia, 2Vision Co-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  operative Research Centre, Sydney, Australia, 3Vision Cooperative Research insufficiency which lead to renal failure at the age of 13 years. Her Centre, Syndey, Australia. father with NPS suffers only under mild proteinuria at the of 70 years . Myopia (short sightedness) is a complex trait influenced by both ge- All 8 exons of the LMX1B gene were amplified by polymerase chain netic and environmental factors. To date, fifteen myopia susceptibility reaction with described primers and then sequenced on an automatic loci (MYP1-15) have been identified but no definitive gene pinpointed. fluorescent sequencer. This study reports the identification of a novel locus for myopia located The missense mutation in exon 4 (c .599 G>A, p .Arg200Gln) of the on chromosome 2q37 adjacent to, but not overlapping, MYP12 . Three homeodomain of the LMX1B gene was detected . This mutation was large multigenerational families with autosomal dominant myopia were detected in the examined patient with renal failure as well as in her fa- recruited into this study . These families consist of 49 participants (35 ther with mild renal involvement . This missense mutation was already affected) each of which has undergone a comprehensive ophthalmic described in more families with NPS but only in individuals without pro- examination . Individuals with other eye diseases that may affect vision teinuria . The patient is nowadays dependent on peritoneal dialysis . such as glaucoma and keratoconus have been excluded . A genome- To conclude, we describe a case of NPS with severe renal involve- wide scan was performed using 400 microsatellite markers spaced an ment . average of 10 cM apart . Using MERLIN, a multipoint parametric LOD Supported by project VZMSMT 0021620806 score of 2 .37 was calculated on chromosome 2q37 . This LOD score increased to 3 .43 with nonparametric analysis . The 1 LOD support in- P06.202 terval initially suggested that this region may overlap with a known serum levels of some igG and igm type natural autoantibodies myopia susceptibility locus, MYP12. However, further fine mapping are differently regulated in carriers and non-carriers of HLA- and haplotype analysis narrowed down the critical region to a 0 .8cM DR16 region that no longer overlaps MYP12 . Hence, a novel locus for myo- G. Füst1, É. Pozsonyi2, B. György3, T. Berki4, Z. Bánlaki1, E. Buzás3, K. Rajczy2, pia was identified on chromosome 2q37 between markers D2S1397 Z. Prohászka1, Á. Szilágyi1; and D2S2968 . Sequencing of all known and hypothetical genes in the 13rd Dept Intern Med, Budapest, Hungary, 2National Blood Transfusion Service, region is underway in order to identify DNA sequence variants associ- Budapest, Hungary, 3Institute of Genetics, Immunobiology and Cell Biology, ated with myopia . Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 4Department of Immunology and Biotechnology, Pécs University, Pécs, Hungary. P06.200 Natural autoantibodies (IgM or IgG type autoantibodies (Abs) pres- Rapid Analysis of myotonic Dystrophy 1 using Quantitative ent in the sera of most healthy individuals) are most important par- Fluorescent and Long PcR ticipants of the immune response . Little is known, however, on the M. Skrzypczak, S. Schinkel, A. Gross, U. G. Froster; genetic regulation of their plasma levels in human beings . Therefore Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. we determined the concentrations of the IgM and IgG type antibodies Diagnostics of myotonic dystrophy 1 (DM1) are based on the identifi- against certain conserved self antigens (60 kD heat shock proteins cation and determination of CTG repeat expansion in the DMPK-gene . (hsp60), citrate synthase (CITS) , and chondroitine sulphate (CONS) This is usually done by Southern blot analysis - a time consuming and in the sera of 78 healthy individuals out of a family study with known very laborious technique requiring high molecular weight DNA . Our alleles of several polymorphisms in the class I, class III and class II study aimed at developing a highly sensitive, rapid and economical regions of main histocompatibility complex (MHC, HLA in humans) . We molecular analysis characterizing the CTG repeat region of DMPK- found significantly lower serum levels of the IgM type CITS (p=0.029) gene based on a two step PCR protocol . Therefore we analyzed 105 and COTS (p=0 .026) Abs in the carriers than non-carriers of the HLA- patients with the clinical diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy 1 derived DR16 allele . Even stronger differences were found when levels of two from the DNA bank of the Institute of Human Genetics, University of Abs were considered. Frequency of the DR16 alleles were significantly Leipzig (Germany) who had already been tested by Southern blot higher in subjects with 1 or 2 low (in the lowest quartile) CITS/COTS analysis . 60 patients had one normal and one mutated allele of up to Abs (p=0 .002), CITS-hsp60 Abs (p=0 .001) and COTS/hsp60 Abs 2700 CTG repeats . 12 probands were homozygous for normal CTG (p=0 .003) as compared to those with normal Ab titers for both anti- repeat length . In the remainder (33 patients) two different normal al- gens . Abs against these antigens exhibited strong positive correlation leles of up to 37 CTG repeats were present . Firstly, for the detection of (p=0 .01) By contrast, concentrations of IgG type anti-hsp60 Abs was alleles of up to 100 repeats quantitative fluorescent (QF) amplification siginificantly higher (P=0.008) in the carriers than non-carriers of the with primers flanking the repeat region and 2 reference genes for stan- HLA-DR16 allele . Similar differences were found when carriers and dardization were used . With these methods it was possible to identify non-carriers of the HLA-DR16-DQ5 haplotype were considered . These both homozygous and heterozygous DM1 alleles . Secondly, long PCR novel observations indicate that not only induced, acquired but natural, was just performed if a single wild type allele was detected by giving a inborn immune resoponse as well is regulated by the MHC . QF-PCR-signal only half as intense . The results of using QF and long PCR indicate high accuracy in comparison to Southern blot analysis . P06.203 We conclude that our new rapid analysis is reliable for genetic testing cytokine (tNF-alpha, tGF-beta1, iL-10, iFN-gamma, iL-6) of DM1 patients . genotyping in turkish children with nephrotic syndrome: A brief report P06.201 S. Pehlivan1, K. Ozdilli2, T. Sever1, Y. Duvarcı3, M. Buyukcelik4, F. Savran- A case of nail patella syndrome with severe renal involvement in Oguz3, S. Oguzkan Balci1, M. Carin3, A. Balat4; two sisters 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, J. Reiterová1, J. Štekrová2, M. Urbanová2, M. Merta1; Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Halıc University, Institute of Health Science, Istanbul, Tur- 1Department of Nephrology, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and key, 3Istanbul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. Istanbul, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Nail-patella syndrome (NPS) is characterized by developmental de- Pediatric Nephrology, Gaziantep, Turkey. fects of dorsal limb structures, nephropathy, normal tension glaucoma Considering the recognized influence of cytokines in nephrotic syn- and sensorineural hearing impairment . NPS is a rare disorder with au- drome (NS) development, the aim of this study was to investigate tosomal dominant mode of inheritance and is caused by heterozygous whether this disease may be associated with polymorphisms of the mutations in the transcription factor LMX1B . Proteinuria was described IL-6, IL-10, IFN-gamma, TGF-beta1 and TNF-alpha genes . in 21% of individuals with NPS . Nevertheless, renal failure in a rare Forty-six children with NS, and 46 age-and sex-matched healthy con- event . trols were tested for 8 polymorphisms in 5 different genes . DNA was A 38-year-old woman was admitted to our nephrology unit because of extracted from whole blood by standard salting out method . Cytokine severe nephrotic syndrome . The diagnosis of NPS was established genotyping was performed by polymerase chain reaction sequence- because of fingernail dysplasia, hypoplastic patellae, iliac horns and specific primer methods. The polymorphisms analyzed in the present dislocation of the radial head . She underwent renal biopsy with the study were IL-6 (-174 G/C), IL-10 (-1082 A/G, -819 T/C, -592 C/A), finding of proliferative glomerulonephritis at the age of 7 years. Her IFN-gamma (+874 A/T), TGF-beta1 (+10 T/C; +25 C/G) and TNF-al- sister with NPS suffered under severe nephrotic syndrome and renal pha (-308 G/A) .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  The distribution of genotypes and allele frequencies were compared intrinsic factor-vitamin B complexes . Vitamin B is an important co- 12 12 with the groups. No statistically significant differences were observed factor in the folate metabolism and low B status in mothers has been 12 in allele distribution comparing NS and healthy groups (P>0,05) . The linked to neural tube defects in the offspring. Other interesting findings haplotypes of IL-10 and TGF-beta1 were compared in terms of their include nominal significant associations with polymorphisms in TRD- expressions and it was shown that the GCC GCC haplotypes of IL-10 MT1, ALDH1L1, SARDH, and SLCA19A1 (RFC1) . Our study points had significantly decreased in the NS whereas there were no statisti- out interesting new candidate genes and functional pathways for fur- caly significant differences in the haplotypes of TGF-beta1. The ob- ther study, and confirms earlier findings. Neither of the genes CUBN, served genotype counts were not deviated significantly from those ex- TRDMT1, ALDH1L1 or SARDH have been investigated for association pected according to the Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium (P>0,05) except with spina bifida, before. for IL-10 -1082 A/G polymorphism (P=0,048) . We conclude that GCC GCC haplotypes of IL-10 gene polymorphisms P06.206 (-1082 A/G, -819 T/C, -592 C/A) have been associated with NS in Turk- investigation of the putative functional effect of the 19bp ish children . However, further studies with larger samples are needed Deletion polymorphism within intron 1 of the Dihydrofolate to address the exact role of IL-10 in childhood NS . Reductase (DHFR) gene A. Magee, K. O’Brien, A. G. Parle-McDermott; P06.204 Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland. The C677T/A1298C Genotypes of MTHFR gene and Neural tube DHFR is an important folate metabolising enzyme that catalyses the Defects In Kazakhs conversion of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate . Folate genes are con- Z. S. Makhmutova, G. S. Svyatova; sidered candidates for association with neural tube defects (NTDs) The Scientific center of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakh- such as spina bifida due to the preventative effect of periconceptional stan. maternal supplementation with folic acid . Investigation of an intronic This study determined the frequencies of MTHFR genotypes for 30 19bp deletion polymorphism within the DHFR gene found a significant NTD cases, 84 their mothers and 150 unrelated healthy Kazakh adults protective effect in mothers of NTD cases when present in one (Rela- for controls . The frequencies of combined C677T/A1298C genotypes tive Risk 0 .59 (95%CI: 0 .39-0 .89), p= 0 .01) or two copies (Relative among NTD cases were: CCaa - 6,7%, CCac - 6,7%, CCcc - 6,7%, Risk 0 .52 (95%CI: 0 .32-0 .86), p= 0 .01) . Analysis of mRNA levels re- CTaa - 10%, CTac - 46,7%, CTcc - 10%, TTaa - 10%, TTac - 3,3% . vealed a small increase in expression (~1 .5 fold) associated with the The frequencies of MTHFR genotypes among controls were: CCaa 19bp intronic deletion polymorphism, but this was not significant (Par- - 27,3%, CCac - 22%, CCcc - 7,3%, CTaa - 29,3%, CTac - 12%, CTcc le-McDermott et al ., Am J Med Genet 143(11): 1174-1180 (2007)) . - 0,7% , TTaa - 1,3% . Thus, the frequencies of CTac, CTcc, TTaa, TTac We sought to further investigate the potential impact of the DHFR 19bp genotypes were higher than the frequencies of this genotypes in a intronic deletion polymorphism on gene expression by employing a controls (p<0,05) . The frequencies of MTHFR genotypes among the recombinant dual luciferase system in HEK293 cells . The results of mothers of cases were: CCaa - 20,2%, CCac - 20,2%, CCcc - 8,3%, these experiments showed that the 19bp deletion showed a modest in- CTaa - 17,9%, CTac - 19%, CTcc - 6%, TTaa - 7,1%, TTac - 1,2% . crease in reporter gene expression in agreement with the mRNA data . The frequencies of this genotypes among controls were: CCaa - 28%, It is proposed that the sequence of the 19bp deletion harbours an Sp2 CCac - 21%, CCcc- 6%, CTaa - 30%, CTac - 13%, CTcc- 1% , TTaa binding site that acts as a repressor of transcription . Mobility shift as- - 1% . Mothers of Kazakh NTD cases were homozygous for the C677T says are being employed to directly test whether this polymorphism mutations at a higher rate than their respective controls (p<0,05) . In results in loss of an Sp2 binding site . summary, our study provides evidence that maternal C677T MTHFR homozygosity and CTac, CTcc, TTaa, TTac genotypes at the fetuses P06.207 are a risk factor for NTD in Kazakh . The frequencies of TTaa and TTac mutations of MFSD is a common cause of variant late-infantile genotypes were higher at the cases of high-level defects . The frequen- neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis cies of CTac and CTcc genotypes were higher at the low level defects M. Kousi1,2,3, E. Siintola1,2,3, L. Dvoráková4, H. Vlaskova4, M. Topcu5, D. Yuksel6, of spine . B. Minassian7, M. Elleder4, S. E. Mole8, A. E. Lehesjoki1,2; 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience Center, P06.205 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Medical Genetics, An association study of 45 folate related genes in spina University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disor- bifida: involvement of Cubilin (CUBN) and tRNA aspartic acid ders, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Pediatrics, methyltransferase  (TRDMT) Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Section of Child Neurology, Ankara, B. Franke1, S. H. H. M. Vermeulen2, R. P. M. Steegers-Theunissen3, M. J. Turkey, 6Dr. Sami Ulus Children’s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 7Genetics and Coenen1, M. M. V. A. Schijvenaars1, H. Scheffer1, M. den Heijer2, H. J. Blom4; Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8MRC Labo- 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen- ratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, United tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Endocrinology, Department Kingdom. of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), characterized by the accu- Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Division of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medi- mulation of autofluorescent storage material mainly in neurons, are the cine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus University Medical most common neurodegenerative disorders of childhood . Six genes Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical (PPT1/CLN1, TPP1/CLN2, CLN5, CLN6, MFSD8/CLN7, and CLN8) Chemistry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. underlying late-infantile onset NCL forms (LINCLs) have been identi- Spina bifida belongs to the neural tube defects, which are congeni- fied so far. We analyzed the recently reported MFSD8 gene for muta- tal malformations of the central nervous system with a prevalence of tions in 79 patients, most of which had a clinical diagnosis of variant 0 .5 to 12 per 1000 births around the world . In this study we aimed LINCL (vLINCL) . Eight novel MFSD8 mutations, including three mis- at identifying genes related to folate and its metabolic pathways that sense, one nonsense, two splice-site, one deletion and one deletion/ are involved in the aetiology of spina bifida. We selected 50 folate insertion mutation were identified in patients of various ethnic origins. metabolism related genes and genotyped polymorphisms in those . Among them, a significant group of Roma Gypsy patients originating Eighty-seven polymorphisms in 45 genes passed quality controls . As- from the Czech Republic were shown to bear a mutation in MFSD8, sociations of those polymorphisms with spina bifida were investigated possibly due to a founder effect . In one patient with a deletion/insertion in a sample of 180 patients and 190 controls . The relation between mutation resulting in an in-frame amino acid substitution, the disease polymorphisms that were associated with spina bifida risk and serum onset was later and the disease course less aggressive than in vLIN- and red cell folate, vitamin B , and homocysteine levels was evalu- CL. Our findings raise the total number of MFSD8 mutations to 14, with 12 ated in the controls . A polymorphism in CUBN was significantly associ- the identified mutations evenly spaced within the gene and with the ated with spina bifida after correction for multiple testing and was re- majority of families having private mutations. Our study confirms that lated to increased vitamin B (P=0 .039) and red cell folate (P=0 .001) . MFSD8 defects are not restricted to the Turkish population, as initially 12 The CUBN gene encodes the intrinsic factor-cobalamin receptor (or anticipated, but are a relatively common cause of vLINCL in different Cubilin), a peripheral membrane protein which acts as a receptor for populations . MFSD8 should be considered a diagnostic alternative inMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  vLINCL but also in NCL patients with later onset and a more protracted P06.210 disease course . Pilot study on NHiL in a population of Portuguese noise- exposed workers P06.208 N. Correia1, A. Turkman2, M. Antunes2, V. Andreozzi2, H. Caria1,3, G. Fialho1; Linkage analysis in 238 ADHD-families identifies genome-wide 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Por- significant signals on chromosomes 2q21.1 and 13q12.11 for tugal, 2Department of Statistics and Operational Research, Faculty of Science, neuropsychological measures Lisbon, Portugal, 3College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, N. N. J. Rommelse1, A. Arias-Vásquez2, M. E. Altink3, C. J. M. Buschgens3, Setúbal, Portugal. E. Fliers3, S. V. Faraone4, J. K. Buitelaar3, J. A. Sergeant1, J. Oosterlaan1, B. Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) is one of the most important oc- Franke5; cupational diseases and, after presbyascusis, the second most com- 1Department of Clinical Neuropsychology, VU University, Amsterdam, The mon form of sensorineural hearing loss . NIHL is a complex disorder, Netherlands, 2Departments of Psychiatry, Human Genetics and Epidemiology & caused by an interaction between environmental and genetic factors . Biostatistics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, In contrast to the considerable amount of knowledge on environmental 3Departments of Psychiatry, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, factors, almost nothing is currently known about the genetic basis of The Netherlands, 4Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience & Physiology, NIHL . SUNY Upstate Medical University, New York, NY, United States, 5Departments In humans, a few studies have been performed aiming at identifying an of Psychiatry and Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme- association between variants of relevant genes expressed in the inner gen, The Netherlands. ear and NIHL. Significant differences were recently detected between ADHD linkage studies have not revealed consistent findings, suggest- noise susceptible and noise resistant subjects for some variants of ing alternative approaches to find genes involved in this disease. En- genes CDH23 and KCNE1 . dophenotypes, defined as heritable, continuously distributed traits that In the pilot study here reported, we have analyzed a population of increase the risk for ADHD, may be more suitable for linkage analysis: Portuguese noise-exposed workers . KCNE1 and CDH23 genes had Endophenotypes seem less genetically complex than clinical disease been selected for genotyping of some SNPs, preferentially in coding phenotypes . Moreover, they are often quantitative traits rather than regions, in order to be able to detect significant differences between dichotomous entities (like DSM diagnostic categories), hence the noise susceptible and noise resistant individuals . more powerful Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) linkage analysis may be When individually analysed, significant statistic differences were found applied . Genome-wide linkage analysis was performed in the Dutch in three SNPs of exon 50 of CDH23 gene: rs4747193 (intronic SNP); subsample of the International Multi-centre ADHD Genetics (IMAGE) rs4747194 and rs4747195 (nonsynonymous SNPs) . However, it was study encompassing 238 DSM-IV combined type ADHD probands and not possible to identify a clear genetic association, when performing their 112 affected and 195 non-affected siblings . Ten neuropsycho- bivariate or multivariate analysis . logical measures (cognitive and motor measures) previously shown The lack of strong association between the variants considered in this to be candidate ADHD endophenotypes were used as quantitative study and NIHL can indicate that none of these polymorphisms has traits . In addition, an overall component score of neuropsychological influence in the susceptibility to NIHL in the Portuguese population, or functioning was used, on which all ten individual measures related . A that their effect could not be detected in our sample due to its small total number of 5,407 autosomal SNPs were used to run a multipoint dimension . regression-based linkage analysis. Two genome-wide significant link- age peaks were found, one for Motor Timing on chromosome 2q21 .1 P06.211 (LOD score: 3 .944) and one for Digit Span on 13q12 .11 (LOD score: Lack of important association between ND gene mutations and 3.959). Eleven suggestive linkage peaks were found (LOD scores ≥ 2) the risk of progression Norrie disease on chromosomes 2p, 2q, 3p, 4q, 8q, 9p, 12p, 12q, 14q, 17q . The sug- G. Modabber1,2, F. Hafez Khiabani2, R. Kharkhane2, M. Riazi Esfehani2, M. Nili gestive linkage signal of the component score at 2q14 .3 (LOD score: Ahmadabadim2, M. Hoshmand1; 2 .878) overlapped with the region linking to Motor Timing . In conclu- 1National Institue of Genetic Engineering and Biotchnology, Tehran, Islamic sion, our results suggest that neuropsychological candidate ADHD-en- Republic of Iran, 2Faraby Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dophenotypes may aid in the discovery of novel ADHD genes through Background: Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a retinal vascular linkage analysis disease which occurs in premature neonates with low birth weight and may lead to retinal detachment and blindness . Mutations in the Norrie P06.209 disease (ND) gene have been reported as a risk factor of progression NFAtc4 gene polymorphism and aerobic performance in to advance stages in cases of ROP . We wanted to determine if any athletes mutation in ND gene may play a role in progression of ROP to advance D. V. Popov1, I. I. Ahmetov2, J. V. Shikhova2, S. S. Missina1, O. L. Vinogra- stages in Iranian infants . dova1, V. A. Rogozkin2; Methods: Fifty Iranian premature neonates with ROP stage 3 and or 1SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., Moscow, worse have enrolled in the study . After polymerase chain reaction Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St (PCR) with three primer pairs and direct sequencing and all three ex- Petersburg, Russian Federation. ons and their flanking areas and all known ND gene mutation regions Nuclear factor of activated T cells C4 gene (NFATC4) encodes transcrip- were evaluated for any mutation . tion factor which regulates cardiac and skeletal muscle metabolism . Results: A C15078A heterozygote mutation was found in the second The aim of the study was to investigate allelic distribution of NFATC4 intron of 90% of the cases but it has no effect on the structure or the gene Gly160Ala polymorphism in endurance-oriented athletes (n=549) production rate of the norrin protein, the product of ND gene . No other and controls (n=1057), and to find interrelation between genotypes and mutations causing changes in norrin protein were found . physiological parameters in rowers (n=90) . Genotyping was performed Conclusions: Our findings from this case series suggest lack of impor- by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis . Physiological tant association between ND gene mutations and the risk of progres- parameters were evaluated by PM 3 Rower Ergometer and MetaMax sion of the disease to advanced stages in patients with ROP . 3B Gas Analyzer. The frequency of NFATC4 Gly allele was significantly higher in athletes than in controls (51 .5% vs . 43 .7%; p<0 .0001), and P06.212 increased with the growth of skills (sub-elite athletes: 36 .7%-48 .5%; the interaction between gene polymorphisms and carbohydrate highly elite athletes: 60 .6%-62 .5%) . Furthermore, NFATC4 Gly allele intake on metabolic profile in Russian athletes was associated with high values of aerobic performance (when VO- A. A. Topanova, I. I. Ahmetov, R. R. Dondukovskaya, N. D. Golberg; 2max and AT in % of VO2max were measured) . Thus, NFATC4 gene St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Gly160Ala polymorphism is associated with aerobic performance of Federation. athletes and plays an important role in sports selection . Genetic and nutritional factors interact together and modulate the plas- ma carbohydrate and lipid profile. The objective was to study whether carbohydrate intake modulates the association between NFATC4, PG- C1A, PPARA, PPARG, PPARD, TFAM, UCP2 and UCP3 gene varia-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  tions and metabolic profile in Russian athletes. The study involved 33 (56,29±11,67 years old). 5HTTVNTR was amplified by PCR and hap- male Russian sub-elite endurance-oriented athletes (road cyclists), toglobin phenotype by PAGE . who were randomly assigned to consume carbohydrates/minerals Results: Women caring allele 1 of Hp showed a higher risk for obesity (CARB, n=17; 6% 200 ml drink “Olympia” (Estonia)) or placebo (CON, (OR=2,270; IC 95% [1,011-5,098]; p<0,05) and the same was verified n=16; 200 ml pure water) for 20 d at 20th min from the end of evening for allele 12 of 5HTTVNTR (OR=2,148; IC 95% [1,071-4,311]; p<0,05) . training . Plasma concentrations of total cholesterol, glucose and rest- The risk increases when these two alleles are associated (OR=3,659; ing lactate (La) were evaluated in the morning before and at the end IC 95% [1,426-9,390]; p<0,01) . of experiment . NFATC4 Ala160Gly, PGC1A Gly482Ser, PPARA G/C, Conclusion: An association between allele 1 of haptoglobin and allele PPARG Pro12Ala, PPARD +294T/C, TFAM Thr12Ser, UCP2 Ala55Val, 12 of 5HTTVNTR increases the predisposition for obesity . The fact that UCP3 -55C/T gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-RLFP . obese individuals show a higher risk for allergic diseases has been At base-line PPARA C allele carriers exhibited the highest values of associated with a predominant Th2 response . It is in concordance with La (P=0 .008); NFATC4 Ala (P=0 .04) and TFAM Ser (P=0 .024) alleles our results as both polymorphisms seem to change Th1/Th2 balance were associated with higher glucose concentrations . At the end of ex- for a predominant humeral immunity . periment PGC1A Ser (r=0 .54, P=0 .03), PPARG Pro (r=0 .58, P=0 .019) alleles were positively correlated with high values of La in CARB- and P06.215 CON-groups, respectively, whilst PPARD C allele (r=0 .47, P=0 .055) Association study of genetic polymorphisms in was associated with higher total cholesterol levels in CARB-group . immunoresponse genes (ILb, ILRN, TNFA, LTA, IL, IL0) in Furthermore, PPARG Pro allele carriers of CARB-group showed the occupational chronic bronchitis greatest decrease in total cholesterol . Thus, polymorphisms of PG- L. Akhmadishina1, G. Korytina1, O. Tselousova1, K. Danilko2, T. Victorova1,2; C1A, PPARG and PPARD genes (involved in carbohydrate and lipid 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir metabolism) may interact with carbohydrate intake to modulate meta- State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. bolic profile of endurance-oriented athletes. The purpose of this study was to investigate the possible roles of the cytokines genes in the development of occupational chronic bronchitis . P06.213 Polymorphisms in the genes encoding IL1b, IL1RN, TNFA, LTA, IL8, cannabinoid type-1 receptor gene polymorphisms are IL10 were investigated in patients with occupational chronic bronchitis associated with central obesity in a southern Brazilian (N=122) and healthy workers (N=166) from Bashkortostan Republic . population Tests for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium among controls were conducted J. P. Jaeger1, V. S. Mattevi2, S. M. Callegari-Jacques1, M. H. Hutz1; using observed genotype frequencies and a χ2 -test with one degree 1Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Fundação of freedom . We also used chi-square tests to examine the association Faculdade Federal de Ciências Médicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil. between genetic polymorphisms and individual susceptibility to occu- The CB1 cannabinoid receptor and its endogenous ligands, the en- pational exposure . A value of p<0 .05 was considered as statistically docannabinoids, are involved in energy balance control, stimulating significant. The frequencies of the TNFA (-308G/A) and LTA (252A/G), appetite and increasing body weight in wasting syndromes . Different IL1B (3953C/T) and IL1 RN gene haplotypes were computed using studies have investigated the relationship between polymorphisms of the expectation-maximization algorithm with the EH software program . the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) gene and obesity with conflicting Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated to estimate results . In the present study, we investigated the 1359G/A (rs1049353), the individual risk of occupational chronic bronchitis . 3813A/G (rs12720071) and 4895A/G (rs806368) polymorphisms in the No difference was found between patients and healthy controls in the CNR1 gene in a Brazilian population of European descent . To verify distribution of genotypes and frequencies of alleles of the TNFA (-308 the association between these variants and obesity-related traits in G/A), LTA (252A/G), IL1B (3953C/T), IL1RN (VNTR), IL10 (-327C/A), this population, 756 individuals were genotyped by PCR-RFLP meth- IL8 -251A/T gene polymorphisms . However, it was shown that the ods . The 4895G allele was associated with waist to hip ratio (WHR) IL1B, IL1RN genes haplotypes frequency distribution patterns signifi- (P=0 .014; P=0 .042 after Bonferroni correction) . An additive effect with cantly differed between workers with occupational chronic bronchitis the GAA haplotype was associated with WHR (P=0 .028), although and healthy workers (χ2=9 .31, df=5, p=0 .03) . The IL1B 3953t/IL1RN*2 this statistical significance disappeared after Bonferroni correction haplotype was associated with higher risk of occupational chronic (P=0.084). No significant association was observed between the gen- bronchitis (4.67% vs. 1.30%, in healthy workers; χ2=4 .29, p=0 .04; otypes of the 1359G/A and 3813A/G polymorphisms and any of the OR=3 .73, 95%CI 1 .06-14 .29) . quantitative variables investigated. Our findings suggest that CNR1 Our results indicate that the IL1B and IL1RN genes polymorphisms gene polymorphism is associated with central obesity in this Brazilian may play a role in pathogenesis of occupational chronic bronchitis . population of European ancestry . P06.216 P06.214 common genetic polymorphisms in the human organic cation Association between haptoglobin phenotype and serotonin transporters 1, 2 and 3 and the pharmacokinetics of biguanide transporter gene polymorphism (5HttVNtR) in the obesity class drug metformin inflammatory process M. V. Tzvetkov, S. Vormfelde, T. Schmidt, D. Sehrt, I. Meineke, J. Brockmöller; P. Levy1, C. Marinho1, J. Ferreira1, A. Esteves1, D. Figueiredo1, M. Laires2, P. University Medicine, Goettingen, Germany. Teixeira2, J. Themudo Barata2, L. Sardinha2, M. Bicho1; Organic cation transporter subtypes 1, 2 and 3 (OCT1, OCT2 and 1Genetic Laboratory, Medical School, Lisbon, Portugal, 2School of Sport and OCT3) mediate the cellular uptake of N,N-dimethylimidodicarbonimid- Exercise Sciencies, Lisbon, Portugal. ic diamide (metformin) used as antidiabetic drug . Earlier, lost-of-func- Introduction: Obesity is a chronic disease associated with an increase tion polymorphisms in the OCT1 gene were associated with reduced of oxygen reactive species . BMI is related with immunologic changes metformin efficacy in mice and humans. resulting in a decrease of antigen tolerance and in a predominance of We analyzed the effect of common genetic variants in the three genes Th2 immunologic system profile. Haptoglobin is an acute phase pro- on metformin pharmacokinetics in 103 healthy male Caucasians . tein. It has three genotypes 1.1, 2.1 and 2.2 that differ in their affinity Thirty functional or haplotype-tagging SNPs and one potential copy to complex haemoglobin and that are involved in the modulation of number variation were genotyped . Polymorphism-dependent and tis- immunological response . Genotype 1 .1 is associated with a predomi- sue-specific variation in gene expression was assessed by quantita- nant Th2 response . Serotonin participates in Th1/Th2 balance as it tive RT-PCR . regulates cytokines release . Their intra and extracellular concentra- The reduction in the OCT1 activity due to one of the amino acid substi- tions are regulated by its transporter whose efficacy depends on its tutions, R61C, G401S, 420del, or G465R, was associated with a higher genetic polymorphisms . renal clearance of metformin (means of 30 .62, 33 .14 and 37 .14 l/h for Objective: Haptoglobin and 5HTTVNTR polymorphisms as risk factors carrier of two, one or none active OCT1 alleles respectively, P=0 .04) . for obesity . In addition, a haplotype in the promoter region of the OCT1 gene was Methods: 289 women were studied, 248 with overweight or obesity associated with an increased renal clearance (30 .96, 33 .65 and 40 .56 (BMI=30,19±3,74 Kg/m2; 47,31±12,63 years old) and 41 controls l/h for two, one or non haplotype carrier respectively, P=0 .03) and withMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  decreased gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines . No associ- P06.219 ation was observed for the polymorphisms in the OCT2 and OCT3 Association of polymorphisms and haplotypes in the 5’ region of genes . Additionally, previously suggested effect of the “silence” A411A COLA gene with BmD and osteoporotic fractures in Russian polymorphism on the OCT3 splicing could not be validated in exon- women from Volga-Ural region trapping experiments . L. Selezneva1, R. Khusainova1, E. Fazlyeva2, R. Nurligayanov3, E. Khusnutdi- In conclusion, genetic variants in humanOCT1 but not in OCT2 and nova1; OCT3 genes were associated with alternation in the metabolism of 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2City Clini- metformin . The best explanation of our data is that OCT1 is involved to cal Hospital no. 5, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3City Clinical Hospital no. 21, Ufa, some extend in tubular reabsorption of metformin . Russian Federation. The collagen type I alpha 1 (COL1A1) gene is a strong candidate for P06.217 susceptibility of osteoporosis . We analyzed the possible association of interferon regulatory factor 6 (iRF6) variation contributes to oral the COL1A1 genotypes and haplotypes, defined by -1997G/T, -1663in- clefts in south America delT and SpI polymorphisms in 340 Russian postmenopausal women . I. M. Orioli1, R. F. Fonseca1, A. R. Vieira2, E. E. Castilla3,4; Patients with chronic diseases and conditions which may potentially 1ECLAMC at Genetics Department, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio affect bone mass were excluded . The -1997G/T, -1663indelT and SpI de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Departments of Oral Biology and Center for Craniofacial polymorphisms were in strong linkage disequilibrium (D’ = 0 .66-0 .95) . and Dental Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, The distribution of three common haplotypes in our population was Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 3ECLAMC at Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de as follow: -1997*G/-1663*insT/*S - 62 .2%, -1997*T/-1663*insT/*S Janeiro, Brazil, 4ECLAMC at CEMIC (Center for Medical Education and Clinical - 19 .9%, -1997*G/-1663*delT/*s - 14 .9% . The SpI and -1663indelT Research), Buenos Aires, Argentina. polymorphisms were associated with BMD: homozygote carries of the Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) has been associated with non- SpI*S allele had increased BMD (p=0 .035 for FN-BMD; p=0 .015 for syndromic (NS) oral-facial clefts (OFC) . ECLAMC (Latin American LS-BMD) and homozygotes for the -1663*insT allele had higher values Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) population that was of BMD (p=0 .017 for FN-BMD; p=0 .009 for LS-BMD) . There was a sig- included in the original IRF6 association study [Zucchero et al ., 2004] nificant association between the -1997*G/-1663*delT/*s haplotype and did not show association . Six SNPs within and in the boundaries of the FN-BMD (p=0 .01) with reduced BMD values in homozygote carriers IRF6 gene were genotyped to test for association with OFC in 304 trios of the haplotype -1997*G/-1663*delT/*s (p=0 .023 from carries of no of affected newborn patients and their parents . The ECLAMC samples copies of the haplotype by Tukey’s post-test) . We found an associa- were from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Colombia, and tion of the -1663*I*D genotype (OR=1 .7; 95%CI 1 .06-2 .71; p=0,024) Venezuela; there were 168 cases of isolated cleft lip with or without and the -1663*delT allele (OR=1 .6; 95%CI 1 .09-2 .4; p=0,015) with cleft palate (CL/P), 47 isolated cases with cleft palate only (CPO), and osteoporotic fractures . The association of the -1997*G/-1663*delT/*s 73 cases with OFC and other defects. The most significant results haplotype with fractures was nominally significant (p=0.04), but these were for SNPs rs 17015215 (VAL274I) in all OFC (p=0 .0002), and iso- did not reach the threshold for significance when multiple testing was lated CL/P (p=0 .0004), and rs 2013162 in isolated CPO (p=0 .0009) . considered. There was no significant association of the -1997G/T poly- Suggestive results were also found for SNPs rs 861019 in all OFC morphism with BMD or fractures in our population . Our results suggest (p=0 .05), CL/P (0 .05), and CPO (p=0 .02), and rs 17015215 (VAL274I) that the COL1A1 gene is a susceptibility locus for osteoporosis in post- (p=0 .048), and rs 2073487 (p=0 .048) in CPO . No association was menopausal Russian women from Volga-Ural region . found in the OFC group associated with other defects . Our results demonstrate that variation in IRF6 is a significant genetic contributor to P06.220 OFC in South American populations . Epidemiological and genetic studies of otosclerosis with a new locus Otsc8 in tunisian population P06.218 I. Bel Hadj Ali1, M. Thys2, N. Beltaief3, E. Mnif3, G. Besbes3, G. Van Camp2, S. Allelic variants of iL1R1 and iL1RL2 genes associate with severe Ben Arab1; hand osteoarthritis 1Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Center of Medical Genetics, A. Näkki1,2, S. Kouhia1, J. Saarela1, A. Harilainen3, K. Tallroth3, T. Videman4, M. Antwerp, Belgium, 3Hôpital La Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia. C. Battié4, J. Kaprio2, L. Peltonen1,5, U. M. Kujala6; Otosclerosis is a very common hearing impairment among Caucasians 1National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, Hel- with a prevalence of about 0 .3-0 .4% among white adults . In Tunisia, sinki, Finland, 3ORTON Orthopedic Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4University of clinical otosclerosis has a prevalence of 0 .4 to 0 .8 . Our aim is to per- Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, form an epidemiological, genetic and linkage analyses of otosclerosis Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. in northern Tunisia . Objective. In search for genes predisposing to osteoarthritis (OA), sev- Segregation analysis were performed and showed that the pattern of eral genome wide scans have provided evidence for linkage on 2q . In the disease is due to a rare dominant major gene with a high polygenic this study we targeted a 470 kb region on 2q11 .2 presenting the locus component . with most evidence for linkage to severe hand OA in our previous ge- Our study showed that in north-eastern areas of Tunisia, the sex ratio nome wide scan families . in probands with clinical otosclerosis being twice as often in women Methods. We genotyped 32 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) than in men . This probably suggests that an endocrine mechanism in this 470 kb region comprising 6 genes belonging to the interleukin and/or biochemical factor are involved in disease aetiology . However, 1 superfamily . We monitored for association with individual SNPs and in north-western areas, there was no significant difference between SNP haplotypes among severe bilateral hand OA cases (n=107) and the rates of otosclerosis between sexes . also end-stage bilateral primary knee OA cases (n=113) and controls Geographical distribution of affected subjects according to the ethnic (n=436) . origin of their parents showed that the areas with the highest concen- Results. In a single SNP analysis with hand OA material, we found a tration of affected individuals were urban or seaside areas . The fre- significant association to a 174 kb region, covered by a single hap- quency of otosclerosis was lower in rural areas and/or areas far from lotype block, comprising genes IL1R1 and IL1RL2 (p-value=0 .001) . the seaside . Haplotype analysis provided further evidence for the IL1R1 gene . Genetic study was undertaken in some genealogies segregating Conclusion. This study demonstrates a consistent association be- autosomal dominant otosclerosis and linkage analysis showed that tween hand OA and gene IL1R1. But since the associated SNPs are three families are linked to the known loci responsible of otosclerosis part of a wide LD block, we cannot unequivocally confirm which of (OTSC1, OTSC2, and OTSC3) . For the fourth family, the genome wide the two genes explains the observed association . IL1R1 and IL1RL2 linkage analysis was performed and revealed a new otosclerosis locus represent highly relevant candidate genes since they encode proteins named OTSC8 . that are known modulators of inflammatory processes associated with The presence of a genetic factor associated with hormonal, biochemi- joint destruction . cal or environmental factors, probably lead to variable expression of the otosclerosis according to age and sex .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.221 was accompanied by a study of levels of pain using EVA . High throughput mutation screening in patients with isolated Our results show no relationship betweewn allelic variants of studied respiratory chain complex I deficiency genes, neuropathic pain, inflammatory pain, or with the levels of pain M. Taverna1, F. Madignier1, B. Rolinski2, R. Horvath2, P. Freisinger2, T. Meit- according to EVA . Therefore we conclude that pain is nnot associated inger1,3, H. Prokisch1,3; with variants IL1B and IL6 genes 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Munich, Germany, 2Metabolic Dis- ease Centre Academic Hospital München-Schwabing, Munich, Germany, 3Insti- P06.224 tute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Alpha-synuclein gene duplication analysis in familial italian Almost 50 causal variants in nuclear genes associated with OXPHOS Parkinson patients disorders are known . Despite this success, in the majority of cases the F. Sironi1,2, P. Primignani3, M. Zini1, L. Trotta1,4, T. Brambilla1, S. Tunesi1,5, A. molecular defects remain unknown . Most mitochondrial disorders are Antonini1, D. A. Coviello3, G. Pezzoli1, S. Goldwurm1; associated with three main categories of biochemical defects: respira- 1Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Pefezionamento, Milano, Italy, 2Medical tor chain complex I (RCC I), complex IV (RCC IV) and combined RCC Genetics Laboratory, Foundation IRCCS “Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Man- I+RCC IV deficiencies. The number of genes potentially harbouring giagalli e Regina Elena”Genetics Laboratory, Milan, Italy, 3Medical Genetics pathogenic mutations is very high . This situation calls for a technologi- Laboratory, Foundation IRCCS “Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e cal improvement for carrying out the diagnosis of this group of disor- Regina Elena”Genetics Laboratory, Milano, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Labora- ders . tory, Foundation IRCCS “Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina We deployed high-throughput protocols for genetic screening using Elena”Genetics Laboratory,, Milan, Italy, 5Institute of Medical Statistics and high resolution melting point analysis (Idaho-Light-Scan) . So far 96 Biometry, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. samples have been analyzed in parallel followed by direct sequenc- Alfa-synuclein gene (SNCA) duplication or triplication was found in au- ing of those PCR products that display divergent melting curves . We tosomal dominant Parkinson disease (PD) . Our aim was to analyse have screened 50 genes (250 amplicons) coding for the subunits and SNCA multiplication in an Italian series of familial PD . assembly factors of RCC I. Causative mutations have been identified We examined SNCA multiplication in an Italian series of 134 unrelated in 16% of patients. A single variant was identified in 30% of additional Italian PD patients with at least one first degree relative affected. Our samples and in 54% of samples no mutations have been found yet . sample population derived from the “Human genetic bank of patients affected by Parkinson disease and parkinsonisms” (http://parkinson . P06.222 it/dnabank .htlm) . We investigated the presence of SNCA multiplication Association of p53 polymorphism with recurrent pregnancy loss using the MLPA approach (Kit “SALSA P51“) . The kit also allow the de- N. Ghasemi, R. Dehghani Firouzabadi, M. Ayazi, H. Fazli, N. Tabibnejad; tection of exon rearrangements in the PKRN, PINK1, DJ1 genes and Reasearch and Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. of two point mutations: p .G2019S (LRRK2 gene) and p .A30P (SNCA The p53 tumour suppressor gene is a well-known factor regulating gene). Each result was confirmed in two independent experiments. apoptosis in a wide variety of cells and tissues . Alterations in the p53 Up to now we performed MLPA assay on the first 58 familial PD pa- gene are among the most common genetic changes in human can- tients . cers . In addition, recent data provide evidence that p53 plays a critical This preliminary screening has identified 1SNCA duplication positive role in mediating pregnancy by regulating steroid hormone activation . patient, 1 heterozygous deleted allele in the PINK1 gene (exon 6), 1 in Several polymorphisms of the p53 tumour suppressor gene have been the PARK2 gene (exon 3-4) and 3 mutated alleles in the LRRK2 gene associated with recurrent pregnancy loss . We evaluated the hypoth- (p .G2019S in exon 41) . esis that polymorphisms in the p53 tumour suppressor gene in women The patient carrier of the SNCA duplication is a woman of 45 years of may be associated with occurrence of repeated miscarriages . age affected by a classical PD . She developed depression and bradiki- The prevalence of a common polymorphism of the p53 tumour sup- nesia as first symptoms at 41 years. She responded to L-Dopa therapy pressor gene (Arg and Pro variants at codon 72) in 50 women with and does not have cognitive decline . The mother developed PD at 45 recurrent pregnancy loss compare with 50 normal women with at least years of age and died at 60 with dementia . two alive children as control group . For each patient, two p53 tumour Our data indicate that SNCA duplication is present also in Italian popu- suppressor alleles (Arg and Pro) were identified by using PCR-RLFP lation: approximately 1 .5% (1/58) of familial PD patient . technique and genotypes were defined as Arg/Arg, Pro/Pro, or Arg/ Pro . Statistical analysis was done by SPSS software and the p-values P06.225 under 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. Parkin mutation analysis in patients with sporadic early-onset The homozygous Pro/Pro genotypes were found more often (27 .5%) Parkinson’s Disease among women with recurrent abortion versus other group (21 .9%) . G. Provenzano1, F. Annesi1, M. T. Pellecchia2, F. E. Rocca1, E. De Marco1, D. It is concluded that P53 codon 72 polymorphism may serve as a sus- Civitelli1, P. Tarantino1, P. Barone2, L. Morgante3, M. Zappia4, G. Annesi1; ceptibility factor affecting the chances of recurrent pregnancy loss . 1Institute of Neurological Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Neurological Sciences, University Federico II, Napoli, Italy, P06.223 3Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of DNA polymorphisms in proinflamatory citokines IL1B and IL6 Messina, Messina, Italy, 4Clinica Neurologica I, Department of Neuroscience, are not associated to pain in spanish patients University of Catania, Catania, Italy. P. Álvarez Fernaud1,2, C. Muriel2,3, J. del Pino4, J. Santos1,3, P. Armero1,2, R. Mutations in the parkin gene (PARK2) are responsible for about 50% González-Sarmiento1,2; of familial autosomal recessive early onset (≤ 45 years) Parkinson’s 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina, Salamanca, Spain, Disease (EOPD) and 10 to 20 % of sporadic EOPD . Recently, a novel 2Cátedra extraordinaria del dolor-Fundación Grünenthal. Universidad de Sala- parkin mutation, consisting of a deletion of the promoter and exon 1 of manca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Unidad del dolor. Servicio de anestesia. Hospital parkin, was described in a family with autosomal recessive EOPD and Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Servicio de Reumatología. in an isolated case with EOPD . The aim of this study is to perform mu- Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. tational analysis of the coding regions of the parkin gene in sporadic The characterization of genes responsible for multifactorial diseases EOPD and subsequently to investigate whether rearrangements within with genetic substrate such as pain, can be done through linkage anal- both the shared promoter region and the parkin gene are present in the ysis or association studies . Association studies can be performed with patients with only one or no mutations . A total of 53 index cases with candidate genes . sporadic EOPD and an age at onset ≤ 45 years from Southern Italy In the case of pain, in addition to genes encoding proteins involved in were screened for parkin mutation . DNA was exstracted from peripher- neurotransmission, genes coding for inflammatory proteins can also al blood using standard protocols and each exon of parkin was ampli- play an important role . We have analysed allelic variants of genes fied and sequenced. Absolute quantification was perfomed by real time encoding IL1B and IL6 proinflamatory proteins in order to determine PCR 7900 HT-SDS . Among 53 patients screened for parkin mutations, whether variants of these genes may be associated with increased 8 carried single heterozygous mutations, 4 had simple homozygous susceptibility to pain . We have studied 404 cases: 250 with neuro- mutations, 1 was a compound heterozygous and 40 had no mutations . pathic pain and 154 with inflammatory pain, in all of them the diagnosis Gene dosage experiment failed to reveal an exonic rearrangement ofMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 00 the parkin gene in patients with single heterozygous mutations . Our P06.228 results show a substantial number of sporadic EOPD patients carry- Parkscreen: a Linkage marker Panel for Parkinson’s Disease ing single heterozygous mutations, suggesting that a second mutation A. De Grandi1, C. Béu Volpato1, E. Bedin1, C. Pattaro1, F. Marroni1, I. Pichler1, could be localized in the promoter . In our study the gene dosage of A. Hicks1, G. Casari2, P. P. Pramstaller1,3,4; core parkin promoter is still in progress . 1European Academy, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Bolzano, Italy, 2Department of Neuroscience, Vita-Salute University and San Raffaele Scientific Institute, P06.226 Milan, Italy, 3Department of Neurology, General Regional Hospital, Bolzano, A functional G-463A polymorphism in the myeloperoxidase gene Italy, 4Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. promoter and Parkinson’s disease PURPOSE: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a complex disease with both F. E. Rocca1,2, P. Tarantino1, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, genetic and environmental susceptibility factors . We set out to develop S. Carrideo1, F. Annesi1, G. Provenzano1, V. Greco1, G. Squillace1, V. Scor- a rapid inexpensive tool to aid in the characterization of known or novel naienchi1, G. Nicoletti1,2, G. Annesi1; loci that may contribute to PD in families . METHODS: We developed 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neu- a genetic marker screening panel, ParkScreen, optimized for simulta- rology, University Magna Graecia,, Catanzaro, Italy. neous marker amplification, to test families for linkage to known PD Epidemiological studies suggest that inflammation increases the risk of loci using only a few affected individuals . We also used ParkScreen developing Parkinson’s disease (PD) and experimental models of Pd for screening patients within genetically isolated homogenous popula- show that inflammatory oxidants modulate neuronal death. Myeloper- tions . It was applied to three groups of apparently sporadic PD pa- oxidase (MPO) is an antimicrobial enzyme involved in the inflamma- tients originating from different Italian Alpine valleys . RESULTS: Panel tory process that produces reactive oxygen species . It is demonstrated functionality was proven by detection of linkage to PARK2 in a family that the levels of catalytically active myeloperoxidase are elevated in with known Parkin mutations . Linkage to several known PD loci in the diseased brains and a functional G-463A polymorphism in the pro- examined pedigrees was excluded, and suggestive linkage to PARK8, moter of the MPO gene is associated with the risk of developing neu- PARK3, and PARK11 was found . For one family, linkage was excluded rodegenerative disorders .There is biologic evidence implicating MPO for all known loci, thus marking it as a candidate for further studies . in PD neurodegeneration process, but no data are currently available CONCLUSION: ParkScreen is a useful, rapid, and inexpensive tool on the possible role of MPO polymorphism in the development of PD . for assessing the involvement of known loci in familial PD . It allows the Our study is the first to examine the association between MPO geno- selection of families suitable for clinical follow-up and genotyping in type and Pd risk . We investigated the G-463A polimorphism in 233 order to identify specific mutations or novel genes. PD cases and 100 controls . All patients were screened for this SNP by combination of PCR and RFLP analysis.We did not find significant P06.229 differences in allele or genotype distribution between PD cases and A genetic variant in Pc-1 gene is associated with susceptibility controls (p=1).Genetic findings show that the less common A allele to type 2 diabetes among Japanese population decreases myeloperoxidase expression, apparently by destroying a P. Keshavarz1, H. Inoue2; binding site for the transcription factor . The reactive oxygen species 1Guilan university of medical science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The play an important role in PD and individual susceptibility to PD may be university of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. modulated by the G-463A SNP .This work will be completed by increas- Previous studies have demonstrated the K121Q polymorphisms in ing the number of the controls analysed to provide a more powered the plasma cell membrane glycoprotein-1 (PC-1, recently known as study . Our preliminary data suggest that G-463A MPO polymorphism ENPP1) gene influences insulin resistance, obesity and risk of type 2 is not a risk factor for PD neverthless further studies in other popula- diabetes .However conflict association results are reported in different tions are needed to confirm these results. population . We previously found no evidence for association of K121Q polymorphisms with risk of type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population . P06.227 This study for first time was carried out in samples of Japanese to characterization and replication of a novel locus for late-onset explore the key role of other previously reported polymorphisms and Parkinson’s disease detected in a genome-wide association haplotypes containing K121Q variant with risk of type 2 diabetes . To study in an isolated population accomplish this, we genotyped the rs997509, rs1799774 (IVS20delT- Z. Bochdanovits1,2, P. Rizzu1,2, K. Rak1,2, L. Pardo-Cortes1,2, P. Heutink1,2; 11) and rs7754561 (A/G_1044TGA) polymorphisms for association 1VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Center for Neurogenomics analysis in 911 type 2 diabetic patients (459 female/452male) and and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 876 control subjects (430 female/446 male) using TaqMan assay . Ac- Genetically isolated populations have two major advantages above cording to single locus association test, in IVS20delT-11, we identified general populations when conducting genome-wide association stud- a significant association of delT allele with type 2 diabetes in Japa- ies: 1- more extended LD allows for using less markers and 2- less nese (adjusted odds ratio, 1.50; 95% confidence interval, 1.15-1.99); genetic heterogeneity, hence a higher relative risk of individual sus- p=0.0002). In a haplotype association analysis, we failed to find any ceptibility alleles . We have performed a genome-wide association significant association between Q-delT-G haplotype and type 2 diabe- study in a young genetic isolate in Turkey for late onset Parkinson’s tes (p>0 .05) . A subanalysis of subjects depending their body mass in- disease (LOPD) . This isolate exhibits increased prevalence of the dis- dex (BMI) status revealed no significant impact of the 3 polymorphisms ease suggesting that susceptibility alleles of relatively high risk are and Q-delT-G haplotype on BMI . In conclusion our study indicated the segregating in this homogeneous population . We used the Affymetrix potential role of an intronic polymorphism IVS20delT-11 with type 2 10K SNPChip to genotype 31 LOPD disease patients and 27 unrelated diabetes in Japanese . controls . Strong LD (r2>0 .8) was commonly found up to approximately 150kb, hence the 10K SNPChip is sufficient to cover the entire genome P06.230 in this isolate . Single SNP associations were carried out followed by a searching for molecular markers of polycystic ovary syndrome permutation test to determine the genome wide significance threshold. K. Wertheim1, A. Sobczynska-Tomaszewska1, J. Maciejewski2, P. Kubik2, U. One SNP, rs1492592, was found to be significantly associated with Szutkowska3, J. Bal1; LOPD (p=4x10-6) . Finemapping a 1 .1 Mb region surrounding the initial 1Institute of Mother and Child, Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, Po- SNP has confirmed the association. Within 1.5 Mb of the locus, several land, 2Institute of Mother and Child, Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, War- interesting candidate genes are located, most notably GRIN3A and saw, Poland, 3Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, Warsaw University, PPP3R2 . A known limitation of using genetic isolates is that the loci de- Warsaw, Poland. tected in one population might not be of relevance in other isolates or Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects about 10% of women in the general population . Therefore we screened two additional genetic reproductive age . PCOS is recognized in the presence of at least two isolates and the general Dutch population for association with tagging of the following symptoms: oligomenorrhea, hiperandrogenism, poly- SNPs covering six candidate genes . We replicated our locus by show- cystic ovaries morphology . Disease results in infertility and increased ing that multiple tagging SNPs are significantly associated with LOPD risk of diabetes type 2, cardiovascular disease, endometrial cancer . in the additional populations . Etiology of the syndrome remains unknown, although interaction of genetic and environmental factors is mostly discussed . Several meta-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  bolic genes are probably involved in PCOS pathogenesis . ric populations . Adverse drug reactions in pediatric oncology regimens The aim of our study was to investigate whether there is a correlation are especially severe and account for 22% of all pediatric oncology between variants of genes: IRS-1, IGF-2, SHBG, INS and symptoms hospital admissions . Cisplatin is one of the most effective anti-cancer of PCOS in Polish patients . agents for the treatment of solid tumors . However, a major dose-limit- Up-to-date 64 PCOS patients (diagnosed on the basis of criteria men- ing toxicity of cisplatin is severe, permanent hearing loss . In previous tioned above) and 37 health controls were enrolled to our study . studies the risk of developing cisplatin ototoxicity was increased with We focused on four polymorphisms G972R (IRS-1), ApaI-rs680A/ younger age and higher cumulative dose, but the contribution of ge- G (IGF-2), TAAAAn (SHBG ) and VNTR classI/III (INS) tagged by - netic risk factors remains undetermined . We aimed to evaluate genetic 23HphI-rs689 A/T . markers predictive of hearing loss in children treated with cisplatin . Our results indicate that: DNA samples and detailed clinical information from cisplatin induced - prevalence of 972R variant is higher in PCOS group hearing-loss cases (n = 60) and drug-matched controls (n = 44) were - allel A of ApaI is less frequent in the patient group compared with collected through the GATC nation-wide ADR surveillance network . controls . On the contrary genotype A/A is more prevalent in patients DNA samples were genotyped for a panel of 3072 single nucleotide group . polymorphisms (SNPs) in 220 genes. A significant genetic association - VNTR classI/III distribution in both groups is nearly the same, where- with increased hearing loss risk was found for patients carrying vari- as class III alleles homozygotes are more frequent among PCOS pa- ants in a key drug metabolizing enzyme (P-value=0.0001; OR=infinity). tients In addition, variants in known drug transporters were also associated - TAAAAn - any association with neither PCOS nor its severity was with cislatin ototoxicity (P<0.002; OR=3). Our results confirm findings found . that cisplatin-hearing loss is associated with a genetic susceptibility . Our preliminary studies indicate, in consistent with literature, that vari- The identification of genetic variants contributing to cisplatin ototoxic- ants of genes (IRS-1, IGF-2, INS) can be among the factors involved ity is essential in the development of diagnostic markers to reduce in PCOS pathogenesis . Nevertheless further analysis on larger cohort the incidence of hearing loss, and make cisplatin treatment safer for is performed . children . Supported by KBN2P05E11729 P06.233 P06.231 the ability to become an elite endurance athlete depends on the Linking Genetic Susceptibility with clinical findings: a case carriage of high number of endurance-related alleles study in periodontitis I. I. Ahmetov, A. M. Hakimullina, J. V. Shikhova, I. A. Mozhayskaya, V. A. V. Moustakis1,2, G. Potamias1, M. Laine3, B. Loos3, L. Koumakis1; Rogozkin; 1Institute of Computer Science, FORTH, Heraklion, Greece, 2Dept. of Produc- St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian tion Engineering and Management, Technical University of Crete, Chania, Federation. Greece, 3Dept. of Oral Microbiology and Dept. of Periodontology, Academic The objective was to evaluate the total contribution of CNB, NFATC4, Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands. PGC1A, PGC1B, TFAM, VEGF, UCP2, UCP3 gene alleles in defin- Diagnosis and hypothesis formation in clinical decision making (CDM) ing predisposition to sports . The study involved 1580 Russian athletes involves the integration of patient history, clinical and laboratory find- and 1057 controls . CNB (calcineurin B) 5I/5D, NFATC4 (nuclear fac- ings . Patient history incorporates genotypic information and carries ge- tor of activated T-cells, calcineurin-dependent 4) Ala160Gly, PGC1A netic susceptibility towards disease manifestation . We present a hybrid (PPARgamma coactivator-1-alpha) Gly482Ser, PGC1B (PPARgamma multi-stage computational model which, in the first stage assesses a coactivator-1-beta) Ala203Pro, TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochon- genetic susceptibility index (GSI) towards disease, in the second stage drial) Thr12Ser, VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) G-634C, links GSI with phenotypic (clinical and laboratory) parameters and in UCP2 (uncoupling protein 2) Ala55Val, UCP3 (uncoupling protein 3) the third stage generates comprehensible knowledge patterns that tie -55C/T gene polymorphisms were determined by PCR-RLFP . We together genotypic and phenotypic information sources . The model in- found that the frequency of endurance-related alleles (CNB I, NFATC4 tegrates two inductive machine learning methods, namely: association Gly, PGC1A Gly, PGC1B Pro, TFAM Thr, VEGF C, UCP2 Val, UCP3 rule mining (ARM) and decision tree learning (DTL) with behavioral T) were significantly higher in Russian elite endurance-oriented ath- communication theory . ARM is used to support formation of genotypic letes (n=351) compared to controls, both separately and cumulatively patterns which, are taken through a behavioral communication theory (45 .6% vs . 37 .4%, p<0 .0001) . Furthermore, 66 .7% of highly elite en- model to establish GSI both at the genotype and phenotype levels . durance-oriented athletes (Olympic and World championship winners; DTL is included at the third stage to validate learned knowledge . n=12) were carriers of 8 to 12 endurance-related alleles (the others The model is demonstrated by means of a case study on periodontitis . were carriers of 7 alleles), while there were only 18 .1% of such per- Data are drawn from the warehouse of ACTA and incorporate geno- sons in the control group (p<0 .0001) . Thus, the success in sports can typic and phenotypic data . Genotypic data include single nucleotide be attributed to the carriage of high number of alleles associated with polymorphisms (SNP) and origin and clinical data include microbial certain physical qualities . values, life style habits, and age . The application of the model on the abovementioned data validates the proposed approach . P06.234 Presentation is cast in topic “Genetic analysis, linkage, and associa- Screening of the PKD1 gene in Czech patients with autosomal tion” and documents a generic procedure, which can be used in any dominant polycystic kidney disease endeavor aimed at genotype - phenotypic data and knowledge integra- J. Stekrová1, J. Reiterová2, S. Svobodová1, V. Kebrdlová1, P. Lněnička1, M. tion . Merta2, J. Zidovská1, M. Kohoutová1; Work reported was partially supported via the INFOBIOMED NoE, and 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genenics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and to be also used in the GEN2PHEN European project . General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2De- partment of Nephrology of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching P06.232 Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. The GATC project: identification of novel genetic markers of Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most cisplatin induced hearing-loss in children common hereditary renal disease . The disease is caused by mutations H. Katzov-Eckert1,2, C. J. D. Ross1,2, H. Visscher1,2, C. Hildebrand3, M. Dube4, of PKD1 (affecting roughly 85 % of ADPKD patients) and PKD2 (affect- R. S. Rassekh3, P. Rogers3, M. S. Phillips4, B. C. Carleton2,3, M. R. Hayden1,2; ing roughly 14 % of ADPKD patients) genes, though in several ADPKD 1Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Vancouver, BC, Canada, families the PKD1 and/or PKD2 linkage was not found . Mutation analy- 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Children’s and sis of the PKD1 gene is complicated by the presence of highly homolo- Women’s Health Centre of B.C., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4University of Mon- gous genomic duplications of the first two thirds of the gene. treal, Montreal, QC, Canada. The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are potentially life-threatening re- PKD1 gene was performed in 78 nonrelated ADPKD patients . The di- sponses to medications . Children are at greater risk for ADRs, be- rect detection of mutations in the whole PKD1 gene was performed in cause >75% of approved drugs used in children are untested in pediat- next 12 nonrelated ADPKD patients .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  The duplicated region of the PKD1 gene was amplified by long range tween the groups of CHD men . Our results suggest that both Q192R polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by nested PCR . Mutation and L55M PON1 polymorphisms play the role in risk of CHD . Further- screening was performed using denaturing gradient gel electrophore- more, PON1 polymorphisms act in various ways in patients of different sis (DGGE), heteroduplex analysis (HA) and high-resolution melting age and sex . (HRM) . Suspected samples were then sequenced . In the PKD1 gene we detected 30 germline mutations among 90 unre- P06.237 lated individuals; 24 mutations unique for Czech population . We iden- the associations between PON1 55mm genotype and coronary tified 11 nonsense mutations, 13 missense mutations, 3 frameshift- artery disease and between the low HDL/LDL ratio values and ing mutations, 2 deletion in-frame and 1 mutation in splice site . In the the large arteries diseases PKD1 gene we detected great numbers of different polymorphisms or E. Strauss1, K. Waliszewski2, W. Supinski3, J. Gluszek2, W. Majewski2, M. unclassified variants. Swierczek1, M. Juszczak1, A. L. Pawlak1; Establishment of localisation and type of mutations and their genotype 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, - phenotype correlation in ADPKD families will improve DNA diagnosis 2Medical University, Poznan, Poland, 3Regional Hospital, Gorzow Wkp, Poland. and could help to assess the clinical prognosis of ADPKD patients . The differences in the vascular diseases risk factor profiles, depending Supported by grant projects IGA MZ CR NR/9427-3, VZ MSMT on the localization of the arterial diseases were analyzed in the series 0021620806 of 428 patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), 210 patients with aortoiliac occlusive disease (AIOD) and 255 cases of abdominal aortic P06.235 aneurysm (AAA) - total 893 of vascular disease patients, as well as the association of metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 8 in 262 persons without symptoms of vascular disease . The SNPs of (mGluR8) polymorphism with executive attention the genes related to the homocysteine metabolism: MTHFR 677 C>T, J. V. Schegolkova, V. A. Shleptsova, A. G. Tonevitsky; PON1-108C>T, L55M; as well as the lipoprotein profiles were analyzed Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation. in search for the functional differences predisposing either to the CAD The glutamatergic signaling pathway represents candidate suscepti- or to the diseases of the large arteries . The SNPs were determined by bility system involved in mechanism of forming attention and working PCR-RLFP methods . capacity . One of attractive candidate for study of molecular physiology In CAD group frequency of PON1 55MM genotypes (16,6%) was of attention is metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 8 (mGluR8) . about 1,7-fold higher as compared to this either in AIOD+AAA group Expression of mGluR8 was observed in the olfactory system, the neo- (10,8%, p<0,01) or in control group (9,9%; p<0,01), indicating the in- cortex, the limbic cortex including the hippocampus and the amygdala . creased risk of CAD in persons with this genotype . In CAD group also Electron microscopically, mGluR8 was largely observed on the axon the marginally higher frequencies of MTHFR 677TT and PON1 -108TT terminals . Especially in several regions of the hippocampus it was homozygotes were noted . On the other hand, the higher susceptibility found in the active zone of both asymmetrical and symmetrical syn- to the large arteries diseases AIOD+AAA was found to be associated apses where mGluR8 may regulate glutamate release as an autore- with the low values of HDL/LDL ratio (p<0,001), the highly heritable pa- ceptor or GABA release heterosynaptically . rameter which may be related to the lower activity of paraoxonase 1 . Influence of mGluR8 polymorphism located 29 bp after the termina- In summary, the PON1 55MM genotype and the low HDL/LDL ratio ap- tion codon (2756C/T) on executive attention was conducted on volun- pear to be the vascular disease type specific risk factors for the CAD teers . 108 students of Moscow State University (mean age 20±2, girls and the large arteries diseases (AIOD+AAA), respectively . = 61, boys = 47) were tested by Schulte tables. We found significant Supported by MNiI grants: 3 P05A12124, 2P05C03828, N402 association of mGluR8 polymorphism with executive attention only in 08131/2499 . males . Carriers of T allele (TT,CT) implemented the test faster than CC group (p=0,02) . P06.238 PPARG and PPARGc1A gene variants are associated with height P06.236 in athletes Q192R and L55m polymorphism of PON1 in patients with I. A. Mozhayskaya, I. I. Ahmetov, V. A. Rogozkin; coronary heart disease (cHD) of different age and sex. St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian G. D. Pardo Perales1, M. A. Bogdanova2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. S. Romashkina2, Federation. O. A. Bercovich3, S. I. Yagashkina4, O. N. Semenova4, V. A. Isakov2, O. A. PPARgamma nuclear receptor positively promotes adipogenesis and Berkovich5, H. B. Kirillova1, V. I. Larionova2; negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation, indicating that PPAR- 1St. Petersburg State Chemical Pharmaceutical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, gamma is a negative regulator of bone mass . The Ala12 variant of Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint- PPARG gene Pro12Ala polymorphism is associated with lower tran- Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg Electrotechnical University, scriptional activity, increased body mass index and height in humans . Russia, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Research Center for people PPARGC1A has been identified as a transcriptional coactivator of who lived in blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5St. PPARgamma . Carriers of the Ser482 allele have been reported to Petersburg State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. have lower levels of PPARGC1A by comparison with Gly482 allele Paraoxonase-1, a high-density lipoprotein-associated enzyme, is homozygotes . Therefore, one could expect that the Gly482Ser poly- believed to protect low-density lipoproteins from oxidation and thus morphism might affect height too . The aim of the study was to investi- decrease the risk of CHD . The aim of this study was to investigate if gate an association of PPARG Pro12Ala and PPARG1CA Gly482Ser paraoxonase-1 gene (PON1) Q192R and L55M polymorphisms influ- polymorphisms with height in Russian male rowers and speed skaters . ence the risk of CHD . 597 patients (438 men and 159 women) were The study involved 99 rowers (height - 191 .1 (5 .4) cm, weight - 86 included in our study: 227 men who survived myocardial infarction (MI) (9 .7) kg; aged 20-27) and 64 speed skaters (height - 179 .6 (6) cm, under the age of 45 (group I), 96 men with MI after 60 years (group II) weight - 74 .9 (8 .8) kg; aged 20-25) . Rowers were divided into three and 115 healthy men (group III); 75 angiographicaly diagnosed CHD groups: the highest group (195-204 cm), the middle group (189-194 women (group IV) and 84 women without CHD (group V) . All patients cm) and the lowest group (182-188 cm) . Gene polymorphisms were originated from Saint-Petersburg, Russia . Genotypes were determined determined by PCR-RLFP . We found that the presence of the PPARG by PCR-RFLP, paraoxonase activities were measured spectrophoto- 12Ala allele was significantly associated with higher body height (Ala/ metrically and standard enzymatic methods were used to determine Ala+Pro/Ala- 182 .7 (4 .9) cm vs . Pro/Pro - 178 .7 (6 .1) cm; P=0 .023) in levels of total cholesterol, triglycerides and HDL cholesterol on a spec- speed skaters . The frequency of the PPARG1CA 482Ser allele was trum analyzer. Statistical significance of differences between groups significantly higher in the highest group of rowers (33.3%), than in the was assessed with χ2-test . We found that in group IV the frequency middle (22 .5%) and the lowest (18 .8%) groups (P=0 .032) . In conclu- of 55M allele of PON1 was a statistically higher comparing to group V sion, functional polymorphisms in PPARG and PPARG1CA genes may (p=0,029). In group I amount of QR patients were significantly higher influence the growth of the skeleton in male athletes. comparing to group IV (p=0,003) . In group II amount of QQ patients were significantly lower comparing to group IV (p=0,009). There were no any differences in allele or genotype frequencies distributions be-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.239 P06.241 susceptibility to preeclampsia in relation to ethnicity: multiple Correlation of genotype/phenotype in primary Congenital genes case-control study Glaucoma patients from different ethnic groups of the israeli G. S. Demin1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, I. Bouba2, E. V. Mozgovaia1, V. S. Baranov1, population I. A. Georgiou2; D. Bercovich1,2, C. Shochat1, S. Korem1, O. Geyer3; 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 1, Migal - Galilee Bio-Technology Center, Kiryat-Shmona, Israel, 2Tel Hai Aca- 2University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. demic College, Tel Hai, Israel, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Carmel Medical Pathogenesis of preeclampsia suggests endothelial dysfunction dur- Center, Haifa, Israel. ing pregnancy . Considering that endothelial gene polymorphism may Mutations in the CYP1B1 gene are responsible for more than 50% affect relevant protein production the aim of the study was to investi- of primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) and mutations in the MYOC gate whether genetic variability in endothelial dysfunction-related pro- gene have also been associated with this disease . The OPTN gene is teins contributes to individual and ethnic preeclampsia susceptibility known to be associated with primary open-angle glaucoma and low- differences . tension glaucoma . We noticed a different clinical presentation of PCG 317 women from Greece and Russia with normal pregnancy or un- in our patients according to ethnicity. Our goal was to find a correlation complicated preeclampsia participated in the case-control study . Poly- between genotype and phenotype in people with PCG according to morphisms of the TNF-alpha (-308G>A and -238G>A), NOS1 (AAT)n, their ethnic origin . We screened the CYP1B1 gene in 86-individuals NOS2 (CCTTT)n, NOS3 (894G>T and 4a/4b), PAI-1 (4G/5G) and ACE from 22-families of Israeli Moslem Arabs, Druze family and Ashkenazi (I/D) genes were determined by a PCR-based RFLP method . and non-Ashkenazi Jewish, using the DHPLC apparatus . The screen- Considering genetic heterogeneity between populations we carried ing revealed the cause for PCG in 11 of these 22-families . The muta- out the comparison of allelic frequencies between controls from Rus- tions, includes a homozygous missense mutation R469W in exon-3 of sia and Greece and between patients from these countries . Analyzing the CYP1B1 gene in 4 different Druze and one Moslem families . Two results revealed that the frequencies of variants of NOS2, NOS3 and Druze and two Moslem Arabs and one non-Ashkenazi families with the TNF-alpha genes differed between controls and patients according to typical severe type of PCG were found to be compound heterozygous ethnic origin . Our results show that it is incorrect to join samples from for two different DNA alterations . Screening the MYOC gene reviled in different countries if significant differences in allelic frequencies have one of the non-Ashkenazi patient a heterozygous missense mutation been revealed . and the patient was compound to another mutation in the CYP1B1 According to the analysis of the polymorphisms independently and the gene . No mutations were found in the OPTN gene in the families with development of preeclampsia, an association NOS3 4a/4b genotype no mutations in the CYP1B1 or MYOC . Establishing the genotype- (OR=2 .18, 95%CI:1 .07-4 .45) was observed for Russian population . phenotype correlations of PCG in our various ethnic backgrounds may Severe preeclampsia was associated with TNF-alpha -308A allele add valuable knowledge for predicting the prognosis of the disease, (OR=5 .07, 95%CI:1 .10-23 .48) in Greek population . When we investi- for guiding therapeutic decision making and for genetic counseling of gated an interaction among these polymorphisms on the development carriers of this cause of blindness in children . of the preeclampsia, it was revealed that several combined genotypes were significant risk factors different in various populations. P06.242 The study of two populations has shown that preeclampsia is associ- Gene screening for primary lateral sclerosis on chromosome ated with misbalance in endothelial gene system, but genetic markers 4ptel-4p16.1 in a French-canadian family of disease vary in different countries . V. V. Belzil1, P. N. Valdmanis1,2, J. St-Onge1, N. Dupre1,3, G. A. Rouleau1; 1Universite de Montreal, Hopital Notre-Dame-CHUM, Montreal, QC, Canada, P06.240 2Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, the X-linked DiAPH2 gene is a risk-factor for Premature Ovarian 3Department of Neurological Sciences, CHAUQ Enfant-Jesus, Quebec, QC, Failure (POF) and accounts for female preponderance among Canada. POF patients offspring Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is a degenerative disease of upper mo- S. Bione1,2, T. Corre2, F. Rizzolio2, S. Sansanelli2, S. Carrabino1,2, M. Testa2, R. tor neurons, characterized by a progressive spasticity resulting from Ricotti1, D. Toniolo2; the degeneration of cortical motor neurons which affects mainly the 1IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2DIBIT-San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. descending pathway of the corticospinal system . The lower extremities Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a complex disorder, resulting in are first affected, followed by a spasticity of the trunk, of upper extremi- primary or secondary amenorrhea before the age of 45 and affecting ties and of bulbar muscles . A 550-marker whole genome scan was 1% of women . Environmental factors have been shown to play a role performed on a French-Canadian family with 12 individuals affected in POF, but a strong genetic component is demonstrated by the preva- with PLS. This lead to the identification of a locus on chromosome 4 lence of familial cases . The X chromosome was shown to be affected between the telomere and marker D4S2928 (4ptel-4p16 .1) . This is the by structural rearrangements in several cases . Mendelian genes mu- first locus described for PLS. A maximum LOD score of 3.01 has been tated in the disease are rare and the premutated allele at the FMR1 lo- found for marker D4S2936 . This region spans 10 .2 megabase pairs cus was shown to be a risk factor predisposing for the disease . These and encompasses about 130 genes; 29 of those genes are clearly observations lead to the hypothesis of POF being a complex disorder expressed in the brain . Five genes have already been screened with- caused by the additional effect of several risk factors . out the detection of a coding mutation . We are currently screening the The X-linked DIAPH2 gene was identified as interrupted by the break- remaining genes in the candidate region. The identification of a gene point of a POF associated balanced transocation but its role in the responsible for PLS would help better understand motor neuron biol- pathogenesis of the disorder remains unclear as no causative muta- ogy and pathology . tions were found in a large number of cariotypically normal patients . An association study was performed in a large cohort of POF patients and P06.243 controls revealed the presence of a risk-haplotype significantly associ- Haplotype associations of the mHc with psoriasis vulgaris in ated to the disorder . Moreover the analysis of the offspring sex-ratio in Russian patients the POF cohort demonstrated a strong female preponderance mainly E. Galimova1, V. Akhmetova1, L. Gazizova2, Z. Sultanova2, E. Shushenacheva3, attributable to the risk-haplotype identified. Taken together these re- M. Kizlasova3, E. Khusnutdinova1; sults demonstrated that the POF condition is preferentially due to ad- 1Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad- ditional risk-factors and thus with a multifactorial pattern of inheritance . emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Dermato-Venereology Hospital, The DIAPH2 gene is one of the susceptibility genes involved and its Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Dermato-Venereology Hospital, Abakan, Russian role in the process of oogenesis and ovulation will be further investi- Federation. gated . Psoriasis is a common inflammatory skin disease with a strong genetic component . Although eight psoriasis susceptibility loci (PSORS1-9) have been identified by genome-wide screening, linkage and associa- tion analysis have defined that MHC is the major genetic determinant related to psoriasis susceptibility . Haplotype associations of the MHCMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  with psoriasis vulgaris (PV) have been demonstrated in different ra- Santa Maria, Lleida, Spain. cial or ethnic populations . To identify special haplotypes in Russian Background: The recently discovered copy number variation of DNA population that may contribute to the genetic susceptibility to PV, we segments is suggested to play a role in the development of complex investigated the distribution of the associated haplotypes in Rus- disorders such us schizophrenia (Redon 2006, McCarroll & Altshuler sian cohort . 407 patients with PV and 418 controls were genotyped 2007) . This abundant genomic variability (submicroscopic deletions for HLA-Cw6, HCR-C325T, HCR-A1911G and CDSN-C1243T SNPs . and duplications) directly links disease phenotypes to gene dosage The results showed: HLA-Cw6 and HCR-C325T, HLA-Cw6 and HCR- alteration . Although early onset forms of some neuropsychiatric disor- A1911G were in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) (D’=0 .67, r²=0 .4 ders have been associated to genetic abnormalities, molecular mecha- in all subjects and D’=0 .66, r²=0 .37 in patients; D’=0 .87, r²=0 .13 in all nisms of early psychosis remain unclear . The aim of the present study subjects and D’=0 .88, r²=0 .16 in patients, respectively), whereas LD was to study the relationship between copy number genomic variability was weaker between HCR-C325T and CDSN-C1243T; HCR-A1911G and early onset psychosis . and CDSN-C1243T (D’=0 .28, r²=0 .024 in all subjects and D’=0 .13, Methods: We performed a comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) r²=0 .007 in patients and D’=0 .17, r²=0 .019 in all subjects and D’=0 .10, analysis in 20 r²=0 .006 in patients, respectively), suggesting a relative recombination Caucasian male patients with a first episode of schizophrenia-spec- hot-spot between HCR and CDSN . Cw6/HCR-325*T/HCR-1911*G/ trum disorder characterised for: age at onset (age of first symptoms CDSN-1243*C(β=1.5, P<0.000001), Cw6/HCR-325*T/HCR-1911*G/ range: 13-30 years; assessed with the Symptom Onset in Schizophre- CDSN-1243*T(β=2.6, P<0.00005) were identified as risk haplotypes nia Inventory, Perkins 2000), neurocognitive profile (WISC/WAIS) and for Russian population . In summary, our study of the Russian pop- premorbid adjustment (Premorbid Adjustment Scale, Cannon-Spoor ulation suggest that a major psoriasis susceptibility gene resides in 1982) . Pooled DNA of 20 Caucasian healthy males, without psychi- a region between HLA-C and HCR gene . Thus, the study of differ- atric history in their first and second degree relatives, was used as ent populations will allow us to reduce the boundaries of the minimal reference in hybridizations . Array CGH analyses were performed using PSORS1 region . Agilent Human Genome Microarray 244K (genome-wide coverage) . Results: Genomic gains in chromosome 17q have been associated P06.244 to early psychosis (childhood and adolescent onset) (Benjamini- Late cornified envelope (LCE) 3C and 3B genes deletion as a Hochberg(adjusted) p<0 .01) . susceptibility factor for psoriasis Conclusions: Genomic variability in 17q chromosomal region seems to E. Riveira Muñoz1, R. de Cid1, J. Robarge2, W. Liao3, P. L. J. M. Zeeuwen4, E. be underlying a significant proportion of illness early expression. Dannhauser5, C. Helms2, G. Escaramís1, E. Ballana1, G. Martín6, E. E. Eichler7, Acknowledgements: Fundación Alicia Koplowitz (2006), Fundació La C. Lázaro8, R. Pujol6, L. Armengol1, J. Armour5, P. Kwok3, J. Schalkwijk4, A. Marató de TV3 (014430/31) and the Spanish Ministry of Health ISCIII Bowcock2, X. Estivill1; (CIBER-CB07/09/0037) . 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2Washington Uni- versity School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States, 3University of P06.246 California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Radboud University Nijmegen is psychosis correlated with differential HsP90 expression? Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Institute of Genetics and School L. Kapur1, N. Pojskic1, J. Ramic1, J. Krehic2, N. Pojskic3, D. Stefatic4, L. Oruc5; of Biology Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 6Hospital del 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Mar-IMAS, Barcelona, Spain, 7University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United Herzegovina, 2Institute of Pharmacology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herze- States, 8Catalan Institute of Cancer, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. govina, 3Psychiatric Clinic, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 4Interna- Psoriasis is a common inflammatory skin disease with a prevalence of tional University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 5Psychiatric 2 to 3% in Caucasian population, characterized by abnormal keratino- Clinic KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. cyte differentiation and recruitment of inflammatory cells in the epider- Endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) has a clear role in stress response mis . Although it is generally accepted that environmental and genetic signaling mechanism . Clear association of heat schock protein with factors contribute to its etiology, the genetic susceptibility alleles of schizophrenia was presented by Kim et al (2001) indicating signifi- psoriasis remain poorly understood . By using comparative genomic cantly higher levels of HSP90 variant among schizophrenia patients . hybridization (CGH) analysis we have identified a copy number variant Recently, the involvement of of HSP90 variability in development of (CNV) spanning 32 kb of chromosome 1q21 and mapping to the pso- major psychotic disorders was renowned by studying of differential riasis susceptibility locus PSORS4 . This CNV comprises two genes expression of this gene preferentially associated with its rs17034977 of the epidermal differentiation complex, LCE3C and LCE3B, both polymorphism in bipolar disorder patients (Kakiuchi et al . 2007) . members of the late cornified envelope gene cluster. The absence of In this study, pathophysiological role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) LCE3C and LCE3B is significantly associated (p = 0.0004) with risk of stress response signaling has been questioned for different subsets psoriasis (OR = 3 .0) in Spanish samples . The association was anal- of patients with psychotic symptoms within schizophrenia, bipolar ysed in samples from The Netherlands and the US (combined allelic disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder. Association of specific association of the three samples p <10E-10) . The CNV-deleted allele HSP90B1 variant with psychosis was investigated . is tagged by telomeric SNPs that showed epistatic effects with the HLA locus . Since LCE3C expression was also shown to be induced in pso- P06.247 riasis lesions of patients that do not have the LCE3C/LCE3B deletion, Gender-biased prevalence of the risk allele of the PtPN22 gene it can be postulated that on deletion chromosomes, other genes in the in patients with type 1 diabetes and Addison’s disease cluster could be expressed in a similar pattern . Preliminary analyses M. Fichna1, M. Zurawek2, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska2, M. Gryczyńska1, P. also suggest that the LCE3C/LCE3B CNV loss may have a positional Fichna1, J. Sowiński1, J. Nowak2; effect on neighboring genes . Thus, loss of LCE3C/LCE3B or altered 1Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Institute of Human expression of LCE genes in genetically susceptible individuals har- Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. boring the deletion might lead to abnormal skin barrier formation and The PTPN22 gene, encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase, a negative psoriasis susceptibility . regulator in the T-cell activation and development, has been associ- ated with susceptibility to several autoimmune diseases . The aim of P06.245 this study was to investigate the association of PTPN22 Genomic gains and age at onset of psychosis G(-1123)C and C1858T polymorphisms with type 1 diabetes (T1D) and M. Fatjó-Vilas1, M. J. Muñoz2, S. Campanera3, S. Miret3, M. E. Navarro2, M. autoimmune Addison’s disease (AAD) in the Polish population . A case- Martín2, M. Aguilera1, L. Fañanás1; control study was performed with 215 T1D patients, 87 AAD individu- 1Unitat d’Antropologia, Dep. de Biologia Animal, Facultat de Biologia. Uni- als and 236 healthy controls . The PTPN22 G(-1123)C and C1858T versitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Àrea d’Adolescents. Benito Menni, SNP were genotyped using PCR-restriction fragment assay (SacI and Complex Assistencial en Salut Mental, Sant Boi de Llobregat, Spain, 3Centre RsaI respectively) . The CC genotype of G(-1123)C polymorphism was de Salut Mental de Lleida, Servei de Psiquiatria i Drogodependències. Hospital increased in AAD (p=0 .030) and (-1123)C was more prevalent in af- fected than in healthy males (p=0.003). No significant difference wasMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  found between T1D patients and controls . The 1858T allele presented the situation where it is suspected that both common and rare variants an association with both T1D (OR=1 .73, 95%CI 1 .19-2 .51, p=0 .0035) are involved in disease etiology a powerful and robust novel method and AAD (OR=1 .84, 95%CI 1 .15-2 .94, p=0 .0099) . 1858T was associ- was developed which combines collapsing and multilocus tests . It is ated with both diseases in males (p=0 .022 and p=0 .008, respectively) . also demonstrated empirically that for both collapsing and combined No statistical difference in females was found. Stratification according methods type I error is well controlled . to the presence of concomitant autoimmune disorders revealed an as- sociation of 1858T with both clinical forms of T1D and polyendocrine P06.250 cases of AAD . G(-1123)C and C1858T were in linkage disequilibrium New mutation in the iGF-i receptor (iGF1R) gene associated with (D’=1 .000; r2=0 .5396 for AAD, and D’=0 .9818; r2=0 .6104 in T1D) . No intrauterine growth retardation significant association between the PTPN22 haplotypes and ADD was E. Barrio1, M. CALVO1, J. Labarta2, M. Miramar1, F. Lorente1, A. Rodriguez1, E. found. The haplotype including both mutant alleles was significantly Mayayo2, A. Ferrández Longás2; more frequent in T1D than in controls (p=0.0033). The results confirm 1Molecular Genetics, HMI Miguel Servet, University of Zaragoza, ZARAGOZA, the association of PTPN22 C1858T polymorphism with T1D and AAD Spain, 2Unit of Pediatric Endocrinology, HMI Miguel Servet, University of Zara- in Polish male population, while the G(-1123)C impact is less explicit . goza, ZARAGOZA, Spain. P06.248 PATIENTS: We have studied 55 spanish patients with short stature mutation analysis of the PVRL1 gene in caucasians with non- (<P3) associated with IUGR. We have also quantified plasma GH, syndromic cleft lip/palate IGF1 and IGFBP-3 . The patients had normal or low levels of GH and M. A. Sözen1,2, R. A. Spritz2; high or normal levels of IGF1 and IGFBP-3 . We have also studied 126 1Afyon Kocatepe University School of Medicine, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Uni- control samples . versity of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United MATERIAL AND METHODS: Genomic DNA was isolated from periph- States. eral blood lymphocytes and amplified by PCR using primers that flank Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P, MIM 119530) the coding regions of the 21 exons of the IGF1R gene . is perhaps one of the most common major birth defects . It has been Direct sequencing of the double stranded PCR fragments was per- shown that homozygosity for a nonsense mutation of PVRL1, W185X, formed (Abi Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems) . result in an autosomal recessive CL/P syndrome (CLPED1), whereas RESULTS: In one patient with IUGR and short stature, we have found heterozygosity for the same mutation is associated with sporadic, non- a mutation, in exon 7 in heterozygosis: Y487F . This mutation leads to a syndromic CL/P in Venezuela . The aim of the study was to investigate change in the aminoacid sequence . We have studied the IGF1R gene further involvement of the PVRL1 gene in non-syndromic cleft lip and/ in this family and we have found this mutation present in the mother or palate in North American and Australian Caucassian populations . and the grand-mother also affected of short stature . This mutation was Therefore, a mutation analysis of PVRL1 gene covering all isoforms not found in the father, the aunt and the grand-mother aunt . We have were carried out in 216 North American and Australian Caucasian not found this mutation in any of the 126 control samples studied . patients and 223 population-matched controls using Single Stranded DISCUSSION: The IGF1R gene is a tyrosine-kinase transmembrane both populations studied . Particularly two variants were more frequent receptor . The mutation Y487F changes a Tyrosine by a Phenylalanine, in Caucasian nsCL/P patients than in Caucasian controls . One, an in- two aminoacid with a different polarity but with similar structure . This frame insertion at Glu442, was more frequent in Caucasian nsCL/P mutation in exon 7 should affect the extracellular domain, α subunit. patients than in Caucasian controls though not significant and another, This region is responsive of the binding IGF1 . This nucleotide change S447L (PVRL1 beta isoform specific one), was found to be significantly is not a SNP as it was not present in the controls more frequent in non-syndromic CL/P in North American Caucasian patients versus controls (p= .032), despite its failure to replicate in Aus- P06.251 tralian population . These results suggest that PVRL1 may play a minor Reelin gene variation in working memory performance role in susceptibility to the occurrence of nsCL/P in Caucasian popula- J. Wedenoja1, A. Tuulio-Henriksson2,3, J. Suvisaari2, T. Paunio1,4, A. Loukola1, J. tions . It also suggests that the beta (HIgR) isoform might have a par- Ekelund1,4, T. Varilo1, T. Partonen2, J. Lönnqvist2,4, L. Peltonen1,5; ticular importance for craniofacial development based on this marginal 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, National Public Health Insti- association, and suggesting a possible genetic heterogeneity in the tute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Mental Health and Alcohol Research, development of non-syndromic CL/P among the populations studied . National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Psychiatry, Helsinki P06.249 University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Detecting associations in the presence of extreme allelic Cambridge, United Kingdom. heterogeneity: Application to the rare variant common disease Lack of convincing results in gene identification for psychiatric disor- hypothesis ders has increased interest towards quantitative traits and endopheno- B. Li, S. M. Leal; types, which provide more power for the data analysis and are poten- Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. tially more closely related to underlying biology . Association studies are frequently utilized to map variants which are In our previous study, we replicated schizophrenia linkage on chro- susceptibility loci for common diseases . Critical assumptions of this mosome 7q21-32 in 352 Finnish families . A regional Reelin (RELN) approach are that the disease is due to a common functional vari- gene on 7q22, encoding for Reelin glycoprotein involved in neuronal ant which is in strong linkage disequilibrium with genotyped SNP(s) migration during the brain development, and contributing to synapse and there is minimal allelic heterogeneity . If the rare variant common remodelling, crucial for cognitive abilities, showed strong association disease hypothesis holds, current association based methods will be with with an intragenic microsatellite marker (STR) and multiple cogni- underpowered due to allelic heterogeneity, low allele frequencies and tive traits in a subsample of 186 families with 618 neuropsychologically poor correlation (r2) with tagSNPs . For common diseases where the tested individuals . underlying etiology is believed to involve extreme allelic heterogene- Here, we utilized neuropsychological test data from 292 Finnish schizo- ity, large scale candidate gene sequencing is currently underway to phrenia families with 923 tested individuals and 376 independent Finn- discover multiple causal rare variants . However, which methods are ish controls, and genotyped 96 RELN intragenic and flanking SNPs, optimal for analyzing this type of data to detect associations is un- two intragenic STRs, and one STR in RELN promoter . In the family known . In this study, we analytically demonstrate that collapsing gen- sample, multiple SNPs associated with visual attention, visual working otypes and rare variants across multiple loci is more powerful than memory, learning, and executive functioning (p=0 .006 to 0 .0001) . Fur- multi-marker test (Hotelling’s T2) and single marker test (Fisher exact thermore, we obtained strengthened evidence for association between test) . Although bioinformatics tools are used to classify variants, vari- the previous STR and especially verbal and visual working memory ants can be misclassified and erroneously included or excluded from (p=0 .007 to 0 .00002) . Also multiple SNPs associated with positive the analysis based upon predicted functionality . Collapsing methods symptoms of schizophrenia (p=0 .005) . Interestingly, also in the control are robust against misclassification of rare variants, but misclassifica- sample multiple SNPs associated with visual attention, visual working tion of common variants can lead to a substantial loss of power . For memory, information processing speed, and general abilities (p=0 .004Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  to 0 .00008) . The strongest signals emerged from the haploblock har- P06.254 boring the trait-associated STR . Genomewide Linkage validation of the RP locus and These data provide further evidence for involvement of RELN gene molecular Evaluation of Forty three candidate Genes variations in cognitive functions . J. Pieras1,2, M. Abd El-Aziz3, I. Barragan1,2, C. O’Driscoll3, S. Borrego1,2, L. Abu Safieh3, M. El-Ashry3, N. Carter4, C. Ponting5, S. Bhattacharya3, G. Antiñolo1,2; P06.252 1Unidad de gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal, Hos- the risk of respiratory distress syndrome in neonates from pitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Bashkortostan, Russia and gene polymorphisms of cytochrome Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Seville, Spain, P450 (CYPA, CYPA) and glutathione-s-transferase M 3Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United (GSTM) Kingdom, 4The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Cam- L. Khamidullina1, K. Danilko2, R. Fayzullina2, T. Victorova1; pus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5The Medical Research Council 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkorto- Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, stan State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. We have investigated association between polymorphisms of cyto- RP25locus (Chr.6:56.02-89.78Mb) was identified as the genetic cause chrome P450 genes (CYP1A1 (A2455G, T3801C), CYP1A2 (A-163C, in 14% of autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) in Spain . T-2467delT)), glutathione-S-transferase M1 (deletion GSTM1) and risk Linkage analysis has also reported the presence of this locus in Paki- of developing respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) in neonates from stani and Chinese families . Bashkortostan . Our objective was: to confirm the initial findings of linkage to RP25locus After birth molecular oxygen and free radicals influence on the neo- by genomewide linkage analysis; mutation screening of genes from nates lung . They are potentially harmful to cellular components . An- the RP25 region in 6 Spanish families with autosomal recessive RP tioxidants provide protection against oxidative damage to proteins, (arRP) linked to this locus; analysis of new arRP families by microsat- lipids and DNA . ellite markers spanning the chromosome 6p12 .1q15 . We used whole peripheral blood of 144 patients with RDS and umbilical The data obtained using the 10KGeneChip-Mapping array have con- cord blood of 217 healthy term neonates for the isolation of genomic firmed the original evidence of linkage to only the RP25locus in the DNA. It was used PCR amplification. We used chi-square tests to de- three families with no linkage to any other region in the genome . Tar- tect the association between genes polymorphisms and RDS babies . geted linkage analysis of 18 newly ascertained arRP families led to It was shown that the CYP1A1 (T3801C) gene genotypes frequency the identification of five additional Spanish families also linked to RP- distribution patterns not significantly differ between patients with RDS 25locus . and healthy neonates (χ2=1 .92, df=2, P=0 .382) . In male infants the Bioinformatics analysis of the RP25 region indicated in excess of 111 CYP1A1 TC genotype was associated with higher risk of RDS (38 .1% genes with many showing retinal expression . 43 candidate genes were in patients vs. 20.5% in healthy babies; χ2=6 .8, P=0 .009; OR=2 .39, selected on the basis of their function, tissue expression pattern and/or 95%CI 1 .23-4 .68) . While, the CYP1A1 TT genotype had a protective the genetic data . effect (60.7% vs. 78.7%; χ2=7 .0 P=0 .009; OR=0 .41, 95%CI 0 .22- The direct sequence analysis from these genes (38,7%) led to the 0 .81) . identification of 244 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms, of which 76 But at the same time we found no differences in the genotypes fre- were novel . quency distributions of the CYP1A1(A2455G), CYP1A2 genes within In conclusion, the fact that none of the observed variants were patho- the patients and healthy groups . genic exclude the screened genes as disease causing in these fami- We also didn’t find any association of GSTM1 gene with RDS . lies . However, we could not rule out these genes as good candidates Our results showed that the polymorphisms in CYP1A1 may play a for other retinal degenerations mapping to the same chromosomal significant role in the development of RDS in male neonates. region . These results support and validate the high prevalence of RP25 in the P06.253 Spanish population . Genetic diagnosis of autosomal dominant and recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa using sNP high-throughput genotyping P06.255 E. Pomares1,2, G. Marfany1,3, R. Gonzàlez-Duarte1,2; Retinoblastoma and microdeletion syndrome: identification of 1Dept. de Genètica. Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER. PcDH8 as a candidate for developmental delay Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 3IBUB. Universitat de Barcelona, C. Dehainault1, D. Michaux1, L. Castera1, I. Aerts1, L. Desjardins1, D. Stoppa- Barcelona, Spain. Lyonnet1,2, M. Gauthier-Villars1, C. Houdayer1,3; Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP), the major cause for blindness in the adults, 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U830 Université Paris Descartes, Paris, is an extremely heterogeneous monogenic disorder which shows all France, 3UMR INSERM 745 Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. mendelian types of inheritance . Up to now, more than 30 RP genes Retinoblastoma (RB), the most common pediatric intraocular neo- have been described, 17 of which are involved in autosomal dominant plasm, results from inactivation of both alleles of the RB1 gene, lo- (adRP) and 20 in autosomal recessive (arRP) forms . However, many cated in 13q14 .2 . Whole germline RB1 gene deletions represent 6 cases remain unassigned . Proper genetic diagnosis of the patients % of RB1 mutational spectrum . When the deletion involves the RB1 and potential carriers requires screening of all the candidates, but the flanking regions it also causes a variable degree of mental retardation high number of genes, with no major mutation sites, makes conven- and several dysmorphic abnormalities . tional mutation analysis time-consuming and costly for a small/medium In order to refine the role of chromosomal regions adjacent to RB1 in sized laboratory . In addition, before undertaking the search for new mental retardation and developmental delay, we decided to map the RP genes, the already known candidates have to be ruled out . Tak- breakpoints in seven RB patients harbouring a whole gene deletion . ing into account these data and the fact that there is increasing evi- Five of these patients presented no associated clinical abnormality, dence assigning the same candidate genes as responsible for distinct one presented a mild developmental delay with epileptic seizures, and retinal dystrophies, we have designed an innovative time-cost effective one presented developmental delay with facial dysmorphism . strategy for cosegregation analysis of 39 RP and LCA genes by SNP To precisely map the deletion breakpoints we designed a 385 000 oli- genotyping on isolated families . This high-throughput strategy allows gos-custom array (Nimblegen) focusing on RB1 and its flanking re- to discard the genes that do not cosegregate with the disease and gions (34-74Mb) . We also used MP/LC, a multiplex semi quantitative highlights the remaining candidates . Subsequent mutational screening PCR assay running on a DHPLC platform to further narrow the break- has allowed us to identify the causative mutations for several families . point regions . Then PCRs spanning the breakpoints were performed This type of analysis is very powerful in the arRP forms, particularly and sequenced which allowed the deletion breakpoints to be defined when the family is consanguineous . For adRP families, the analysis of at the nucleotide level . several affected siblings is usually informative enough to discard most We compared the deleted intervals between RB-only patients and RB of the candidates . This approach can also be successfully applied to patients with developmental delay and define a 3Mb critical interval diseases with high genetic heterogeneity . that includes a good candidate, protocadherin 8 (PCDH8) . PCDH8 is thought to function in signalling pathways and cell adhesion in a cen-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  tral nervous system-specific manner. P06.258 Further studies are now needed to refine the critical interval and to Specific neuromuscular diseases in the Roma population living check putative involvement of PCDH8 in developmental delay . in Hungary V. Karcagi1, A. Herczegfalvi2, J. S. Müller3, A. Abicht3, M. C. Walter3, R. Hor- P06.256 vath3, H. Lochmüller3, L. Kalaydjieva4; A functional heme oxigenase-1 promoter polymorphism confers 1National Institute of Environmental Health, Dept. of Molecular Genetics and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis Diagnostics, Budapest, Hungary, 2Bethesda Children’s Hospital, Dept. of Neu- B. Rueda1, J. Oliver1, G. Robledo1, M. Lopez-Nevot2, A. Balsa3, D. Pascual-Sal- rology, Budapest, Hungary, 3Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Friedrich- cedo4, M. Gonzalez-Gay5, M. Gonzalez-Escribano6, J. Martin1; Bauer-Institute and Dept. of Neurology, Munich, Germany, 4Western Australian 1Consejo superior de investigaciones científicas (CSIC), Armilla - Granada, Institute for Medical Research and Centre for Medical Research, the University Spain, 2Division of Immunology, Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. 3Division of Rheumatology, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Division of Im- Interest in the unique genetic background of the Gypsy population munology, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Division of Rheumatology, Hospital led to the discovery of novel disorders in Bulgaria such as Hereditary Xeral-Calde, Lugo, Spain, 6Division of Immunology, Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Motor and Sensory Neuropathy type Loom (HMSNL) and type Russe Sevilla, Spain. (HMSNR) and the Congenital Cataracts Facial Dimorphism (CCFDN) Objective: To investigate the role of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene syndrome . Studies across Europe characterized unique founder muta- as a novel functional candidate gene for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) . tions in disorders such as Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2C (LGM- Methods: We carried out a case-control study including 736 RA pa- D2C), Congenital Myasthenia Syndrome (CMS) and Spinal Muscular tients and 846 healthy controls of Spanish Caucasian origin . Two puta- Atrophy (SMA) . tive functional HO-1 promoter polymorphisms, a (GT)n microsatellite Our group has recently investigated affected Hungarian Gypsy fami- and a -413 T/A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), were selected lies . Large experience was obtained with CMS, as 43 Gypsy families as genetic markers and genotyped using PCR-based methods . In ad- with 65 affected and 90 unaffected family members were analyzed . In dition, the intracellular expression of HO-1 was determined in healthy 63 patients the 1267delG founder mutation has been detected in ho- individuals with different (GT)n genotypes . mozygous form in the CHRNE gene, whilst two independent patients Results: The distribution of HO-1 (GT)n alleles (Short [S] ≤ 25 GT re- showed compound heterozygosis of the frame shifting founder muta- peats and long [L]> 25 GT repeats) revealed a significant protective tion and a missense mutation. Out of the other specific neuromuscular effect of S (GT)n alleles (P = 0 .019; OR 0 .8, [95 % CI 0 .7-0 .9]) and diseases three families showed HSMNL with homozygous R148X mu- SS (GT)n genotype (P =0 .002; OR 0 .4, [95 % CI 0 .6-0 .9]) . In contrast, tation in the NDGR1 gene and another family was linked to 10q22, the the -413 HO-1 promoter SNP did not yield any statistically significant candidate region of HSMNR . Two patients were genetically diagnosed deviation between RA patients and controls considering either allelic or as having CCFDN with homozygous mutation IVS6+389C→T in the genotypic frequencies . The haplotype analysis showed a strong pro- CTPD1 gene . Four patients were found to be affected by LGMD2C tective effect of the S-A haplotype (P = 7E-07, Pc = 0 .000003; OR 0 .4 where the gamma-sarcoglycan gene carried the C283Y founder muta- [95 % CI: 0 .3-0 .6]), whereas the L-A haplotype showed the opposite tion in homozygous form . tendency (P = 0 .008, Pc = 0 .03 OR 1 .2 [95 % CI 1 .1-1 .4]) . In addition, In Hungary, 8% of the population is represented by Romas . Therefore, we demonstrate that individuals carrying the SS (GT)n genotype show the exact knowledge of the frequent disorders, with the nature and a significantly higher percentage of HO-1 expression than LL homozy- prevalence of the founder mutations and the carrier frequency is re- gous individuals (P=0 .0003) . quired . Precise genetic diagnosis, carrier testing and genetic counsel- Conclusion: In this study we identified the HO-1 (GT)n microsatellite as ing programs should be offered for this population at risk . a new genetic marker involved in RA genetics in our population . P06.259 P06.257 integration of omic data in identification of sarcoidosis stAt4 gene and the risk of Rheumatoid Arthritis in the tunisian candidate genes population A. Maver1, I. Medica1, B. Salobir2, M. Tercelj2, M. Sabovic2, B. Peterlin1; M. Ben Hamad1, H. Mbarek2, S. Marzouk3, Z. Bahloul3, F. Fakhfakh1, F. Corne- 1Clinical Institue of Medical Genetics, Department of Gynecology and Obstet- lis2, H. Ayadi1, E. Petit-Teixeira2, A. Maalej1; rics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Pulmonary Diseases 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genotel- and Allergy, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. EA3886 Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Integration of genomic and transcriptomic information together with Evry, France, 3Service de Médecine Interne CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia. linkage analysis data allows for the identification of the genetic back- The STAT4 (Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4) gene ground of complex multifactorial diseases . This approach was per- encodes a protein that plays an important role in the regulation and formed in our search for possible candidate genes for sarcoidosis, activation of certain cells of the immune system . In order to search an combined with literature-based discovery knowledge . association of STAT4 rs7574865 T allele in the genetic predisposition A comprehensive search of Pubmed database for available transcrip- to RA, we have studied 140 Tunisian patients affected with RA and tomic, proteomic and genomic scan data for sarcoidosis has been 200 healthy controls . DNAs genotyping was carried out with a Taq- performed . Additional information on possible candidate genes has Man 5’ allelic discrimination assay on an ABI 7500 real time PCR ma- been obtained by using BITOLA software, itself enabling advanced chine (assay: C__29882391_10) and data were analyzed by χ2-test, literature-based discovery searches of the Pubmed database . After Genotype relative risk and Odds Ratio with 95% confidence interval. careful inspection of discovered candidate genes, the most plausible Our results showed that the T allele and the T/T genotype were more candidates were selected for further analyses . Additionally, after identi- frequent in RA patients compared to controls (p= 0 .008; p= 0 .003, re- fication of informative polymorphisms, the association of the candidate spectively) (OR = 0 .6; CI = [0 .41-0 .88]) . We next examined patients RA genes with the disease was investigated . In our previous studies we subgroups according to clinical and immunological data for association found a statistically significant association of PPARG and PPARGC1A with STAT4. A significant association of both T allele and T/T geno- polymorphisms with sarcoidosis . type were found in patients presented erosion (p=0 .003 and p=0 .006) . By using omic approach we have identified new genes as poten- A genotypic association was observed according to the presence of tial gene candidates for sarcoidosis: Glutathione S-transferasePi nodules (p=0 .007) . Morover, an allelic association were found when (GSTP1), Endothelin-1 (EDN1), 25-(OH)-Vitamin D-1α-hydroxylase 3 patients were stratified according to the presence of rheumatoid factor (CYP27B1), Osteopontin (SPP1) . antibody (RF) (p=0 .015) as well as the presence of another autoim- In our study on 105 sarcoidosis patients and 100 controls, the prelimi- mune disease (p=0.021). However, no significant differences in allele nary results did not show evidence of significant association of allelic and genotype frequencies of rs7574865 were detected with anti-cyclic variants of single polymorphism in GSTP1, EDN1, SPP1, CYP27B1 peptides antibodies (ACPA) positive RA patients (p=0 .1 and p=0 .13 gene with susceptibility to sarcoidosis . Further studies on larger sam- respectively) . These results support the involvement of STAT4 gene in ple of patients and multiple polymorphism/gene molecular analyses the genetic susceptibility to RA in the Tunisian population . are currently in progress .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.260 to both studied diseases . However, only one SNP association survived clinical and genetic analysis of a four-generation family with correction for multiple testing - for rs1615409 in schizophrenia . More autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia detailed analyses, including haplotype and subgrouping according to F. Annesi1, D. Italiano2, G. Provenzano1, A. Laganà2, P. Tarantino1, F. Pisani2, age at onset and family loading are currently underway and will be E. V. De Marco1, G. Annesi1, A. Quattrone1,3; presented . 1National Research Council, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of Neurosciences of Psychiatric and A., First P06.262 Neurology Clinic, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, A common haplotype of DRD3 affected by recent positive University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. selection is associated with protection from schizophrenia Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a heterogeneous J. Costas1, N. Carrera1, E. Domínguez2, E. Vilella3, L. Martorell3, J. Valero3, A. group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by imbalance, Gutiérrez-Zotes3, A. Labad3, Á. Carracedo1,4; dysarthria, progressive gait and limb ataxia which are variably associ- 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, ated with other neurological signs . There are many distinct loci as- Spain, 2BIOFARMA, Departament de Farmacology, University of Santiago de sociated to Mendelian forms of SCA, but only 15 genes have been Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Psychiatric Hospital Institut Pere identified (SCA 1-8, 10, 12-14, 17, 27 and DRPLA). Molecular genetic Mata. Faculty of Medicine. University Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain, 4Genomic studies have shown that SCAs are caused by abnormal repeat ex- Medicine Group, Institute of Legal Medicine, University of Santiago de Compos- pansions and that the age at onset is inversely correlated with repeat tela, and CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. length . In the present study we conducted a genetic analysis of a SCA Recently, two independent reports identified association between family from southern Italy, that included 15 affected members over four haplotypes of the dopamine receptor (DRD3) gene and schizophrenia generations . The mean age at onset was 34 years with a strong evi- using different sets of tagSNPs . One of the reports suggests the ex- dence of anticipation across generations . We performed a mutational istence of a common protective haplotype . A case-control association analysis searching for the most common SCA mutations and a linkage study was conducted in 273 schizophrenic patients and 512 controls analysis for known genetic loci . The LOD score values were calculated from NE Spain . The characterization of the linkage disequilibrium pat- using the LINKAGE program package, assuming an autosomal domi- terns between tagSNPs of the previous reports was determined to nant inheritance and a disease frequency of 1 to 100,000 . Penetrance allow for pooled analysis, comprising a total of 794 cases and 1078 in each subject was assigned to five liability classes determined from controls . Searching for natural selection was done with tests based the age at onset . Pathological repeat expansions in the SCA 1, 2, 3, on extended linkage disequilibrium around specific haplotypes. The 6, 7, 8, 12, 17 and DRPLA genes were excluded . In addition, there pooled analysis gives a strong statistical support for the existence was no evidence of linkage to SCA5 and SCA14 loci . We are now of the protective haplotype (Mantel-Haenszel chi-square P value = performing linkage analysis of remaining SCA known loci . The lack of 0 .00227) . This haplotype is linked to another haplotype at the locus, any association will lead a full genome wide scan in order to identify characterized by the Ser variant at the non-synonymous SNP rs6280, the disease-related locus . who increased its frequency recently by natural selection . Therefore, we can conclude that there is a DRD3 schizophrenia protective hap- P06.261 lotype that has reached intermediate frequency due to the action of Association analysis of 42 sNPs in the tsNAX and Disc1 genes selection on a linked functional polymorphism. This finding reveals that in schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder in the Polish natural selection may play a role in the existence of common alleles population of susceptibility to schizophrenia, suggesting a new approach to find P. M. Czerski1, A. Karpushova2, S. Herms2, P. Kapelski3, M. Wiłkość4, B. Go- susceptibility loci . dlewska5, M. Tomaszewska4, A. Leszczyńska-Rodziewicz3, J. Hauser3, J. Land- owski5, A. Borkowska4, M. Rietschel6, M. M. Nöthen2, S. Cichon2; P06.263 1Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Laboratory of Psychiatric Genetics, Recent adaptive selection at mAOB and ancestral susceptibility Poznan, Poland, 2University of Bonn, Department of Genomics, Life & Brain to schizophrenia Centre, Bonn, Germany, 3Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Department N. Carrera1, J. Sanjuán2, M. Moltó3, Á. Carracedo1,4, J. Costas1; of Psychiatry, Poznan, Poland, 4Clinical Neuropsychology Unit, Nicolaus Coper- 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, nicus University Torun, Collegium Medicum, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 5Medical Uni- Spain, 2Psychiatric Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Hospital, University of versity of Gdansk, Department of Psychiatry, Gdansk, Poland, 6Central Institute Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Univer- of Mental Health, Division of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Mannheim, sity of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 4Genomic Medicine Group, Institute of Legal Germany. Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, and CIBERER, Santiago de Linkage between schizophrenia and chromosome 1q42 .2 markers has Compostela, Spain. been reported independently in different populations worldwide . This The ancestral susceptibility hypothesis has been proposed to explain region contains the gene TSNAX and Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 the existence of common susceptibility alleles . Some ancestral alleles, (DISC1) which had been found to be disrupted by a balanced trans- reflecting ancient adaptations, may be poorly adapted to the more con- location and to co-segregate with schizophrenia in a large Scottish temporary environmental conditions giving rise to an increased risk pedigree . Association studies investigating DISC1 single nucleotide to suffer some common disorders . In order to test this hypothesis in polymorphisms (SNPs) in a number of samples were promising but schizophrenia, we focus on monoamine oxidase B (MAOB) . This gene not yet compelling . is involved in deamination of several monoamines, including both xe- In the present study, we aimed at investigating the possible contribu- nobiotic amines present in several foods, as well as neurotransmitters tion of TSNAX and DISC1 variants on the pathogenesis of SCH and such as dopamine . In addition, preliminary analysis based on phase I bipolar affective disorder . HapMap data suggested that recent natural selection have acted on We investigated 42 SNPs, on the basis of previous association find- this locus . We further explored the existence of this recent positive se- ings, using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry-based SNP genotyping lection using a test based on extension of linkage disequilibrium (LD) to (Sequenom’s iPLEX technology) . The study sample comprised 501 large distance at the specific selected haplotype taking data from Hap- DSM-IV diagnosed patients with schizophrenia, 418 DSM-IV diag- Map phase II, and searched for association of the ancestral haplotypes nosed patients with bipolar affective disorder and 530 controls - all to schizophrenia in a sample of 532 schizophrenic patients and 597 from the Polish population . controls from Spain . Our analysis suggests the existence of a haplotype For single marker analysis DISC1 rs1615409 was associated with of MAOB subject to recent selection . In agreement with the ancestral schizophrenia at the allelic (p=0 .001) and genotypic (p=0 .002) level . susceptibility hypothesis, the ancestral haplotypes were significantly TSNAX rs1411776 showed an association with bipolar disorder and over-represented in patients (P = 0 .047) . These haplotypes confer an schizophrenia at the allelic (p=0 .015, and p=0 .053 respectively), and increased risk to schizophrenia, restricted to males (P = 0 .024, OR = genotypic level (p=0 .038 for bipolar disorder) . 1 .41, 95% CI 1 .01-1 .90) . Thus, pending on replication studies, MAOB Our results provide evidence for the contribution of rs1615409 to seems to fit the ancestral susceptibility model, opening a new strategy schizophrenia susceptibility (particularly in females - p=0 .0004), and to search for common schizophrenia susceptibility genes by focusing in modest evidence for an involvement of rs1411776 in the predisposition those functional candidate genes subject to recent positive selection .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.264 lobe epilepsy (TLE) . Using a candidate gene approach, we recently il- support for the involvement of NRG1 in schizophrenia in iranian lustrated that the G1465A polymorphism in the GABBRI is a strong risk population: Evidence from a case: control association study factor for non-lesional TLE . Afterwards, other studies observed no evi- S. A. M. Shariati1, M. Behmanesh1, H. Galehdari2, A. Fathian2, A. Forough- dence of association . To better investigate this association, we set out mand2; to examine whether common variations in GABBR1 predisposes to the 1Department of Genetics, School of Basic Sciences, Tarbiat Modares Univer- development of non-lesional TLE . We performed a genetic association sity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department Of Genetics, School of Basic analysis of GABBR1 sequence variants by evaluating three SNPs and Sciences, Chamran University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. an (AC)n repeat in a sample of 236 patients with non-lesional TLE and It has been accepted widely that schizophrenia is a multifactorial dis- 380 age and geographic origin matched healthy controls . The program order and evidence in support of the involvement of genetic factor UNPHASED was used to compare genotype, allele and haplotype fre- in pathology of schizophrenia is compelling . As a result of extensive quencies between cases and controls, including age and gender as study, a list of genes has emerged as candidate genes for schizophre- covariates in the model . nia . Research into genetics of schizophrenia has found Neurgulin1 We found that each variation conferred an increased risk of disease (NRG1) among the most promising candidate genes for schizophre- development . In addition, the four-SNP haplotypes were associated nia. For the first time in 2002, Steafansson et al suggested NRG1 as with the disease . a candidate susceptibility gene for schizophrenia in a linkage study Our data show that genetic variability in GABBR1 is highly associated carried out in an Icelandic population . Since then, the association with susceptibility to non-lesional TLE, further corroborating our earlier of NRG1 with schizophrenia was further confirmed by several stud- observations . Further studies in different TLE patient-control cohorts ies in different population . However, analyzing allele and haplotype are needed . frequencies of NRG1 in distinct populations have yielded varying re- sults and also different alleles or haplotypes have been associated P06.267 with schizophrenia . Meanwhile, some studies have failed to replicate interleukin-23 receptor (iL23R) gene polymorphisms in patients the association . In this work we attempted to study the association of with sjögren syndrome two NRG1 polymorphisms with schizophrenia in Iranian population . E. Sáfrány1, V. Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, C. Sipeky1, M. SNP8NRG241930 and SNP8NRG221533 were studied in 100 cases Zeher2, B. Melegh1; of schizophrenia matched with 100 healthy individuals. For the first 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, time in Iranian population, we showed a positive association between Pécs, Hungary, 2Medical and Health Science Center, Institute for Internal Medi- NRG1 and Schizophrenia . Our statistical analyses indicate that there cine, 3rd Department of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. are significant differences in allelic and genotypic frequencies between Sjögren syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disease that mainly effects two studied groups . the exocrine glands . It is clinically characterized by keratoconjunctivi- tis sicca and xerostomia . Duerr et al . (Science, 2006; 314:1461-1463) P06.265 found an association between Crohn’s disease and the intreleukin-23 Autosomal recessive form is the predominant pattern in iranian receptor gene using genome-wide association; amongst the reported patients with Severe Combined Immune Deficiency Disease SNPs the 3’-UTR C2370A (rs10889677) conferred risk for Crohn’s S. Safaei; disease, the Arg381Gln (rs11209026) showed the strongest protec- Immunology, Asthma and Allergy Research Institute, Tehran University of Medi- tive effect and the Pro310Leu (rs7530511) had no association with cal Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the disease . Since the IL23 pathway is known to associate also with Severe Combined Immune Deficiency is a X-linked and Autosomal Re- other autoimmune diseases, we theoretized that these SNPs might cessive disorder . World investigations showed nearly 48% X-linked in- also have significance in the development of SS. We performed ge- heritance which caused by mutations of the IL-2RG .This form of SCID notyping using DNA samples collected from 156 patients with SS and is characteristically T-/NK-/B+ . Also many genes invovled in Autosomal 182 unrelated, healthy controls . The genotypes were analysed using Recessive pattern . The aim of this study was to determine the inher- PCR/RFLP-methods. We found no significant difference between the ited pattern of SCID affected families in Iranian patients . allele frequencies of the two groups, as for rs10889677 the distribution Methods: Genomic DNA of 5 male unrelated patients with T-B+ clinical of genotypes were CC 45 .5%, CA 43 .6%, AA 10 .9% in patients with symptoms of SCID was purified from peripheral blood. The sequenc- SS, while we observed CC 45 .6%, CA 48 .4%, AA 6 .04% in the control ing of IL2RG was performed to find out if they harbour any mutation in group (not significant). For rs11209026 the genotypes were GG 87.8%, these exones or not . GA 12 .2% and GG 86 .3%, GA 13 .7% in the examined groups . Similar Result: We analyzed the IL-2RG (The X-linked mode of inheritance ) of results were obtained for rs7530511 also: CC 73 .7%, CT 22 .4%, TT the patient for mutations by direct genemic sequencing, but found it to 3 .85% and CC 72 .5%, CT 25 .3%, TT 2 .20% in the groups of patients be normal, suggesting an autosomal mode of inheritance of SCID . and controls, respectively . Our results suggest that these SNPs do not Discussion: About 48% of SCID patient were reported to have IL2RG play a role in the development of Sjögren syndrome . deficiency in the word but our result showes that autosomal recessive pattern is the predominant in Iranian SCID patients even the number P06.268 of patients is not enough to say strongly that . Because of counsanguity The STK11-PRKAA2-CRTC2 genes are play a major role in the marriage it is also very hard to say that the patient who lost boy be- genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes cause of SCID had cause from IL2RG gene . Because of complexcity P. Keshavarz1, H. Inoue2, M. Itakura2; of SCID we suggest that for those family who lost boy first linkage with 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The Chromosome X and then if it is negative for that linkage with other cau- university of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. setive genes . This is pilot study and much more investigation need to The activation of hepatic LKB1-AMPK-TORC2 signaling pathway, clarify that which gene is more frequently causetive in Iranian Patient . which is the probable target for the antidiabetic drug metformin, have a key role for development of type 2 diabetes (T2D) . We hypothesized P06.266 that genetic polymorphisms of the STK11, PRKAA2 (encoding AMPK Association of a GABA(B) gene haplotype and temporal Lobe α subunit) and CRTC2 (encoding TORC2) could influence the suscep- 2 Epilepsy tibility to T2D . We screened STK11 and CRTC2 by direct sequencing I. Manna1, A. Gambardella1,2, P. Forabosco3, A. Labate1,2, E. Colosimo2, R. and genotyped in 1787Japanese subjects . Additionally, the previously Ambrosio2, E. Le Piane4, U. Aguglia4, G. Di Palma1, A. Quattrone1,2; described association between the PRKAA2 haplotype and T2D was 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Piano Lago di tested for replication . According to single locus association test, an Mangone, Cosenza, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, intronic SNP in the STK11 (rs741765; OR 1 .33, 95% CI 1 .05-1 .67, p Catanzaro, Italy, 3Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s Col- = 0 .017, under a recessive model), and a non-synonymous SNP in lege London School of Medicine at Guy’s, London, United Kingdom, 4Regional the CRTC2 (6909C > T: Arg379Cys; OR 3 .01, 95% CI 1 .18-7 .66, p Epilepsy Centre, Hospital of Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy. = 0.016, under a dominant model) showed a nominal significant as- There is experimental evidence that dysfunctions of the GABA(B) re- sociation with T2D . In PRKAA2, two non coding SNPs, rs1418442 ceptor l gene (GABBRl) are implicated in the pathogenesis of temporal and rs932447 were associated moderately with T2D (OR 0 .62, 95%Molecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 CI 0 .40-0 .96, p = 0 .030, under a recessive model) . Haplotype analysis P06.271 showed that only in STK11, one haplotype containing the minor T allele Highly significant association between Contactin Associated of rs741765 was slightly associated with T2D (P=0 .04) . The associa- Protein-like 2 (CNTNAP) and non-word repetition in a language tion of PRKAA2 haplotype reported previously in Japanese was not impaired sample replicated in our samples . Among the three genes investigated herein, D. F. Newbury, L. Winchester, L. Addis, S. L. I. Consortium (SLIC), A. P. Mo- gene-gene (SNP-SNP) interaction studies provided evidence for an in- naco; teraction between STK11 and CRTC2 influencing susceptibility to type Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. 2 diabetes . In conclusion, this study has found a weak evidence that Specific Language Impairment (SLI) is defined as a substantial delay STK11, PRKAA2, or CRTC2 polymorphisms contribute to the suscep- in the development of language despite normal development in other tibility to T2D in Japanese . areas and in the absence of accompanying neurological conditions like autism . Despite the diagnostic division between autism and SLI, P06.269 the two disorders share many clinical features and researchers have Extremely High carrier Frequency of smA in iranian Population proposed that they may share risk factors and involve mutual neu- M. Hasanzad1,2, M. Azad3, B. Shoja Saffar1, A. Aghajani Refah1, K. Kahrizi1, H. rodevelopmental pathways . The lack of any clear genetic candidates Najmabadi1,3; has precluded the validation of this hypothesis at the molecular level . 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- However, converging evidence from genetic research has recently im- ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University, Tehran Medi- plicated members of the neurexin gene family in autism . In the present cal Unit, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology study we therefore investigated a neurexin gene, Contactin Associated and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Protein-like 2 (CNTNAP2), within families affected by SLI . We typed 37 Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the most common autosomal SNPs within 184 families ascertained by the SLI Consortium (SLIC) . recessive diseases, affecting approximately one in 6000 to 10000 live Quantitative TDT (QTDT) was used to assess marker-trait association births and with a carrier frequency of approximately one in 40 to 60 . for three language-related measures . Expressive and receptive lan- About 94% of individuals with clinically typical SMA lack both copies guage abilities were assessed with the Clinical Evaluation of Language of SMN1 exon 7 . Fundamentals (CELF-R) and a test of non-word repetition (NWR) was Carrier frequency studies of SMA have been reported to be variable used to measure phonological short-term memory . We found a highly in different population and no population-based studies has been significant level of association (max P=0.00005) between NWR and done in Iran, however our observations indicate that the incidence of a cluster of 9 SNPs within the CNTNAP2 gene . A suggestive level of SMA is much higher in Iranian population partly because of high rate association was also observed in this region to both CELF measures of consanguineous marriages . The copy number of SMN1 gene was (max P=0 .003) . These results were supported by subsequent hap- determined in 400 normal individuals by quantitative real - time PCR lotype and regression analyses. Our findings support the existence with SYBR Green I dye . The comparative threshold cycle (Ct) of each of shared genetic risk factors between SLI and autism, a conclusion sample was calculated and albumin was used as a reference gene . which yields important consequences for the conceptualisation, diag- The homozygous SMN1 deletion ΔΔCt ratio of patient was 0.00 and nosis and treatment of these disorders . the hemizygous SMN1 deletion ΔΔCt ratio of obligate carriers ranged from 0.29 to 0.55. The ΔΔCt ratio of 92 persons among 400 normal P06.272 individuals was within the carrier range, 0 .31-0 .57 . An investigation of dyslexia risk loci in families with Specific Our data indicated that the carrier frequency of SMA in Iranian popula- Language impairment, (sLi), implicates KIAA0 as a shared tion is higher (1 out 5) than other countries . genetic factor L. Addis, D. F. Newbury, L. Winchester, S. L. I. Consortium (SLIC), A. P. Mo- P06.270 naco; Determination of the smN1 and smN2 copy number based on Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. real-time PcR in Hungarian smA families Specific Language Impairment, (SLI), is defined as a considerable M. Nagymihaly1, A. Herczegfalvi2, L. Timar3, V. Karcagi1; developmental delay in the acquisition and/or use of language in the 1National Institute of Environmental Health, Dept. of Molecular Genetics and absence of other diagnostic features such as hearing loss and autism . Diagnostics, Budapest, Hungary, 2Bethesda Children’s Hospital, Dept. of Neu- There is substantial co-morbidity of SLI with developmental dyslexia, rology, Budapest, Hungary, 3National Institute of Child Health, Genetic Counsel- in which children are described as having unexpected difficulties in ling, Budapest, Hungary. learning to read, write and spell . This has lead researchers to inves- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by progressive mus- tigate the possibility of shared risk factors for the two disorders . Sev- cle weakness caused by degeneration of the spinal anterior horn cells . eral genomic regions have shown consistent association to dyslexia Patients with SMA have been classified into three types on the basis on chromosomes 2, 6 and 15. We typed 16 SNPs identified within of clinical severity . The survival motor neuron gene is present in two these regions in 175 language-impaired families, ascertained by the copies, SMN1 and SMN2, which differ by only five nucleotides. Only SLI Consortium (SLIC) . Quantitative TDT (QTDT) was used to assess SMN1 gene provides fully functional protein due to exon 7 skipping in marker-trait association using both orthogonal (within family) and to- SMN2. On the other hand, the SMA phenotype can be modified by the tal (within- and between- family) association to three reading-related presence of several copies of SMN2 . measures . These measures, taken from the Wechsler Objective Read- SMA is a common and fatal disorder, therefore the carrier detection is ing Dimensions (WORD), assess basic reading, spelling, and reading essential for prevention and proper genetic counseling . Therefore, es- comprehension. Single SNP orthogonal analysis identified association timation of the SMN1 and SMN2 copy number in patients by real-time of these measures to SNPs within MRPL19/C2ORF3 on chromosome PCR has been recently introduced in Hungary . This technique is used 2, and DCDC2 on chromosome 6 . Total association was found to the also for the detection of possible compound heterozygotes . same SNP in MRPL19/C2ORF3, and also to a SNP within KIAA0319 Until now, SMN1 copies were determined in 25 affected patients and on chromosome 6 . We used the SNP data to reconstruct haplotypes their 132 family members and twenty controls . Seven patients were that had previously been reported to be associated with dyslexia . In identified as being compound heterozygotes and thus, the diagnosis this analysis, association was replicated only in the KIAA0319 gene of SMA was assumed. The intragenic pointmutations will be identified and with all reading-related measures . This investigation therefore in- later on by sequencing. Additionally, 151 SMA patients with undefined dicates that the loci identified by studies of dyslexia, and in particular genetic diagnosis still have to be tested for the SMN1 copy number . KIAA0319, may also contribute to reading ability in language impaired For urgent family planning, 24 relatives of the known carrier parents populations . were tested and 8 were confirmed as carriers of the common SMN1 mutation . Additionally, SMN2 copy number were estimated in 64 pa- tients and in 33 family members and a good correlation was found between copy number and severity of the disease .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.273 To address this issue, we used rat L6 myoblast cells, which can differ- intronic sequence changes may have unpredictable effects on entiate into myocytes, in this study . We treated cells with cerivaststin splicing which had developed potent myopathy or pravastatin relatively less F. Joncourt, S. Gallati; toxic than cerivastatin, and measured cell viability using MTT assay . Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Berne, Swit- MTT assay showed significant concentration-dependent decrease of zerland. cell viability by treatment of statins and revealed cerivastatin is much Mutation scanning often identifies yet undescribed sequence changes more toxic than pravastatin . It seems that DNA microarrays could be in genomic DNA, which are not easily classified as either pathogenic very helpful not only to predict drug-induced toxicity, but also to better or neutral solely by sequence inspection . Increasing knowledge about understand the mechanism of actions of drug . Using DNA microarrays, the splicing process has revealed its great complexity: In addition to we discovered 522 genes that are specifically responsible to cerivas- the well known splice-site consensus sequences in recent years a mul- tatin-induced muscle cell toxicity and these genes correctly classified titude of regulatory elements have been identified both within introns as muscle toxicity group. Moreover fifteen genes that are the poten- as well as within exons. In order to assess / confirm their pathogenic tial candidates as myopathy biomarkers were selected . Among them, nature, we have analysed the effect on splicing of several yet func- seven genes are the sensitive genes that were showed response even tionally uncharacterized intronic sequence changes in different genes at the low toxic dose, and eight genes are responded in dose-depen- by analysing their respective RNA’s . Lymphocytes from patients were dent manner . immortalized, RNA was extracted and reverse transcribed . The cDNA was then amplified by PCR and analysed by PAGE or agarose gel elec- P06.276 trophoresis . Bands with altered electrophoretic mobility were isolated, Genetic association study of Kalirin and Ropporin with ischemic purified and sequenced. Two mutations located within the conserved stroke donor and acceptor splice sites respectively (NF1: c .3496+1G>A and T. Krug1, H. Manso1,2, L. Gouveia3, B. V. Fonseca1, I. Albergaria2, G. Gaspar2, SPG4: c .1688-2A>G) were shown to lead to exon skipping as expect- M. Correia4, M. Viana-Baptista5, R. M. Simões6, A. N. Pinto6, R. Taipa4, C. ed. c.357+2T>A identified in a patient’s DMD-gene, however, resulted Ferreira7, J. R. Fontes7, M. R. Silva8, J. P. Gabriel8, I. Matos9, G. Lopes4, J. M. in the inclusion of 31 bases of intronic sequence into the mRNA lead- Ferro3, A. M. Vicente1,2, S. A. Oliveira1; ing to a frameshift, while exon skipping would have left the reading 1Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, Oeiras, Portugal, 2Instituto Nacional de Saude frame intact . This latter case further illustrates that the effect of an Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, unknown mutation on the splicing process can not easily be predicted . 4Hospital Geral de Santo Antonio, Porto, Portugal, 5Hospital Garcia de Orta, The results emphasize the need for functional characterization of new- Almada, Portugal, 6Hospital Fernando Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal, 7Hospital ly described sequence changes . Sao Marcos, Braga, Portugal, 8Hospital de Sao Pedro, Vila Real, Portugal, 9Hospital Distrital de Mirandela, Mirandela, Portugal. P06.274 Introduction: Cerebrovascular and cardiovascular diseases such as sPRY1 molecular analysis in subjects with ureteral duplicity stroke and coronary artery disease (CAD) are the leading causes of L. Artifoni1, E. Benetti2, S. Negrisolo1, S. Centi1, G. Caridi3, G. Ghiggeri3, L. death and disability worldwide . They are complex disorders resulting Murer1,2; from the interplay of genetics and environment, and may share sev- 1Laboratory of Nephrology, Department of Paediatrics, University of Padua, eral susceptibility genes . Recently, an association-mapping study in Padua, Italy, 2Paediatric Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Depart- the chromosome 3 linkage peak for CAD found that the rs9289231 ment of Paediatrics, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 3Laboratory of Physiopa- SNP in the Kalirin gene (KALRN) was associated with CAD in multiple thology of Uremia, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Genoa, Italy. datasets . KALRN is involved, among others, in the inhibition of induc- Studies on murine models demonstrated that Sprouty1 protein, encod- ible nitric oxide synthase, in guanine exchange factor activity, and in ed by Spry1 gene, modulates Gdnf/Ret signal, which activates a cru- the Rho GTPase-signaling pathway . The goal of the present study was cial gene network in urinary tract development . Spry1-knockout mice to determine whether SNPs or haplotypes in the KALRN gene region, develop supernumerary ureteric buds, that result in multiple ureters which includes the Ropporin gene (ROPN1), predispose to ischemic and kidneys . In the literature, there only one report about mutational stroke (IS) in a cohort of Portuguese patients and controls . analyses of human SPRY1 gene, the homologue of murine Spry1, Methods & Materials: We genotyped 27 tagging SNPs in the KALRN- even if the gene is known to be expressed in fetal renal tissue . ROPN1 chromosomal region, on 565 IS patients and 518 unrelated We carried out mutational analysis of SPRY1 gene in patients with ure- controls, and performed single-marker association tests . teral duplicity: 23 isolated and 4 familial cases . On each DNA sample, Results: Intronic SNP rs11712619 in KALRN was associated with IS the coding region and 5’UTR were analysed by SSCP and all PCR risk in unadjusted (allelic and genotypic p=0 .003) and adjusted (log- products were then directly sequenced (ABI PRISM 3100 Applied Bio- additive model p=0 .027, adjusted for age-at-examination, hyperten- system) . DNA from 6 subjects without kidney and urinary tract anoma- sion, diabetes, ever smoking/drinking) tests . A block of six SNPs (from lies was used as control group . rs2280422 to rs12637456), located mostly in the ROPN1-KALRN in- We detected 5 polymorphisms (SNPs), previously reported in data- tergenic region, had a modest (0 .02<p<0 .05) allelic and genotypic as- bases, and 1 nucleotide substitution, which has never been reported . sociation with IS risk when unadjusted for co-variates . The rs9289231 The frequency of this substitution was estimated in 127 umbilical cord SNP was not associated with IS in any test performed . blood DNA samples and was 0 .094 . In order to understand SPRY1 Conclusions: This study suggests that variants in the ROPN1-KALRN role in renal development, mutational analysis will be extended to a region may constitute risk factors for stroke in the Portuguese popula- population of subjects with different malformative nephrouropathies tion . and association studies with the detected polymorphisms will be per- formed . P06.277 Polymorphisms in PDED gene region are associated with P06.275 ischemic stroke recovery transcriptomic analysis of statin treated rat skeletal muscle H. Manso1,2, T. Krug1, T. Magalhães1,2, B. V. Fonseca1, J. Sobral1,2, I. Alber- cells garia2, G. Gaspar2, J. M. Ferro3, S. A. Oliveira1, A. M. Vicente1,2, t. PORTuguese M. J. Ko, H. S. Choi, H. S. Jeong, J. I. Ahn, S. Y. Kim, H. J. Chung; Stroke GENetics (PORTSGEN) Group4; National Institute of Toxicological Research of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 1Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 2Instituto Nacional de Saúde Statins are competitive hydroxy-3-metyl glutaryl coenzyme A(HMG- Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital de Sta. Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, CoA) reductase inhibitors that inhibit the synthesis of cholesterol from 4Portugal, Portugal, Portugal. mevalonic acid . Statins are the drugs most frequently used to reduce Stroke is a major cause of permanent disability in developed coun- plasma cholesterol levels and decrease cardiovascular events . How- tries . It is therefore of major importance to understand how to reduce ever, the side effects associated with the use of statins have been brain damage and how to improve patient’s recovery . Evidence from highlighted by the withdrawal of cerivastatin from the market in 2001, animal studies and an association between family history of stroke and but little is currently known about the effect of statins on the RNA ex- stroke outcome suggests the existence of genetic factors influencing pression profile of skeletal muscle cells and mechanism of myopathy. stroke recovery . The PDE4D gene, a regulator of cAMP degradation,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  is a possible candidate because cAMP levels in immunocompetent cohort 2 from Germany (257 SLE patients and 317 controls) and co- cells influence the release of inflammatory mediators and relevant cy- hort 3 from Sweden (310 SLE patients and 247 controls) . The CD24 tokines, which are important mediators of stroke recovery. Forty five A57V polymorphism was genotyped using a PCR system with pre- SNPs covering genetic variation in the 5’ region of the PDE4D gene, developed TaqMan allelic discrimination assay . In the Spanish cohort including SNPs previously associated with stroke risk in the Icelan- we found a statistically significant difference in the distribution of the dic population, were genotyped in 430 ischemic stroke patients and CD24V allele between SLE patients and controls (P< 0 .0001, OR= 3 .6, tested for association with functional recovery . Stroke recovery was 95%CI 2 .13-6 .16) . In addition, the CD24V/V genotype was increased in assessed 3 months after a stroke episode, using the modified Rankin SLE patients (P< 0 .00001, OR= 3 .7, 95%CI 2 .16-6 .34) compared with Scale (mRS). Patients were classified in two groups: good (mRS<=1) controls . Additionally, we sought to replicate this association with SLE or poor recovery (2<=mRS<6) . Binary logistic regression analysis was in a Swedish and a German SLE population . A similar trend was found carried out to adjust for clinical severity parameters and risk factors in the German set, where the CD24V/V genotype and the CD24V al- with a significant impact on stroke recovery. Seven SNPs were as- lele were more frequent in SLE patients than in controls, although this sociated with mRS (0.00098<P<0.048) after adjusting for significant difference did not reach statistical significance. No differences were co-variates - history of hypertension, aphasia, paresis, consciousness observed in the Swedish set . A meta-analysis of the Spanish and Ger- disturbance and medical complications during hospitalization . Five man cohorts demonstrated that the CD24V allele has a risk effect in haplotypes, including at least one of the associated individual SNPs, SLE patients (Pooled OR= 1 .25, 95%CI 1 .08-1 .46, P= 0 .003) . In ad- were also associated with stroke outcome (0 .0056<P<0 .0367) . These dition, homozygosity for the CD24V risk allele significantly increased results suggest that PDE4D gene variants may contribute to individual the effect (Pooled OR= 2 .19, 95%CI 1 .50-3 .22, P= 0 .00007) . Our data variability in ischemic stroke recovery, possible by playing a role in the suggest that the CD24 A57V polymorphism plays a role in the suscep- neuroinflammatory processes that occur after stroke. tibility to SLE in a Spanish population . P06.278 P06.280 Association analysis of 677c>t polymorphic marker of mtHFR Genetic polymorphism of Eta-1/Osteopontin is associated with gene and suicide systemic lupus erythematosus in Korea Z. Khalilova1, D. Gaysina2, A. Kazantseva1, E. Khusnutdinova11; H. Kim1, J. Song2; 1Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Psychia- 1laboratory medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Internal medicine, Seoul, Re- try, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom. public of Korea. Suicide is almost always a complication of a psychiatric illness, the Background: The aim of this study is to investigate the association most common of which is a mood disorder that generally accounts with this SNP at position nucleotide 9250 (C->T) in OPN gene and for 60% of cases . It has been reported that a functional single gene susceptibility to SLE patients firstly. Also, we try to compare the allele polymorphisms 677C>T (rs1801133) of methylenetetrahydrofolate frequency of Korean with them of USA and Japanese . reductase gene (MTHFR) is involved in pathogenesis of depression, Materials and Methods: A total of 40 Systemic lupus erythematosus and also of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . The aim of our study (SLE) patients and 104 healthy controls were studied . SNP located at was to conduct the association analysis of 677C>T polymorphism of position 9520 in the Osteopontin (OPN) gene were genotyped using MTHFR gene and suicidal behavior in 310 patients (134- Russians, the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) . The wild-type 107- Tatars) and 434 health volunteers (169- Russians, 248- Tatars) sequence contains a C while the polymorphism variant is a T (C->T), from Bashkortostan (Russia) using PCR-RFLP technique . The distri- which results in the appearance of an Alu I restriction site . bution of genotype frequencies was in accordance with Hardy-Wein- Results: The gene frequencies of C/C, C/T, and T/T at position 9250 berg equilibrium. No significant differences in either allele or genotype on the Eta-1/osteopontin gene in SLE patients were 37 .5%, 12 .5%, frequencies of MTHFR 677C>T polymorphism were found between and 50 .0%, respectively, compared with 6 .7%, 27 .9%, and 65 .8% in suicidal and control groups in Russian population . However in Tatar controls (p<0 .05) . The allele frequencies of C and T at this position population MTHFR*T allele (X2 = 16 .48; p<0 .001; df = 1; OR = 2 .13; in such SLE patients were 43 .75 and 56 .25, whereas those in con- 95%CI 1 .47-3 .08) and MTHFR*C/*T genotype (X2 = 21 .14; p<0 .001; trols were 20 .7 and 79 .3 (p<0 .05), respectively . The allele frequen- df = 1; OR = 2.95; 95%CI 1.85-4.737) were shown to be significantly cies found in the present study were compared with those coding SNP associated with suicidal behavior . Moreover, MTHFR*C allele (X2 = described in the USA database; 60 and 39 (USA) vs 20 .7 and 79 .3 16 .48; p<0 .001; df = 1; OR = 0, .47; 95%CI 0 .33-0 .68) and MTHFR*C/ (Korea) (p<0 .05) . *C genotype (X2 = 21 .95; p<0 .001; df = 1; OR = 0 .33; 95%CI 0 .21- Conclusions: Those findings suggest Eta-1/osteopontin genetic poly- 0 .53) are reported to be protective markers of suicidal behavior in Ta- morphism and allele frequencies were significantly association with tar population . Our study reports the involvement of MTHFR gene in SLE patients . Also we observed the difference of allele frequencies in predisposition to suicidal behavior; and it is shown that the effect is our controls and in USA controls, these differences may be caused by influenced by ethnicity. a difference in incidence of SLE patients between the two countries . The work was supported by RSCI grant 06-06-00163 P06.281 P06.279 Analysis of the genetic variability in the TFF gene cluster Association of a cD24 gene polymorphism with susceptibility to F. Marín1,2, N. García1,2, X. Muñoz1,2, B. Hurtado1, C. A. González2, G. Capellà1, systemic lupus erythematosus N. Sala1,2; E. Sánchez1, A. Abelson2, J. Sabio3, M. A. González-Gay4, N. Ortego-Centeno5, 1Translational Research Laboratory, Institut Català d’Oncologia (ICO-IDIBELL), J. Jimenez-Alonso3, E. de Ramon6, J. Sanchez-Roman7, M. A. Lopez-Nevot8, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Unit of Nutrition, Environment and Cancer, I. Gunnarsson9, E. Svenungsson9, G. Sturfelt10, L. Truedsson10, L. Truedsson11, Cancer Epidemiology Program, Institut Català d‘Oncologia (ICO-IDIBELL), A. Jönsen10, M. González-Escribano12, T. Witte13, M. E. Alarcón-Riquelme2, J. Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. Martin1; The genes encoding the trefoil factor peptides (TFF1, TFF2 and TFF3) 1CSIC, Armilla (Granada), Spain, 2Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Hos- are clustered in a 55 kb region on 21q22 .3 . TFFs are a small protein pital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 4Hospital Xeral-Calde, Lugo, Spain, family secreted onto the mucous epithelia that play an important role 5Hospital Clinico San Cecilio, Granada, Spain, 6Hospital Carlos-Haya, Malaga, in gastrointestinal mucosal maintenance . Genetic variation in these Spain, 7Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 8Immunology Department. genes could influence inflammation progression to gastric cancer. To Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 9Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska study association between polymorphisms in the TFF genes and gas- University Hospital, Solna, Sweden, 10Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, tric carcinogenesis, the purpose of this study was to characterize vari- 11Lund University Hospital Section MIG, Lund, Sweden, 12Immunology Depart- ability in the TFF cluster . ment. Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 13Medical School Hannover, We selected TFF polymorphisms from public databases and used Hannover, Germany. RFLP and SSCP/HD analysis to validate them in a control sample The aim of this study was to determine the potential role of the CD24 group . SSCP/HD was also used to scan the TFF genes for novel vari- A57V gene polymorphism with SLE . Our study includes three Cauca- ants . Validated polymorphisms were genotyped in a larger population sian cohorts: cohort 1 from Spain (696 SLE patients and 539 controls), by real-time PCR and, one of them, by the recently developed HighMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  Resolution Melting technology in the LightCycler 480 . We performed genetic analysis can increase our ability to detect phenotypes that are linkage disequilibrium (LD) and haplotype analysis using the Haplo- affected by sex . We hope that our results will help to understand the view and SNPstats programs . regulation of fibrinogen plasma levels that determine the susceptibility Six of the nine polymorphisms initially selected from the public data- of cardiovascular disease . Our results may provide a template for fu- bases were validated in our population . SSCP/HD analysis allowed ture genetic studies of quantitative traits affecting complex diseases . for the identification of 9 novel SNPs (3 in TFF1, 4 in TFF2 and 2 in TFF3), 7 of which could be functional, and a novel insertion polymor- P06.284 phism c .*66_67InsCTT, in the 3’UTR region of TFF2. Preliminary LD Genetic variants of the tBX15 gene associated with thyroid analysis indicates that each TFF gene is located in independent LD cancer susceptibility blocks and that high LD exists between SNPs in TFF2 . Genotyping M. Akdi1, P. Galofré2, R. Marcos1, A. Velázquez1; of these polymorphisms in case-control studies of gastric cancer is at 1Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona and CIBERESP, Cerdanyola, Spain, 2Hos- present underway . pital Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. Association studies to identify susceptibility genetic factors for thyroid P06.282 cancer have been appeared recently . Our initial case-control associa- investigation of genetic component of susceptibility to atopic tion studies had shown that the rs2145418 and the rs4658973 mark- bronchial asthma and tuberculosis: xenobiotic-metabolising ers that map 377 kb apart on the 1p12 region have an independent enzymes. association with thyroid cancer susceptibility . Next we have expanded E. Bragina1, M. Freidin1, A. Rudko1, O. Kolokolova2, L. Ogorodova2, A. Strelis2, these initial studies by genotype and haplotype analysis in the region V. Pusyrev1; containing the two markers . Here we present the results related to the 1Institute of Medical Genetics of Tomsk Scientific Center of Siberian Branch of rs2145418 region . Thus, the MassArray technique was used to geno- Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian type 136 control individuals and 201 thyroid patients . First we have State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. confirmed our previous results, by genotyping the rs2145418 SNP The relationships of polymorphic variants of the genes encoding xe- along with two SNPs surrounding this marker . Only the rs2145418 nobiotic-metabolising enzimes (CYP2C19, CYP2E1, GSTT1, GSTM1, polymorphism showed association with thyroid cancer . Consequently, GSTP1) with atopic bronchial asthma and lung tuberculosis, were stud- our hypothesis that rs2145418 could reside in a regulatory sequence ied in people of Tomsk region . An association of a deletion polymor- of casual genes mapping near or at certain distance of this marker phism of the GSTM1 gene and a 7632T>A exchange of the CYP2E1 can not discarded . In addition, we have studied nine SNPs that cover gene with bronchial asthma were revealed (p=0 .008 and p=0 .049, re- the TBX15 gene sequence, this gene maps 550 kb downstream of spectively) . Prevalence of a “null” genotype of the GSTT1 gene was rs2145418 . Four of these SNPs lying on the 5’-UTR region have shown significantly different in groups of patients with various severity of bron- significant association with thyroid cancer (p<0.05). Furthermore, the chial asthma (p=0 .045) . It was shown that 313G/G genotype of the association of each SNP alone is less significant than that of a vari- GSTP1 gene is a factor of resistance to tuberculosis (OR=0 .43; 95%CI: ant haplotype (TACT) of the four 5’-UTR markers (OR, 2 .18; 95% CI, 0 .20-0 .91; p=0 .026) . 681G>A polymorphism of the CYP2C19 gene 1 .23-3 .88; P=0 .0085) . The TBX15 gene is involved in developmental was associated with scope of a pulmonary tissue damage (p=0 .040) processes; thus, based in our results, we can conclude that the TBX15 and with amount of erythrocytes in tuberculosis patients (p=0 .027) . gene may be involved in thyroid cancer risk . 313A>G polymorphism of the GSTP1 gene was associated with vari- ability of alanine aminotransferase levels (p=0 .021) . The combination P06.285 of the GSTM1 +/+ and GSTP1 313G/G, played a protective role for the Polymorphisms of tLR2, tLR4 and cD14 genes and risk of both studied diseases (OR=0 .10; p=0 .018 for the asthma; OR=0 .37; meningococcal and pneumococcal infections in children p=0 .045 for the tuberculosis) .This suggests that the genotypes and J. J. Telleria1,2, D. Varillas1,2, J. Casado3, M. Alonso1,2, I. Fernández-Carvajal1,4, their combinations of CYP2C19, GSTT1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 genes A. Blanco-Quirós1,2; have influence on predisposition and clinical polymorphisms of atopic 1Facultad de Medicina. Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Instituto asthma and lung tuberculosis . de Biología y Genética Molecular (UVa/CSIC), Valladolid, Spain, 3Hospital del Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 4Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (UVa/ P06.283 CSIC), Valladolid, Austria. Sex-specific genetic determinants in plasma levels of fibrinogen The Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and CD14 are factors of the innate im- M. Sabater-Lleal1, A. Buil2, J. Souto1, L. Almasy3, J. Blangero3, J. Fontcuberta1, mune defences to microbial infections and seem to play an important J. Soria1,2; role in signalling of molecules of pathogens and of endogen proteins 1Haemostasis and Thrombosis Unit, Department of Hematology, Barcelona, related to immune activation and influence the susceptibility to and the Spain, 2Bioinformatic of Complex Diseases Unit. Research Institute of Hospital evolution of several diseases as can be sepsis, asthma and athero- de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Population sclerosis . Genetics. Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio, TX, In the present study, we have genotyped the polymorphisms p .R677W United States. and p .R753Q within TLR2 gene, p .D299G of TLR4gene and c .-159C>T A major challenge of biomedical research is the identification of risk of CD14 gene in 157 blood samples from children admitted in the Criti- factors for complex diseases . One well-established risk factor for car- cal Care Unit of the Hospital Niño Jesus (Madrid) with meningococ- diovascular disease is the plasma fibrinogen levels. These levels are cal (Gram-negative) (n=55) or pneumococcal (Gram-positive) (n=102) influenced largely by genetic factors. But the exact nature of these infections . Sixty six controls were genotyped in order to compare the genetic factors is unknown . genotypic frequencies . Our aim was to localize QTL responsible for the plasma levels of fibrin- Genotypic frequencies of TLR2 polymorphisms were clearly different ogen . We present the results of a Genome Wide Scan for fibrinogen in both groups of patients, when compared to control population, espe- levels that includes a gender-specific analysis in 21 Spanish families cially for the p .R753Q polymorphism, being more frequent the p .753Q from the GAIT (Genetic Analysis of Idiopathic Thrombophilia) Project . allele (p=0 .0004 in meningococcal infections, and p=0 .0005 in pneu- We used 500 DNA microsatellites scattered throughout the genome . mococcal infections) . Our results revealed a highly significant LOD score (3.52, nominal Conversely, TLR4 polymorphism din not show different genotypic dis- p=0 .00003) on Chromosome 17 that was only detected in females, in- tribution when compared to control population . Finally, the study of the dicating that a QTL on this chromosome was responsible for fibrinogen polymorphism of the CD14 showed different distribution when com- levels only in women . pared to controls, with a p=0 .0113 in meningococcal infections and A bioinformatic study in the region of Chromosome 17 revealed the p=0 .0353 in pneumococcal infections . presence of some hormone-related genes (steroid hormone receptors) No differences were found among both groups of studied patients . that affect fibrinogen levels and that could explain this gender-specific These results confirm the key role of the innate immunity system in pre- finding. disposition to severe infections . For both studied bacteria, the main risk To our knowledge, this is the first report of a gender-specific QTL re- factor is the p .753Q allele followed by the CD14 promoter polymorphism . lated to cardiovascular disease. It demonstrates that a gender-specific TLR4 polymorphism did not influence the risk of suffering infections.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.286 P06.288 Novel assay for tLR4 single nucleotide polymorphisms testing tUB gene polymorphisms are associated with anthropometry in patients with acute coronary syndrome and eating behavior in middle-aged women S. A. Wisniewski, M. Popiel, A. Olasinska-Wisniewska, K. Kordel, S. Grajek, J. V. van Vliet-Ostaptchouk1, C. Onland-Moret2, R. Shiri-Sverdlov3, P. van R. Wachowiak; Gorp3, P. Peeters2, C. Wijmenga1,2, M. Hofker1,3, Y. van der Schouw2; University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Univer- Our aim was to investigate occurrence of: A896G(Asp299Gly), sity Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Maastricht University, C1196T(Thr399Ile) and other single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) Maastricht, The Netherlands. of toll-like receptor TLR4 in patients with ACS and healthy controls . The TUB gene, encoding an evolutionary conserved protein, is highly TLR4 is activated in the innate immunity response to lipopolysaccha- expressed in the hypothalamus and might act as a transcription fac- ride LPS . TLR4-dependent reaction is involved in the pathogenesis of tor . Mutations in TUB cause late-onset obesity, insulin-resistance and atherosclerosis i .e . acute coronary syndrome (ACS) . SNP A896G and neurosensory deficits in mice. An association of common variants in SNP C1196T of TLR4 are postulated to occur more often in patients the TUB gene with body weight in humans has been reported . The aim with ACS . was to investigate the relationship of single nucleotide polymorphisms Blood samples were collected from 50 patients with ACS within 24 (SNPs) of the TUB gene (rs2272382, rs2272383 and rs1528133) with hours from admission to ICCU and from 100 healthy controls . Genom- both anthropometry and macronutrient intake in general population . ic DNA was extracted and TLR4 genetic variations A896G and C1196T The association of SNPs in TUB with body composition and macronu- have been analyzed by genotyping with LightTyper system . Unknown trient intake from a validated food frequency questionnaire was studied SNP’s of TLR4 were investigated with MSSCP . in a population-based study of 1680 middle-aged Dutch women . Frequency of A896G(Asp299Gly) and C1196T(Thr399Ile) allele were in The minor allele C of the rs1528133 was significantly associated with ACS patients and controls: G - 0,03 and 0,01, resp ., A - 0,97 and 0,99, increased weight (+1 .88 kg, P = 0 .022) and BMI (+0 .56 units, P = resp .; C - 0,955 and 0,95, resp . and T - 0,045 and 0,05, resp . Very rare 0 .05) . Both AG and AA genotypes for the rs2272382 were associated homozygous G/G variant of A896G was found in one patient with ACS . with an increased energy intake from carbohydrates (0 .69%, P = 0 .04 New cost-effective genotyping technique has been developed - allele and 1 .68%, P = 0 .003, respectively), mainly because of a higher intake specific PCR reaction was performed with primer length modification of mono- and disaccharides . Both these SNPs were also associated with poli(T), which allows analysis of multiplex PCR reaction . with a higher glycemic load (GL) in the diet . The GL was higher among Frequency of A896G and C1196T allele did not differ significantly those with AG and AA genotypes for the variant rs2272382 than among patients with ACS and controls . However, relatively small num- among the wild types (+1 .49 and +3 .89 units, respectively) . Carriers of ber of patients requires caution in extrapolating results to population the minor allele C of rs1528133 were associated with an increased GL study. The second part of our study will be quantified assessment of of 1 .85 units compared with non-carriers . TLR4 expression: in controls, in patients during ACS and then in stable Our results suggest that the effect of TUB on body composition might period of CAD . be due to the increased intake of carbohydrates . P06.287 P06.289 Relation of TPH gene polymorphic variants to personality traits Influence of several polymorphisms in the risk of anti- associated with psychiatric disorders tuberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity in caucasian A. Kazantseva1, D. Gaysina1,2, E. Khusnutdinova1; population 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre of Russian Acad- D. Valverde1, V. Leiro2, A. Fernández-Villar2, L. Constenla3, R. Vázquez2, L. emy of Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC SGDP Centre, Institute of Anibarro4, L. Piñeiro2; Psychiatry, King’s College, London, United Kingdom. 1University of Vigo. Spain, Vigo, Spain, 2Pulmonary Department, Hospital Individual differences in personality are influenced by both environ- Xeral-Cíes, Complexo Hospitalario de Vigo (CHUVI), Vigo, Spain, 3Unidad de mental and genetic factors . Enormous studies indicated association Apoyo a la Investigación Biomédica, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de between TPH1 A218C polymorphism and personality disorders (char- Vigo (CHUVI)., Vigo, Spain, 4Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Provincial, acterized by impulsivity, anxiety and low extraversion) . It is likely that Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra (CHOP), Vigo, Spain. genetically mediated variability of the TPH1 gene functioning can con- Homozygous delection GSTM1 (glutathione S-transferase M1) poly- tribute to individual differences in personality traits . morphism, slow NAT2 (N-acetyltransferase 2) acetilator genotypes We aimed to define genotype effect of TPH1 A218C polymorphism and c1/c1 CYP2E1 genotype increase the risk of antituberculosis and to check possible TPH1*gender and TPH1*ethnicity interaction drug-induced hepatotoxicity in Asian population . There are no studies effect on personality traits (assessed with the EPI and TCI question- about these polymorphisms and the risk of antituberculosis drug-in- naires) . We recruited 602 healthy individuals (men-206, women-396) duced hepatotoxicity in Caucasians . of Caucasian origin (Russians-214, Tatars-388) from Russia (mean Case-control prospective study of tuberculosis patients treated with age±SD, 19 .85±2 .43 years) . isoniazid, pyrazinamid and rifampin . Cases were patients with antitu- Association between C-allele and higher Extraversion berculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity and controls patients without (p=0 .001;F=11 .127), and lower Harm Avoidance (p=0 .027;F=4 .922) this complication . After DNA extraction from periferic blood, GSTM1 was observed, that was also reported in women and Tatars . Gender and T1 null polymorphisms were performed by PCR and NAT2 slow and ethnicity specific differences on personality were detected, with polymorphisms and CYP2E1 c1 and c2 polymorphisms by PCR and women and Tatars scoring higher on Harm Avoidance, Tatars scor- RFLP . ing lower on Extraversion . MANOVA (carried out with gender and We included 38 cases and 60 controls without differences in age, sex, ethnicity as second factors) revealed the influence of TPH1*ethnicity BMI and basal transaminases values . The homozygous delection at interaction on Extraversion (p=0 .032;F=4 .634) observed due to the GSTM1 locus was present in 34 .3% cases and 41 .7% controls (P = differences in this trait between Tatars with C-allele and A/A-geno- 0 .47) and at the GSTT1 locus in 48 .6% cases and 26 .7% controls (P type (p=0 .000;F=15 .779); Tatars with A/A-genotype and Russians = 0 .03) . Slow NAT2 acetilator genotypes were present in 65 .8% cases with C-allele (p=0 .000;F=19 .770); Tatars and Russians with A/A- and 61% controls (P = 0 .67) . The 6*/7* genotype was only present in genotype (p=0 .007;F=7 .820) . The same pattern of TPH1*ethnicity cases (P = 0 .02) . CYP2E1 c1/c1 genotype was present in 86 .8% cas- interaction influence on Extraversion was demonstrated in women es and 87 .3% controls and c1/c2 genotype in 13 .2% cases and 12 .7% (p=0 .043;F=4 .139) . controls (P = 0 .95) . The CYP2E1 c2/c2 was not found in any patient . Current findings suggest that the variance in Extraversion and Harm We did not find any relation between NAT2 slow genotypes and Avoidance could be explained by TPH1*ethnicity interaction, although CYPE1 c1/c1 genotype and the risk of antituberculosis drug-induced the single TPH1 genotype and ethnicity effect occurs . hepatotoxicity . This work was supported by RSCI grant 06-06-00163à and «Russian Partial finance support by SOGAPAR (beca Almirall), Xunta de Gali- Science Support Foundation» (to A .Kazantseva, D .Gaysina) . cia (axuda PIGDIT05SAN21PR), FIS (PI052461) and SEPAR (beca becario) .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.290 mune response genes . Differential activation of the complement genes DNA diagnostics in tuberous sclerosis - development of reliable could alter the innate response and contribute to T1D development . and economical test These quantitative changes could be caused by copy number varia- R. Vrtel1, H. Filipová1, R. Vodicka1, G. Voutsinas2, D. Konvalinka3, A. Santava1, tions, a recently described polymorphism type that has been associ- J. Santavy1; ated with autoimmune diseases . 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub- Our aim was to determine whether gene copy number variants of com- lic, 2NCSR ‘’DEMOKRITOS’’, Institut of Biology, Athens, Greece, 3CGB labora- plement genes C2 and C4B are associated with T1D . tory, Ostrava, Czech Republic. We analyzed 60 T1D patients and 60 nondiabetic control individuals . Tuberous sclerosis (TSC) is inherited autosomal dominant disorder C2 and C4B copy number quantitation was performed by real-time with incidence of up to 1/5 .800 births . Almost 80% of cases are new PCR using specific Taqman assays. Experiments were performed in mutations . Extreme clinical variability complicates diagnostics and duplicate using 20ng of genomic DNA . Raw data were normalized us- genetic counselling . Accurate diagnosis is essential in order to detect ing the endogenous RNAseP gene and expressed relative to a refer- and treat a life threatening neurological, renal and cardiac lesions and ence sample, using the -2ΔΔct method. Comparisons between the two for prenatal diagnosis purposes . Mutations in TSC1 and TSC2 tumor- groups were performed using a Student’s T test . suppressor genes were shown to be responsible for development of T1D patients presented a significantly (p<0.01) increased abundance TSC . The TSC2 gene on 16p13 .3 spans over 41 exons, coding for in C2 (mean relative values±SD=1 .17±0 .58 in T1D vs . 0 .94±0 .31 in tuberin and the TSC1 gene on 9q34 has 21 exons coding for hamar- controls) and a decrease in C4B (0 .47±0 .43 vs . 0 .91±0 .45, respec- tin . No ,,hot-spot“ with more frequent mutation occurrence was found . tively) . Presented study is a project of bilateral Czech-Greek cooperation in We conclude that these differences in gene copy number of comple- research and development, ME 923 . The aim is to establish a compre- ment genes could affect the risk to develop T1D, and these polymor- hensive genetic test for the analysis of TSC mutations in Greek and phisms seem to be associated with genetic susceptibility to T1D . How- Czech patients . Greek team is introducing direct sequencing of TSC1 ever, we have to take into account that these associations could be and TSC2 coding sequences what is recent trend, though quite expen- due to linkage disequilibrium with the HLA class alleles and not to a sive . Czech team is performing preliminary screening for mutations by primary effect . DGGE and LOH test and MLPA for larger rearrangements . Especially the utilization of LOH test simplifies and accelerates TSC diagnostics P06.293 in some cases. Czech and Greek sample files are exchanged and ex- Polymorphisms in NOS(C/T), NOS (VNTR4a/b, 894G/T), ILRA amined in the other laboratory . The reliability of DGGE was tested on (i50V) genes are associated with microvascular complications in positive samples from partners’ lab . Sensitivity of DGGE was proved patients with type 1 diabetes on artificial mosaics, revealing 10% mutant lineages. The knowledge N. V. Tarasenko1, E. I. Kondratieva2, V. P. Puzyrev1; acquired from the research collaboration should contribute significantly 1State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, to the development of valid diagnostic methods at a minimum cost . 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a multifactorial autoimmune disease . T1D P06.291 patients face the risk of late diabetic microvascular complications: Polymorphism of TNFA gene promoter region and chronic retinopathy (DR), nephropathy (DN) and polyneuropathy (DP) . Ge- inflammatory disorders netic polymorphisms genes for NO-synthases and cytokines could be T. Ivashchenko, J. Nasyhova, J. Ostankova, N. Semenov, V. Baranov; risk factors of vascular damages in diabetes . The aim of this study Ott’s institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. was analysis of association of candidate genes polymorphisms with Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFA) is a potent immunomodulator and diabetic microvascular complications (DR, DN, DP) in groups of T1D proinflammatory cytokine that has been implicated in the pathogenesis patients with DR (n=41), DN (n=60), DP (n=39), combination of DR, of chronic inflammatory disorders. Several polymorphisms located in DN and DP (n=36) and their families (n=110) . The following polymor- the promoter region of the TNFA gene have recently been reported to phisms were studied: NOS1(C/T), NOS3 (-691C/T, VNTR4a/b, 774C/ be associated with production of TNFA . We have studied the genetic T, 894G/T), IL1B (+3953 A1/A2), IL1RN (VNTR), IL4 (G/C 3’-UTR), IL- polymorphisms -238G/A and -308G/A of the TNFA gene by PCR-RFLP 4RA (I50V) . Using Transmission/Disequilibrium Test (TDT), we found analysis in 100 patients with Crohn’s disease, in 71 ulcerative colitis following associations: IL4RA allele I and DR (TDT=4 .22, p=0 .0498); patients, in 103 asthmatic patients and in relevant population group NOS3 allele B (VNTR4a/b), allele G (894G/T) and IL4RA allele I with (n=117) . It is known that these diseases are characterized by the de- DN (TDT=4 .50, p=0 .0340; TDT=4 .32, p=0 .0376; TDT=4 .97, p=0 .0259; velopment of chronic inflammation. respectively); NOS1 allele C, NOS3 allele B (VNTR4a/b) and IL4RA al- The analysis of genotypes and alleles distribution for polymorphisms - lele I with DP (TDT=4 .69, p=0 .0303; TDT=4 .50, p=0 .0339; TDT=3 .84, 238G/A in patient groups and in population has not revealed significant p=0 .0500; respectively); IL4RA allele I with combination of DR, DN and differences . DP (TDT=4 .27, p=0 .0389) . Thus, NOS-genes and cytokines genes are For Crohn’s disease the -308A allele of the TNFA gene was detected the risk factors for T1D and its microvascular complications . Further in 27% of patients but only in 6 .8% of population (p<0 .0001) . Similar studies should be conducted to address the molecular basis for such results were obtain for patients with ulcerative colitis and with asthma effect . (19%, p=0 .015 and 32%, p<0 .0001, respectively) . The distribution of genotypes for -308 G/A polymorphism was also different in studied P06.294 groups compared to population . The frequency of combined genotype Presence of additional t1Dm risk determinants on HLA-DR3 -238A/G + -308 G/G of the TNFA gene which is associated with the conserved extended haplotypes (cEH) lowest level of gene expression considerably decreased in patients I. Santin1, A. Castellanos-Rubio1, A. M. Aransay2, J. L. Vicario3, J. Noble4, L. with chronic inflammatory disorders. Castaño1, J. R. Bilbao1; Thus, the polymorphism in promoter region (-308 G/A) which is associ- 1Research Unit in Endocrinology and Diabetes, Barakaldo, Spain, 2Functional ated with increased expression of the TNFA gene might be considered Genomics Laboratory - CIC Biogune, Derio, Spain, 3Histocompatibility Unit as an inherited risk factor contributing to development of multifactorial - Transfusion Centre of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 4Children´s Hospital Oakland inflammatory diseases. Research Institute, Oakland, CA, United States. Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is a complex autoimmune disease in P06.292 which insulin-producing pancreatic ß cells are destroyed by an aber- Gene copy number analysis of complement genes in type 1 rant immune response . The major T1DM susceptibility locus is located diabetes in the HLA region on chromosome 6p21, and DR3-DQ2 and DR4-DQ8 A. Castellanos-Rubio, I. Santin, L. Castaño, J. Bilbao; are the most predisposing haplotypes . Among Caucasians of South- Research Unit in Endocrinology and Diabetes, Barakaldo, Spain. ern European origin, DR3/3-conferred predisposition is comparable to The major contributor to type 1 diabetes (T1D) is located in the MHC DR3/4 risk, probably due to the relative abundance of the extraordi- complex, and HLA DR3 and DR4 confer maximum risk . Other genes narily homogeneous B18-DR3 CEH in this population, and support the also associated with T1D include INS, CTLA4, PTPN22 and innate im- presence of additional determinants within this CEH, that are absentMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  from other less T1D-predisposing DR3 chromosomes (like B8-DR3 group . CEH) . We have shown that TNFR1*G/*G genotype was less frequent among To test this hypothesis, we genotyped a panel of 2,360 SNPs in the patients with T1DM (15 .5±2 .2% vs . 26 .1±2 .8%, P=0 .020) . We may MHC region, spanning 4 .9 Mb (MHC Panel Set - Illumina Inc, San Di- conclude that TNFR1*G/*G genotype is associated with decreased ego, CA) in 21 T1D patients and 39 non-diabetic individuals who were risk of T1DM in Tatars (OR=0 .52, CI: 0 .30-0 .90 and OR=0 .73, CI: 0 .54- homozygous for HLA-DR3 and carried only one copy of the complete 0 .99) . B18-DR3 CEH (HLA-A*30-B*18-DR3-DQ2) . Genotype and allele fre- quency calculations and association analyses were performed using P06.297 PLINK v.1.0 (http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/purcell/plink/). Region wide association study on chromosome 10q25.1-26.3 After stringent correction for multiple testing (Bonferroni) six indepen- and its contribution to type 2 diabetes susceptibility in Japanese dent SNPs remained associated (uncorrected p-value: 1 .03·10-5 and P. Keshavarz1, H. Inoue2, M. Itakura3; 2 .73·10-7) . 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The Our results add further evidence for the presence of additional suscep- University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan, 3The university of Tokushima, tibility determinants in the MHC . Since the associated markers might Tokushima, Japan. just be proxies of the etiological variants in B18-DR3 haplotypes, we Several linkage studies indicated that human chromosome 10q is one are genotyping these SNPs in HLA-unmatched cases and controls . of a candidate susceptibility locus for type 2 diabetes (T2D) . But there Further in-depth analysis of these associated regions might be neces- is no information about certain variant(s) or gene(s) have strong effects sary to identify the etiological variants . on the disease within the region . In order to identify T2D disease sus- ceptibility genes in Japanese, verified SNPs from the databases with P06.295 a minor allele frequency larger than 0 .15 were applied to 10 intervals Family-based analysis of tumour necrosis factor and across a 25 Mb region on chromosome 10q25 .1-26 .3 . Using the 993 lymphotoxin alpha tag polymorphisms and type 1 diabetes in the SNPs for genotyping a two-stage case-control analysis was applied to population of south croatia Japanese subjects consisted of 888 T2D patients and 898 control sub- V. Boraska1, E. Zeggini2, C. J. Groves3, N. W. Rayner2, V. Škrabić4, M. Diakite2, jects . Haplotype and linkage disequilibrium (LD) were assessed based K. A. Rockett2, D. Kwiatkowski2, M. McCarthy3, T. Zemunik1; on SNP genotypes of all study subjects . To search for new SNPs in 1School of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Gene- the detected significant gene, screening of exons and 3’UTR are per- tics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Oxford Centre for Diabetes, formed in 32 randomly selected T2D patients . We detected 10 SNPs Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, (six intronic and four 3’UTR) in DOCK1 (detictor of cytokinesis 1) gene 4Clinical Hospital Split, Split, Croatia. were showed replicated association in the two set of independent DNA Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease characterized by destruc- samples. These nominal significant SNPs were located in two different tion of pancreatic β cells. It is influenced by environmental and genetic Linkage disequilibrium (LD) block containing exons 7-23 and exons factors . TNF and LTA are cytokines with a wide range of inflammatory 51-52 respectively . When the two data were combined, the most sig- and immunomodulatory activities possibly related with type 1 diabe- nificant association was observed with SNP 827 in 3’ UTR of DOCK1 tes . The aim of the present study was to evaluate the association of gene (p=0 .0005) . Real time quantitative revealed that the expression 11 TNF/LTA tag polymorphisms in 160 type 1 diabetes trio families of DOCK1 was rather ubiquitous with relatively abundant expression from South Croatia . Investigated tag polymorphisms were designed in the pancreas, kidney and brain in T2D patients . Our region-wide to capture the majority (62%) of common variation in TNF/LTA gene association analysis suggests the strong impact of DOCK1 gene with region, based on the HapMap database . We observed overtransmis- risk of T2D in Japanese . sion of alleles from parents to affected child at four variants: rs909253, allele C, p=1 .2x10-4; rs1041981, allele A, p=1 .1x10-4, rs1800629 (G- P06.298 308A), allele A, p=1 .2x10-4 and rs361525 (G-238A), allele G, p=8 .2x10- study of mtDNA polymorphism in type 2 diabetes patients 3. We also identified overtransmission of the rs1800629(G-308A)- S. V. Buikin1, M. V. Golubenko1, K. V. Puzyrev2, O. A. Makeeva1, I. V. Tsimba- rs361525(G-238A) G-A haplotype, p=2 .384x10-5 . The present study luk3, O. A. Koshelskaja2, V. P. Puzyrev1; found an association of TNF/LTA gene region with type 1 diabetes . A 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Re- careful assessment of TNF/LTA variants adjusted for linkage disequi- search Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Siberian State librium with HLA loci is needed to further clarify the role of these genes Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. in type 1 diabetes susceptibility . Diabetes is among frequent endocrine diseases . Endocrine system is one of energy-dependent systems in human organism . Phylogenetic P06.296 mtDNA haplogroups possess different common polymorphisms and Polymorphisms of the NOs2, tNFB and tNFR1 genes are can mark effects of these variants on predisposition to common dis- associated with type 1 Diabetes mellitus in tatars and Russians eases . Samples of 119 type 2 diabetes patients (78 women, 41 men) from Bashkortostan and 134 healthy people were studied (all living in Tomsk region) . Mean Z. R. Balkhiyarova1, D. S. Avzaletdinova2, T. V. Morugova2, O. E. Mustafina1; age in the groups was 52+5 .5 and 47 .6+10 .2 years, respectively . Ul- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Acad- trasound examination, 24-hours monitoring of blood pressure and emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, fasting glucose measure were performed . Comparison of frequencies Ufa, Russian Federation. of some of Europeans haplogroups (H, U, T, J) has uncovered lower Apoptosis may play a role in two different aspects of autoimmune dis- frequency of haplogroup T in type 2 diabetes patients as compared ease - generation of autoreactive cells and tissue destruction . Type one to control group (OR=0 .14; 0 .02<OR<0 .66; p=0 .007) . In the group diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is a typical autoimmune disease . The aim of of type 2 diabetes patients this haplogroup was detected only in two the present study was to investigate the association between apop- cases, whereas in control it corresponds to known frequencies for Eu- tosis genes (NOS2, TNFB and TNFR1) polymorphisms with T1DM in ropean population (11 .6%) . Our previous study which was conducted Tatar and Russian ethnic groups (Bashkortostan, Russia) . on patients with arterial hypertension has shown higher prevalence We studied 254 T1DM patients and 544 controls . DNA was isolated of haplogroup T in group of patients with left ventricular hypertrophy by phenol-chloroform extraction from 8 ml venous blood and used as against patients without this complication . These alternative effects of template in PCR-RFLP . Two-tailed test of Fisher was used for statisti- mitochondrial haplogroup T may reflect different adaptive advantages cal analysis . for an individual carrying the haplogroup, in respect to different con- We have found that NOS2*G/*G genotype was associated with de- ditions. The findings suggest that particular mtDNA haplogroup (i.e. creased risk and *G/*A genotype was associated with increased risk of set of haplogroup-specific polymorphisms in mtDNA) may have some T1DM in Tatar males (OR=0 .50, P=0 .02, CI: 0 .28-0 .88 and OR=2 .18, impact on energy metabolism and may be predisposing or protective P=0 .011, CI: 1 .22-3 .87, respectively) . factor for some diseases and their complications . The work was sup- Carriers of TNFB *A/*A genotype had lower risk of T1DM in Tatars ported by Russian Foundation for Basic research (RFBR) grants 07- (OR=0 .56, CI=0 .36-0 .87) . At the same time, TNFB *G/*G is associated 04-01526, 06-04-08326 . with higher risk of T1DM (OR=2 .52, CI=1 .33-4 .79) in Russian ethnicMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.299 vented such association studies from being completed . Instead, whole Further evidence for association of the RGS gene with genome copy number studies have been limited to paired sample antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism: Protective role of a analysis or visual inspection on small numbers of samples . Arguably, functional polymorphism in the 3’ untranslated region due to small sample sizes and the susceptibility of visual inspection to E. Ben-Asher1, L. Greenbaum2, R. C. Smith3,4, A. Rigbi2, R. Strous5, O. Teltsh2, human error, such approaches offer only cursory insights and lack in K. Kanyas2, M. Korner2, D. Lancet1, B. Lerer2; their effectiveness to uncover CNV associations . 1The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2Hadassah-Hebrew Uni- To address these issues, we developed a series of novel methods em- versity Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 3New York University Medical School, bodied in a new tool called CNAM. CNAM is capable of efficiently and New York, NY, United States, 4Manhattan Psychiatric Center, New York, NY, accurately preprocessing whole genome copy number data for thou- United States, 5Beer Yaakov Mental Health Cneter, Beer Yaakov, Israel. sands of samples, finding large to single probe CNVs, and performing In our previous study using a candidate gene approach we have shown a range of statistical tests to identify CNV associations . that the RGS2 gene (regulator of G protein signaling 2) is associated Discussed methods include accurately extracting log ratio signals, with susceptibility to extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) induced by anti- quantile normalization without gender bias to properly normalize psychotic drugs (Pharmacogenet Genomics . 2007 Jul; 17(7):519-28) . against reference populations, optimal univariate and multivariate seg- Thus supporting our hypothesis that since regulators of G protein sig- menting based on dynamic programming (Hawkins Segmentation) to naling (RGS) play a pivotal role in dopaminergic transmission, geneti- determine regions of variation, enhanced Eigenstrat-based principal cally based, functional variation could influence therapeutic response component analysis to detect and correct for population stratification to antipsychotic drugs . and batch effects, and association testing using various copy number To further investigate our previous report we performed a replication measures as covariates . study . EPS were rated in U .S . patients with schizophrenia (African- We demonstrate the utility of these methods by presenting preliminary American and Caucasian) treated for at least a month with typical results on public whole-genome data using thousands of case-control antipsychotic drugs risperidone, olanzapine, or clozapine . Six single samples . nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within or flanking RGS2 were geno- typed. Odds ratios and confidence intervals calculations indicate asso- P06.302 ciation of SNP rs4606 with antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism (AIP) First case of maternal UPD7 and recessive congenital myotonia in the overall sample and in the African-American sub-sample with the C. Bulli1, C. Peconi1, P. Battistella2, M. Bordignon3, L. Salviati3, F. Sangiuolo1, minor allele having a protective effect . Sequence analysis of the RGS2 G. Novelli1; gene further indicated that this SNP is biologically meaningful and 1Department of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Department could have clinical utility . of Pediatrics, Padua University, Padua, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Padova, Padua, Italy. P06.300 Autosomal congenital myotonia dominant (Thomsen) and recessive UcP3 gene polymorphism and cardiac growth in response to 1 (Becker) are rare non dystrophic disorders due to allelic mutations of year of endurance training the muscle chloride channel gene, CLCN1, located on chromosome S. B. Goriyeva1, I. I. Ahmetov1,2, O. L. Vinogradova1; 7q35 . Both diseases are characterised by muscle stiffness and myo- 1SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci, Moscow, tonia, which is based on an electrical instability of the muscle fibber Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St membrane, but they differ clinically by age at onset . Petersburg, Russian Federation. We report on the clinical and molecular data of the first case of a Beck- Reduced fatty acid utilization and increased oxidative stress both can er patient carrying two identical mutations because of a maternal UPD contribute to the development of cardiac hypertrophy . Left ventricular of the entire chromosome 7 . hypertrophy in endurance-oriented athletes is generally understood to The proband is 14-year-old male with involuntarily prolonged contrac- be a limiting factor for improving maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max) . tion of muscles, hypertrophy calves, normal CPK and EMG with dy- Cardiac uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3) can serve to protect the heart namic myotonia . Moreover he was reported as having severe growth against lipid-induced oxidative stress, and stimulate fatty acid trans- retardation and a facial anomalies compatible with the diagnosis of port and oxidation . A variant in the UCP3 gene associated with higher Silver-Russell syndrome . Proband’s DNA analyses showed homozy- mRNA levels has been identified (UCP3 -55C/T). This variant has gosity for a novel mutation leading to a G355R substitution (GGG→ been associated with reduced risk of type 2 diabetes and obesity . Re- AGG) . The mutation segregated only from the mother, while the father cently we have shown that -55T allele was overrepresented in highly was not carrier for G355R . Non paternity was excluded using a panel elite rowers and was associated with high values of VO2max . If UCP3 of 15 highly polymorphic markers and one marker for amelogenin . is important for muscle and heart metabolism and can protect against Only markers located on chromosome 7 showed some segregation development of LVH, then one might anticipate -55T variant of UCP3 anomalies from the father. For this reason, a fluorescent microsatellite gene to be associated with insignificant cardiac growth (rational adap- analysis was performed using 9 polymorphic markers spanning the tation) in response to endurance training . We have tested this hypoth- entire chromosome 7 region . PCR products were analysed by auto- esis in the study of elite Russian rowers (n=19, males) . UCP3 -55C/T mated sequencer . All the markers showed homozygosity in proband’s polymorphism was determined by PCR-RLFP . Echocardiography was DNA. Our results clearly allowed us to affirm the presence of a mater- performed for two times with one year interval . We found that subjects nal isodisomy of the entire chromosome 7 (matUPD7) in the affected of CC genotype exhibited the greatest cardiac growth (when interven- proband . tricular septal wall thickness was measured; CC: 3 (1 .4) mm, CT: 1 (0) mm, TT: -1 mm; P=0 .019), whereas the individuals of TT genotype P06.303 exhibited the reduction in septal wall thickness . In conclusion, we dem- A genome wide association study reveals sLc2A9 as a major onstrate that variation in the UCP3 gene influences cardiac growth in gene for uric acid levels with pronounced gender-specific response to endurance training in rowers . effects C. Gieger1,2, A. Döring1, D. Mehta3, H. Gohlke1, H. Prokisch3,4, S. Coassin5, G. P06.301 Fischer1, K. Henke6, N. Klopp1,2, F. Kronenberg5, B. Paulweber7, A. Pfeufer3,4, Powerful new methods for whole genome copy number D. Rosskopf6, H. Völzke8, T. Illig1, T. Meitinger3,4, H. E. Wichmann1,2, C. Meis- association studies inger1,9; C. G. Lambert1, G. F. Rudy1, I. H. Lake1, J. G. Grover1, D. M. Hawkins2; 1Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, 1Golden Helix, Inc., Bozeman, MT, United States, 2School of Statistics, Univer- Germany, 2Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Lud- sity of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States. wig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, The latest genotyping arrays provide over a million markers across Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Hu- the genome to interrogate copy number variation (CNV), making it man Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University Munich, Munich, possible to perform whole genome copy number association studies . Germany, 5Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, However, the various statistical and computational challenges involved Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, with the analysis of copy number data on such a large scale have pre- Austria, 6Department Pharmacology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University, Greifswald,Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  Germany, 7First Department of Internal Medicine, St. Johann Spital, Paracelsus partment of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa, Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria, 8Institute for Community Medi- IA, United States, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp (UA), cine, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University, Greifswald, Germany, 9Central Hospital of Antwerp, Belgium, 5United States Boys Town National Hospital, Omaha, NE Augsburg, MONICA/KORA Myocardial Infarction Registry, Augsburg, Germany. and University of Iowa Medical School, Iowa, IA, United States. Serum uric acid (UA) levels are correlated with gout and clinical enti- Over 440 genetic syndromes that include hearing loss have been ties such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes . In a genome-wide described . Syndromic hearing impairment accounts for 30% of pre- association study (KORA F3-500K, n=1644), we identified a QTL as- lingual deafness . The two most common types are Usher and Pen- sociated with UA level located on chromosome 4 including 40 SNPs dred syndromes . Up to now 12 different loci and 9 genes have been with P-values below the genome-wide significance level. The most identified. Also Pendred is characterized by congenital sensorineural significant SNPs mapped within intron 4 and 6 of SLC2A9 (effects - hearing loss, goiter (40-60%) and inner ear abnormalities and impaired 0.18 to -0.36 mg/dL per copy of the minor allele). These findings were vestibular function test . The objective of this study was to identify the replicated in three independent samples from Germany (KORA S4 and prevalence of USH loci in deaf-blind patients and PDS gene mutations SHIP) and Austria (SAPHIR) with P-values ranging from 1 .2x10-8 to in Iranian Population . 1 .0x10-32 . The SLC2A9 genotypes in addition showed significant asso- Thirty USH families and 80 families with autosomal recessive non- ciation with self-reported gout . The proportion of the variance of serum syndromic hearing loss, having two or more affected individuals were UA levels explained by genotypes was about 1 .2% in men and 6% in subjected to linkage analysis using STR markers . The sequencing for women. Analysis of whole blood RNA expression profiles from a KORA mutation screening was performed for the linked families . F3-500K subgroup (n=117) revealed a significant association between Nine out of thirty USH families were linked to the studied USHI and the SLC2A9 isoform 2 and urate levels . SLC2A9 encodes a transport- USH II loci which we identified the mutation in three of these families er protein that belongs to class II of the facilitative glucose transporter and mutation screening in the other linked families is on the way . Also family . A potential substrate of GLUT9 is fructose, as GLUT9 has the we were able to link fourteen autosomal recessive hearing impaired highest similarity with the fructose transporters GLUT5 and GLUT11 . families to DFNB 4 locus and nine of them showed different types of Our expression studies allow discrimination between two annotated PDS mutations . In conclusion 30% of the families with USH syndrome isoforms of this gene. The significant association with the shorter pro- were linked to one of the known loci, however additional study needed tein GLUT9ΔN argues for a prominent role of the SLC2A9 isoform 2 to determine the causative genes involve in the other families .We have in the regulation of urate concentrations . The association with the iso- also been able to determine Pendred syndrome as the second cause form 2 suggests an involvement of the protein in urate excretion . of hearing loss in our population . In addition we have determined four novel mutations in SLC26A4 gene in Iranian patients . P06.304 Association of polymorphisms Ala62Thr in ZNF365 gene and Taq P06.306 i and Fok i in VDR gene with metabolic alterations in adults with Genetic profile of the PCDH gene in probands with Usher urolithiasis from Yucatan, mexico syndrome type i M. M. Medina-Escobedo1, L. González-Herrera2, S. Villanueva-Jorge1, E. T. Jaijo1,2, A. Oshima3, E. Aller1,2, C. Nájera4, C. Ayuso5,2, W. J. Kimberling6,7, J. Gala-Trujano1, M. Salazar-Canul1, G. Martín-Soberanis3; M. Millán1,2; 1Hospital General “O’Horán” S.S.Y., Mérida, Mexico, 2CIR “Dr. Hideyo-Nogu- 1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Center for Biomedical Research chi”, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Mérida, Mexico, 3Hospital General No. on Rare Diseases (CIBERER). ISCIII., Valencia, Spain, 3Department of Oto- 12 “Lic. Benito Juárez”, IMSS, Yucatán, México, Mérida, Mexico. rhinolaryngology. Shinshu University school of Medicine, Marsumoto, Japan, Urolithiasis (UL) is an endemic health problem in Yucatan, Mexico . Hy- 4Department of Genetics. University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 5Department pocitraturia, hypercalciuria and hyperurocosuria are frequent metabol- of Genetics. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Valencia, Spain, 63. Center for the Study ic alterations in UL . Polymorphisms Ala62Thr in ZNF365 gene and Taq and Treatment of Usher Syndrome, Boys Town National Research Hospital, I and Fok I in VDR gene have been associated to UL . Polymorphisms Omaha, NE, United States, 77. Department of Ophthalmology, Carver School of might affect the metabolic pathways involved in UL, so we analyzed Medicine, Iowa City, IA, United States. the association of these polymorphisms with metabolic alterations in INTRODUCTION adults with UL from Yucatan, Mexico . 169 patients, 59 males (34 .9%) Usher syndrome type I (USH1) is the most severe form Usher syn- and 110 females (65.1%) were analyzed. UL was confirmed by RX drome . It is characterized by congenital severe-profound sensorineu- and ultrasonography . 24 hours urine excretion of Na, K, Ca, P, Mg, ral hearing loss, prepuberal retinitis pigmentosa and vestibular are- uric acid, oxalates and citrates were determined . Polymorphisms were flexia. The PCDH15 gene is implicated in this disorder and it encodes determined in DNA samples by PCR-RFLPs . Genotypic and allelic fre- for protocadherin-15, a large transmembrane protein belonging to the quencies of each polymorphism were compared between patients with cadherin superfamily . metabolic alterations and patients with normal metabolism . Metabolic OBJECTIVE alterations found were hypercalciuria 16 .6%, hyperuricosuria 13 .6%, The main of this study is to identify the USH1 causative mutations and hyperphosphaturia 7 .7%, hypomagnesuria 1 .2%, hyperoxaluria 24 .9% to evaluate the PCDH15 implication in this syndrome . and hypocitraturia 61 .5% . Genetic frequencies obtained for VDR were: PATIENTS AND METHODS Taq I (tt 1 .2%, tT 30 .8%, TT 68 .0%), Fok I (ff 20 .7%, fF 53 .5%, FF Fifty-six USH1 patients from Spain and USA, which had previously 26 .0%) and for ZNF365 (AA 8 .9%, AG 29 .0%, GG 62 .1%) . Polymor- discarded the most prevalent USH1 gene, MYO7A, were studied . phisms in the VDR gene were not associated with metabolic altera- The mutation screening was performed by directly sequencing of all 33 tions (p>0 .05), whereas allele G of ZNF365 gene was associated with exons and intron-exon boundaries from the PCDH15 gene . hypocitraturia (p=0 .044) . Mean concentrations of K, Mg and citrate in RESULTS urine excretion were significantly lower (p<0.05) in subjects with GG In this study, seventeen different pathologic variants and forty-five genotype compared to wildtype . Polymorphism Ala62Thr in ZNF365 polymorphisms in the PCDH15 gene have been found in USH1 pa- gene was associated with hypocitraturia, whereas GG mutated geno- tients. Mutations identified include twelve missense variants, three type was associated with a lower urine excretion of K, Mg, and citrate premature stop codons and two splice site changes . These variants in the studied population . have been found in seventeen of fifty-six USH1 patients (30.6%). One patient was compound heterozygous and two patients had a homozy- P06.305 gous mutation . One unique pathologic variant was detected in the rest Genetics and clinical Aspects of Usher and Pendred syndromes of studied patients . in iranian Population CONCLUSIONS K. Kahrizi1, G. Asaadi1, N. Sadeghpour1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, M. Out of a total of 112 alleles, 20 of them (17 .9%) were considered Jaberi2, S. Saketkhoo1, N. Meyer3, N. Hilgert4, W. J. Kimberling5, G. Van Camp4, pathologic in the PCDH15 gene . R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1; It can be estimated that the PCDH15 gene is responsible for about 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci- 16% of USH1 patients . ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Retinitis Pigmentosa Institute, Tehran, Most of studied patients were carriers of only one mutation . Large rear- Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, De- rangements within this gene could explain this fact .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  P06.307 Petersburg, Russian Federation. Genome-wide screen for aberrant DNA methylation in human There is strong relationship between muscle fiber type distribution uterine leiomyoman by ms-RDA and human physical performance . For example, elite weightlifters and S. Izumi1, L. Cai1, M. Abe2, A. Kondo1, Y. Morita3, M. Mizoguchi3, N. Uchida1, S. sprinters exhibit large percentages of fast-twitch fibers (FT, also known Takagi3, T. Ushijima2; as type II muscle fibers) compared to controls and endurance athletes. 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University School of Medi- FT fibers have comparatively low capillary density and blood flow ca- cine, Isehara, Japan, 2Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Re- pacity and low mitochondria content . Vascular endothelial growth fac- search Institute, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Tokai Univer- tor (VEGF) is important in the basal maintenance of skeletal muscle sity School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan. capillarization and may influence the determination of muscle fiber Uterine leiomyoma are very common benign tumors in women of re- type distribution. To investigate the question of the influence of VEGF productive age . However the molecular mechanisms of cause and de- gene polymorphism on the proportion of fibers types of m. vastus late- velopment of these tumors are poor understood . This study is attempt- ralis, we have analyzed the muscle biopsies obtained from 21 elite ed to examine whether aberrant DNA methylation occurred in these Russian athletes (all-round speed skaters) . The immunoperoxidase tumors . Therefore we carried out a genome-wide screen for aberrant technique was employed for immunohistochemical identification of DNA methylation, adopting methylation-sensitive-representational dif- myosin isoforms . VEGF gene A2578C polymorphism was determined ference analysis (MS-RDA) using normal adjacent myometria as tester by PCR-RLFP. Mean percentages of FT fibers were significantly higher and myoma tissue driver . As the results, a total of 192 clones were in VEGF CC homozygotes than in VEGF A allele carriers (AA/AC - sequenced, 27 DNA fragments derived from CpG islands (CGIs) were 38 .3 (6 .2) %, CC - 47 .8 (12 .4) %; P=0 .03) . Then we determined dis- isolated, and seven of them were from CGI in the 5’ regions of known tribution of VEGF alleles in 60 elite and sub-elite weightlifters and in genes, which include CHARC1, FAM44B, FLJ33655, HSUP, MLLT3, 1,113 controls . We found that the frequency of VEGF 2578C allele was SLC16A1, and ZNF96 . Then, methylation statuses of those CGIs significantly higher in weightlifters than in controls (58.3% vs. 48.0%; were analyzed by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) using five primary P=0 .035) . In conclusion, VEGF 2578C allele is associated with in- samples of human uterine leiomyoma . Aberrant DNA methylation did creased proportion of FT muscle fibers in all-round speed skaters and not observed in seven genes in five human uterine leiomyoma eventu- with elite power athlete status . ally . Though, this study failed to identify aberrant DNA methylation oc- curring in the human uterine leiomyoma by a genome-wide screen, it P06.310 dose not exclude that epigenetic modifications of DNA methylation are VEGF iD polymorphism and peripheral neuropathy susceptibility involved in the cause and development of uterine leiomyomas . A large M. Stavarachi1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, I. Radu1, A. Craciun2, D. population of primary samples and more attempts, such as use cell Cheta2, L. Gavrila1; lines or primary monolayer cultures established from tissue samples, 1University of Bucharest, Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2”N. are needed be done to develop this issue Paulescu” Institute, Bucharest, Romania. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a cytokine involved in an- P06.308 giogenesis and in maintaining of neuronal function . The genetic varia- study of the VEGF Polymorphism in HELLP syndrome patients tion in VEGF promoter may be responsible for different neuropathies, B. Nagy1, A. Molvarec1, T. Várkonyi1, B. Rigó1, H. Savli2, P. Hupuczi1, J. Rigó including the diabetic one . Jr1; The aim of our study was to investigate the relationship between the 1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Kocaeli University, Izmit, Turkey. -2549 I/D VEGF gene promoter polymorphism and diabetic peripheral Background: The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has a neuropathy susceptibility . critical role in vasculogenesis and vascular permeability in several A case-control study was performed in 60 diabetic patients with pe- diseases including preeclampsia . VEGF G+405C, C-2578A and C- ripheral neuropathy and 60 healthy subjects, sex and age matched . 460T SNPs are known to be related to VEGF production . We decided After the informed consent was obtained, DNA was extracted from pe- to determine the allele and genotype frequencies of VEGF G+405C, ripheral blood . The VEGF -2549 I/D genotyping were assessed using C-460T and C-2578A SNPs in healthy pregnant women and HELLP PCR method . syndrome patients . The distribution of VEGF -2549 ID in both lots respected the Hardy- Methods: The authors introduced a quantitative real-time PCR method Weinberg condition . The frequencies of genotypes and alleles in the for the determination of the three VEGF SNPs . Blood samples were patients and healthy control groups were compared using the con- collected from 71 HELLP syndrome patients and 93 healthy controls . tingency tables . Although the DD genotype and D allele frequencies Results: There were significant differences in the allele and genotype were higher in diabetic patients than in controls (DD: 33 .3% vs 25%, D: frequencies of VEGF C-460T SNP between the two study groups . The 57 .5% vs 52 .5%) these differences do not reach the statistical power . T allele was present in 71 .1% in the HELLP group, while in 53 .8% in We also observed that the trend of association increases if only pa- the controls (p=0 .0014) . The TT genotype occurred significantly more tients with early onset were compared (OR~1,2) . frequently in the HELLP group than in the control group (45 .1% vs . This preliminary study indicates that the VEGF ID polymorphism may 21 .5%; p (for genotype frequencies)=0 .0011) . The TT genotype car- be associated with early onset diabetic peripheral neuropathy . A future riers had an increased risk of HELLP syndrome, which was indepen- study with an increased statistical power is necessary to clarify the dent of maternal age and primiparity (adjusted odds ratio (OR)=3 .03, relationship between this polymorphism and peripheral neuropathy 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.51-6.08; p=0.002). Although the VEGF susceptibility . G+405C allele and genotype distributions did not differ significantly The research was funded by GAR 183/ 2007 . between the two groups, the CC genotype carriers were also found to have an increased risk for HELLP syndrome after adjustment for P06.311 maternal age and primiparity (adjusted OR=3 .67, 95% CI=1 .05-12 .75; Linkage and association study for VEGF serum level in the p=0 .041) . The VEGF C-2578A SNP was not associated with HELLP isolated population of campora syndrome . D. Ruggiero1, R. Sorice1, C. Bellenguez2, T. Nutile1, G. Fardella1, M. Aversano1, Conclusions: We found that the VEGF -460TT and +405CC genotype C. Bourgain2, M. Ciullo1; carriers have an increased risk of HELLP syndrome . 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Naples, Italy, 2INSERM U535, Villejuif, France. P06.309 Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) is an angiogenic factor VEGF A2578C polymorphism is associated with muscle fiber having a key role in both physiological and pathological angiogenesis . type distribution in athletes In order to identify QTLs influencing VEGF serum levels, we performed E. V. Lyubaeva1, I. I. Ahmetov2, A. M. Hakimullina2, O. L. Vinogradova1, V. A. a genome-wide linkage analysis using a sample of individuals random- Rogozkin2; ly chosen in Campora, an isolated population in South Italy . 1SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., Moscow, VEGF serum levels were measured using ELISA method in a sample of Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St 656 individuals . 627 individuals out of the 656 were all related through a 3049-member pedigree and genotyped for 1122 microsatellites onMolecular and biochemical basis of disease 0 the genome (average marker spacing of 3 .6cM) . The heritability for P06.314 VEGF serum levels was estimated to 0 .86 after adjusting for age . Identification of two new mutations in the VLGR and the PDEB To perform linkage analysis we broke the large genealogy using genes segregating in a tunisian family GREFFA method through a multiple splitting approach recently pro- M. Hmani1,2, Z. Benzina3, F. Zulfiqar4, H. Dhouib5, A. Shahzadi6, A. Ghorbel5, P. posed by Bellenguez and coll . Söderkvist7, S. Riazuddin4, W. Kimberling8, H. Ayadi2; With the regression-based linkage statistic, we detected a strong link- 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Unité Cibles age on chromosome 6p12 .3 (LOD=10 .08) at marker D6S459 . This pour le Diagnostic et la Thérapie, Centre de Biotechnologie, Sfax, Tunisia, linkage signal exactly corresponds to the location of the VEGF gene . 3Service d’Ophtalmologie, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Centre of Hence, coding and regulatory regions of VEGF gene were sequenced Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, in a sample of 42 individuals. 31 polymorphisms were identified, 22 of 5Service d‘O.R.L., C.H.U.Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 6Centre of Excellence which having a MAF>0 .05 . in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 7Division of The association between these 22 SNPs and VEGF levels was tested Cell Biology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of using GTAM test, that also corrects for relatedness between individuals Health Sciences, Linköping, Sweden, 8Center for Hereditary Communication through the genealogical information . After correction for the number Disorders, Boys Town National Research Hospital (BTNRH), Omaha, NE, IA, of independent tests performed, significant association was detected United States. with two SNPs (p<0 .001) and VEGF serum levels . Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (ARRP) is a genetically Our data indicate that polymorphisms located in the regulatory regions heterogeneous disorder . ARRP could be associated with extraocular of VEGF gene are significantly associated with VEGF serum levels in manifestations that define specific syndromes such as Usher syn- Campora population . drome characterized by retinal degeneration and congenital hearing loss (HL) . The Usher syndrome typeII (USH2) subtype associates RP P06.312 and mild to moderate HL with preserved vestibular function . At least Genetic polymorphisms in patients with vesico-ureteric reflux three genes USH2A, the very large G-protein coupled receptor VLGR1 B. Zagradisnik, N. Marčun Varda, K. Bračič, A. Gregorič, N. Kokalj Vokač; and WHRN are responsible for USH2 syndrome . University Medical Centre, Maribor, Slovenia. Here, we report on the segregation of non-syndromic ARRP and USH2 Primary congenital vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR) is a very common syndrome in a consanguineous Tunisian family, which was previously urogenital tract disorder . It has a strong genetic component which is used to define USH2B locus. Upon extending this family, the genotyp- assumed to influence the development of the disease as well as its ing with additional STR markers excluded linkage to USH2B locus . progress . So far different genes were analyzed and also several poly- In addition, ophthalmologic reexamination showed phenotypic het- morphisms were tested for association with VUR with mixed results . erogeneity . We therefore reanalyzed the extended family with regard This study presents association analysis for several polymorphisms to the co-occurrence of two different pathologies i .e non-syndromic from candidate genes of interest . ARRP and USH2 syndrome . Surprisingly, linkage analysis disclosed Genotyping was done in 170 children diagnosed with primary congeni- the cosegregation of the USH2 phenotype with D5S428 and D5S618 tal vesico-ureteric reflux and in 300 healthy controls with no medical re- markers corresponding to the USH2C locus while the ARRP perfectly cord of reflux. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood samples segregates with PDE6B flanking markers D4S3360 and D4S2930. using standard methods. Allele specific polymerase chain reaction as Molecular analysis revealed two new missense mutations p .Y6044C well as PCR-RFLP was used for analysis . Detection was performed and p .W807R occurring in VLGR1 and PDE6B genes, respectively . with agarose gel electrophoresis . Both mutations were absent in 95 genetically unrelated controls . Following polymorphisms were included in the study: M31R, S275T, Finally, the combination of molecular findings for VLGR1 and PDE6B C335R from the gene IL8RA, G-800A, T-509C, L10P, R25 and T233I genes enable us to explain the phenotypic heterogeneity in particular from the gene TGFB1, rs2229773 from the gene RARA and D299G the severe ocular affection first observed in one USH2 patient. This re- from the gene TLR4. Allele frequencies were not significantly different port presents an illustration of how consanguinity could increase famil- between patients and normal controls . ial clustering of multiple hereditary diseases within the same family . The results of our study indicate that polymorphisms from genes IL- 8RA, TGFB1, RARA or TLR4 are not associated with the development P06.315 primary congenital vesico-ureteric reflux. Therefore it is unlikely that mLPA in Diagnostics of copy Number Variations in X-linked these particular variations play a role in the development of this dis- mental Retardation ease . M. Nawara1, B. Nowakowska1, A. Kutkowska-Kazimierczak1, K. Szczaluba1, K. Chrzanowska2, A. Lauda3, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1; P06.313 1Institute of Mother and Child, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, Poland, Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms and vitamin D deficient 2The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, rickets in turkey Poland, 3University Medical School, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Bydgoszcz, G. Bora1, B. Özkan2, D. Dayangaç-Erden1, H. Erdem-Yurter1, T. Coşkun3; Poland. 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, An- X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is highly heterogenous . Because kara, Turkey, 2Atatürk University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, of the low prevalence of mutations in known nonspecific XLMR (MRX) Erzurum, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of genes the systematic screen is not feasible in a routine practice . It is Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey. important to introduce new techniques which enable to screen many In Turkey, considerible number of children suffer from vitamin D defi- loci . cient rickets, which causes growth retardation, impaired bone forma- MLPA (multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification) is such a tion and fracture risk . To explore the association between vitamin D re- technique and it allows a relative quantification of up to 45 different se- ceptor gene polymophism and vitamin D deficient rickets, we analyzed quences in one reaction . In our study we used the MLPA kit containing VDR gene polymorphisms (FokI, TaqI and ApaI) in 24 Turkish vitamin probes for 14 different MRX genes to search for copy number varia- D deficient rickets patients and 100 healthy controls. We showed that tions in a group of 106 XLMR patients . 68 of them were from potential “A” (ApaI) allele is more common in patients (83%, p=0 .002) but there XLMR (pXL) families with two males in different generations affected, were no significant differences for FokI (p= 0.693) and TaqI (p=0.804) and 38 from families with two or more brothers affected (BP) . allele frequencies between patients and controls . We also found that We detected three variants: two deletions (IL1RAPL1 and PAK3) and the frequency of Tt and Aa genotypes were significantly decreased in one duplication (IL1RAPL1), all in the pXL patients . The duplication patients. This is the first report that demonstrated VDR gene polymor- was also present in two affected maternal uncles of the proband . All phisms might be an important factor for genetic susceptibility to vitamin these rearrangements are being confirmed by other molecular (PCR) D deficient rickets in Turkish population. or cytogenetic (FISH) techniques . The clinical evaluation of all affected patients from the families is in progress . The frequency of copy number variations in our studied group was 2 .8%, but if we consider only pXL patients it becomes as high as 4 .4% . We recommend MLPA as a screening for microduplications and micro-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease  deletions in a large proportion of known MRX genes . Because of its 75 children (47%) had moderate asthma and 75 children (47%) had low cost and sensitivity it is suitable for routine diagnosis of X-linked severe asthma. Two common ADRB2 polymorphisms 16 (Q→E) and mental retardation . 27 (G→R) were detected by PCR method with the subsequent restric- tion assay . P06.316 Results: we have revealed association between distribution of haplo- the chromosome abnormalities, Y-chromosome microdeletions types ADRB2 and severity of BA . Patients with the severe asthma had and cFtR gene mutations testing of infertility man from Western sighnificantly more frequent haplotype EE/GG than patients with mod- Ukraine erate asthma (p=0,024) in which more frequent where was haplotype M. Tyrkus, N. Huleyuk, O. Bilevych, D. Zastavna, H. Makukh; QQ/GR . In group of boys we detected analogical changes (p=0,017), State institution “Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical Sci- but there were no differences in girls . ence of Ukraine”, Lviv, Ukraine. The most widespread genetic factors causing male infertility include P06.319 different quantitative and structural chromosome abnormalities, Y- No significant role of the FXII 46C→T mutation in Spanish and chromosome microdeletions and CFTR gene mutations . tunisian cardiovascular patients DNA and cultivated leukocytes from peripheral blood of 150 males with G. Athanasiadis1, E. Esteban1, M. Gayà-Vidal1, M. Resano1, R. Carreras Tor- spermatogenesis failure were analyzed . res1, H. Chaabani2, P. Moral1; Cytogenetic analysis revealed Klinefelter’s syndrome - 47, XXY (7 per- 1Unitat d’Antropologia, Dpt. de Biologia Animal, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat sons), de la Chapelle syndrome - 46, XX (3), disomy of Y-chromosome de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Faculté de Pharmacie de Monastir, Monastir, - 47, XYY (1) . Totally quantitative and structural chromosome abnor- Tunisia. malities were found in 13 males (9%) . Background.- The 46C→T polymorphism in the Coagulation Factor XII Any changes in the structure of Y-chromosome hadn’t been found in gene consists of a cytosine to thymidine transition at the position 46 males with Klinefelter’s syndrome . In patients with 46, XX karyotype from the transcription initiation point in exon 1 of the 5´-untranslated whole sequence of AZFa, AZFb and AZFc is absent . Among 3 patients region . Previous case-control studies have indicated an association with de la Chapelle syndrome SRY gene had been detected in 2 per- between this polymorphism and variation in plasma levels of FXII . The sons . 46C→T seems to affect the translation efficiency, leading to reduced We detected various cases of AZF gene subregions deletions: AZFa plasma levels of the protein . It has been inferred that this mutation ac- (1 patient), AZFb (1), AZFb+c (1), AZFc (6) . Whole absence of PCR - counts for 40% of the variance in FXII activity levels in a Spanish Medi- product of AZFa, AZFb and AZFc and SRY gene was detected in male terranean population . As other case-control studies in the same region with azoospermia and normal karyotype that requires next sequencing indicate, genotype T/T is an independent risk factor for venous throm- analyses . Thus, in 7% of examined infertile males with normal karyo- bosis, ischemic stroke and acute coronary artery disease (CAD) . type Y-chromosome microdeletions were found . In regard to the group Aim.- In this study, we try to confirm the importance of the 46C→T of examined infertile males the percentage of Y-chromosome microde- polymorphism in two patient samples from Spain and Tunisia . letions reached approximately 10% . Methods.- We have implemented two different approaches: a Trans- The molecular-genetic analysis of CFTR gene mutations and mission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) based on 101 families (N=302) from IVS8polyT polymorphic locus revealed F508del mutation in 4 persons, Spain (Barcelona) with one offspring with CAD; and a classical case- 5T polymorphic allele - in 12 males with spermatogenesis failure . control study based on 76 patients with CAD complicated by myocar- The studies point on high effectiveness of the complex of cyto- and dial infarction and on 118 healthy individuals from North and Centre- molecular-genetic researches in males with impaired fertility and state South Tunisia. All subjects were genotyped for the 46C→T polymor- their necessity in diagnose . phism with Real-Time PCR using a TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assay (Applied Biosystems) and the appropriate software was implemented P06.317 for the data analyses . ZNF0 in psoriasis Results.- No statistically important association was detected in any of R. Y. Birnbaum1, A. M. Bowcock2, I. Cohen1, S. Sivan1, R. Ofir1, O. S. Birk1; the two samples (TDT: p=0 .16, statistical power = 99%; case-control 1National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Depart- study: p=0 .65) . ment of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, Conclusion.- The results suggest that 46C→T is not a risk factor for United States. CAD in any of the two analysed samples . So far as we know, the TDT We have previously shown that a dominant mutation in ZNF750 under- analysis for this mutation is the first one carried out in a Spanish popu- lies seborrhea-like dermatosis with psoriasiform elements . To assess lation and suggests that 46C→T might not be the only functional site the contribution of ZNF750 to the pathogenesis of bone fide psoriasis, that would explain the susceptibility to thrombotic disease . we screened 250 psoriasis patients from the U .S . for mutations in the 3 exons of ZNF750, the intron-exon boundaries and 1000bp upstream P06.320 sequences . While no mutations were found in the coding region, a het- Bsmi, Apai and taqi Polymorphisms of Vitamin D receptor gene erozygous ZNF750 5’ UTR variant (+46 C>T) was seen in 3 unrelated in turkish nephrolithiasis patients psoriasis patients . This change was not found in 300 healthy control N. Ersoy, K. Incekara, O. Kose, O. Cakir; samples . Our data suggest that the ZNF750 5’ UTR variant (+46 C>T) Halic University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Tur- might be associated with psoriasis key. Nephrolithiasis is a multi-factorial disease influenced by genetic, hor- P06.318 monal and environmental effects . Calcium oxalate (CaOx) is the most β-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) polymorphisms in the childhood common constituent of kidney stones . Vitamin D receptor (VDR) in- 2 asthma volves in controlling the effects of 1,25dihydroxyvitaminD . The 3’UTR 3 E. A. Isupova, G. A. Novik, V. I. Larionova; region of the VDR gene includes a cluster of polymorphisms: BsmI, Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian ApaI and TaqI . These polymorphisms have been studied in patients Federation. with urolithiasis, but yielded inconclusive results . Since the contribu- Gene polymorphisms of ADRB2 are candidate gene of genetic predis- tion of alleles may appear to be different in different ethnic populations, position to bronchial asthma (BA) and allergic diseases . From data of the relationship of the individual and combined polymorphisms should literature the genetic variants of cellular receptors possibly influence be studied for each population . In this study, we investigated the as- on efficiency of action of antiasthmatic drugs. sociation of BsmI, ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms in 98 Turkish CaOx The aims of our study was to investigate genotypes and alleles fre- stone patients and 70 controls . 52% of the patients reported a family quency of two common polymorphisms of ADRB2 gene (Arg16Gly and history of stones . The polymorphic sites were amplied with PCR, sub- Gln27Glu ) in boys and girls with different severity BA . jected to restriction enzyme digestion and analyzed on agarose gels . Patients and methods: 160 Caucasians children, 129 boys (81%) and Associations between the disease and genotypes were assessed by 31 girls (19%) with the set diagnosis of bronchial asthma of different calculating odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. VDR genotype severity were included . Mild astma was diagnosed in 10 children (6%), distribution was compared with that of controls using the chi-squareMolecular and biochemical basis of disease  test . VDR genotype frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . P06.323 We also carried out haplotype analysis as the polymorphisms are in- Expression profiles of non-syndromic thoracic aortic aneurysms herited together. In patients, six different haplotypes were defined, with C. Patuzzo1, A. Pasquali1, M. Iafrancesco2, G. Faggian2, I. Dal Pra3, A. Chia- over-representation of BAt (40 .7%) . On the other hand, baT haplotype rini3, U. Armato3, A. Mazzucco2, P. F. Pignatti1, E. Trabetti1; was the most frequent in controls . BaT haplotype was four times and 1Department of Mother and Child and Biology-Genetics, Verona, Italy, 2Division bAt haplotype was two times more frequent than in controls . This study of Cardiac Surgery, Dpt of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, Verona, Italy, also provides evidence that there is a statistically significant associa- 3Histology and Embryology Unit, Dpt of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, tion of the bT VDR haplotype and formation of CaOx kidney stones . Verona, Italy. Thoracic aortic aneurysms occur when the arterial wall is unable to P06.321 resist the dilating force of arterial pressure . Aortic aneurysms tend to changes in ca homeostasis lead to electrical and structural expand without symptoms until aortic rupture or dissection take place . remodeling of the heart in the ‚human PLN‘ mouse mode The aim of the study has been to define the molecular circumstances D. A. Arvanitis1, M. Dong2, W. Zhao2, V. Papalouka1, E. G. Kranias1, H. S. in which non-syndromic aneurysm of thoracic ascending aorta can de- Wang2, D. Sanoudou1; velop . 1Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, Fragments of human ascending thoracic aortas with (35, cases) and 2University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, United States. without (22, controls) aneurysms have been isolated during surgical in- Phospholamban (PLN), the reversible inhibitor of SERCA2, is a key tervention (aortic/cardiac transplantation or aortic valve replacement) . regulator of calcium homeostasis and cardiac function, and it has been The three layers of each isolated aortas have been dissected . We now directly implicated in the development of dilated cardiomyopathy . Its report on media layer results . amino acid sequence is highly conserved across species except for Gene transcription and proteomic profiles of the aneurysmal compared humans, where Asn is replaced by Lys at amino acid position 27 . To to non aneurysmal aortic media layer have been studied . Our pre- evaluate the significance of this single nucleotide difference we in- liminary oligonucleotide microarray (22000 genes) results evidenced duced cardiac-specific insertion of the human-PLN in the null back- down regulation of genes such as Decorin (DCN), Thrombospondin 1 ground . The “humanized” PLN expressing transgenic (TG) mouse (THBS1), Reticulocalbin 2 (RCN2), Reticulon 1 and 4 (RTN1 and 4) . hearts presented increased inhibition of SERCA2, abnormal calcium Paucity of these transcripts delineate a structural lack of resistance to handling, fibrosis, and hypertrophy. Using whole genome microarrays mechanical stress and an increase of angiogenesis possibly as an at- (Codelink), we identified significant changes in ion transport, muscle tempt to remodeling the vessel . Proteomic analysis indicated an hyper contraction, cell cycle and proteolysis, as well as numerous transcrip- expression of Testican 2 (SPOCK2) and Jagged 1 (JAG1), confirmed tion related genes . The observed changes in key sodium, potassium by Real Time PCR analysis: mRNAs for these genes are upregulated . and calcium plasma membrane pumps were confirmed at the protein The implication of angiogenesis in the aneurysmal aorta is consistent level and suggested an ongoing electrical remodeling process . In sup- with upregulated Eph transcripts found in microarray analysis . Prelimi- port to these findings, ex vivo Langendorff perfusion of intact hearts nary results from microRNA microarray (794 miRNA) analysis indicate revealed decreased rates of contraction and relaxation in TG mice . differential expression between cases and controls of miRNA 15, 16, Furthermore, patch clamp analysis of isolated cardiac myocytes un- 21, 128, 487, and 133, and this is consistent with down and up regu- veiled significantly prolonged cardiac myocyte action potential, de- lated genes found . creased transient outward current (Ito) and increased sodium/calcium exchanger activity. Significant changes were also detected in key cyto- P06.324 skeletal and contractile proteins . In conclusion, “human-PLN” directly Determination of a novel OA1 gene deletion identified by MLPA affects calcium cycling and contractility, which in turn triggers electri- in a spanish family. cal and structural remodeling . These compensatory mechanisms ulti- M. Martínez-García1,2, C. Villaverde1,2, M. López-Martínez1,2, R. Cardero1,2, D. mately enable long term survival of the TG mice . Cantalapiedra1,2, E. Vallespín1,2, R. Riveiro-Álvarez1,2, M. Rodríguez de Alba1,2, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, C. Ayuso1,2; P06.322 1Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica the Human and canine Dopamine D4 Receptor Genes en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. E. Szantai1, K. Héjjas1, J. Vas2, A. Miklósi2, J. Topál2, Z. Rónai1, M. Sasvári- Nistagmus is the common symptom of a range of diseases involving Székely1, M. Sasvári-Székely1; the macula, including X-linked disorders like ocular albinism type 1 . 1Institute of Medical, Chemical, Molecular Biology and Pathobiology, Semmel- Prevalence of OA type 1 is estimated around 1 in 50,000 live births in weis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Ethology, Eotvos Lorand Caucasian populations . The OA1 gene, which has been assigned to University, Budapest, Hungary. the Xp22 .3 region and spans approximately 40 Kbp of genomic DNA The human dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) is a candidate gene of great containing nine exons, encodes a melanosomal membrane glycopro- interest in molecular studies of human personality and psychiatric dis- tein G consisting of 404 residues belonging to the protein-coupled re- orders . This gene is unique in having an exceptionally high amount of ceptor family . polymorphic sites both in the coding and in the promoter region . One A purified DNA sample of a female carrier in a Spanish family suffer- of the most thoroughly investigated polymorphisms is the 48 base pair ing from ocular albinism was subject to the p054 probe mix of MLPA, variable number of tandem repeats in exon III that has been carefully showing a decreased peak corresponding to exon 2 of the OA1 gene . studied as a possible genetic risk factor for several psychological traits In order to determine whether the OA1 gene was altered, we anal- and psychiatric disorders, such as novelty seeking, drug abuse and ysed a DNA sample from an affected male (proband’s father), and after attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. MLPA, no peak was observed . Therefore, we focused our sequencing Mice or rat possess no analogous repeat sequences, whereas similar analysis on exon 2 because it appears to be particularly prone to dele- tandem repeat polymorphism of the DRD4 gene was identified in dogs tions. Here, we report a mutation (g.5815delA) identified in 2 affected and chimpanzees . Therefore, genotyping method was developed for males and 4 female carriers of this particular family . This mutation exon III length polymorphism of DRD4 gene in dogs; genotype and al- which results in a truncated protein 35 codons downstream, generates lele frequency values were measured in several dog breeds, in wolves a new restriction target site for XcmI, that we further confirmed by di- and in human DNA samples . gestion of DNA from the 6 affected patients . Indirect approach analysis Moreover two other VNTRs were identified and analyzed in dogs in by using OA-CA, a STR located in intron 1, showed co-segregation exon I and intron II of the DRD4 gene and were found to be polymor- with the disease in the family . phic . In conclusion, the prior screening by MLPA is a suitable molecular Our results show that DRD4 gene is also variable in dogs, which means strategy for diagnosis of patients suffering from X-linked ocular albi- that these animals have the potential to become a natural model for nism . testing relationships between this candidate gene polymorphism and psychiatric disorders (such as hyperactivity) .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P06.325 P07. Normal variation, population genetics, Further support for the contribution of the NRG1 gene (8p12- p21) to the risk for schizophrenia: case-control association genetic epidemiology study in a German population based on the GRAs Data collection (Goettingen Research Association for schizophrenia) P07.001 S. Papiol1, M. Begemann2, H. Krampe2, S. Klaus2, F. Benseler3, S. Sperling2, S. DNA analysis for blood group ABO determination and RhD DNA Stawicki2, K.A. Nave1, H. Ehrenreich2; typing for prenatal diagnosis 1Neurogenetics Department, 2Division of Clinical Neuroscience and 3Molecular A. V. Kirov, T. Todorov, A. Todorova; Neurobiology Department, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Genetic laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria. Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3, D-37075 Goettingen, Germany. Blood type group can be determined immunologically or by genetic Background: Schizophrenia is a severe neuropsychiatric disorder with methods, but genetic methods are more accurate . a worldwide prevalence of around 1% and outstanding heritability es- We report on a method for ABO and RhD blood type determination, timates (80%; Cardno & Gottesman, 2000) . The neuregulin 1 gene performed by multiplex PCR and PCR-SSP (sequence-specific prim- (8p12-p21) has been strongly associated with an increased risk to ers) . These analyses provide fast, cheap and easy to perform method develop schizophrenia by numerous studies in several human popu- for blood type determination . We utilize two PCR reactions for RhD lations since the first association reported in an Icelandic population determination - first amplification covers the fragment spanning the (Stefansson et al ., 2002) . However this prominent genetic risk factor intron 3/intron 4 of RhD gene to look for 37bp insert in exon 4 . Second has not been analyzed in the German population so far . PCR is multiplex (3 fragments), it amplifies intron 7 and 3’UTR of RhD Methods: Authors analyzed the genetic variability contained in the «Ice- locus . Until now we have already done 14 prenatal diagnoses in RhD landic core-at-risk» haplotype as well as in the intron 1 of the NRG1 (-) mothers . The obtained results for the fetuses RhD blood type were: gene in a sample of German origin based on the GRAS Data Collection 13 RhD positive and 1 RhD negative . (Goettingen Research Association for Schizophrenia), made up of 883 Determination of ABO blood type includes 4 specific regions analyzed DSM-IV-diagnosed schizophrenic patients and 880 healthy controls, by PCR-SSP . Until now we have tested this method only using con- in the context of a case-control study . SNPs were genotyped through trol DNA probes to detect the method specificity and sensitivity. The melting curve analysis in a LightCycler®480 system while microsatel- obtained results are promising and the method could be applied rou- lite analyses were carried out in a 3730xl DNA Analyzer® . Haplotype tinely for ABO blood group determination . Both methods for DNA blood analyses were performed using UNPHASED (Dudbridge, 2006) and group/RhD typing will be applied for the purposes of the individual PHASE (Stephens et al ., 2001) . identification and paternity testing, as such analysis is in some cases Results: Sliding windows analysis revealed that the frequency of a requested simultaneously with the DNA genotyping of the individuals . haplotypic combination defined by markers SNP8NRG241930, 487-2 and D8S1810 (G-12-18) was increased in cases (7 .9%) with respect P07.002 to controls (3.8%), and was significantly associated with an increased The ACE I/D polymorphism in Lithuanian professional athletes risk for the disorder (P-value=7 .0x10-7; OR=2 .21 95%CI(1 .60-3 .08)) . V. Ginevičienė1,2, J. Kasnauskienė1, V. Kučinskas1; Conclusions: Our results reinforce the interest in the NRG1 gene as a 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- risk factor with a moderate but robust contribution to the risk for schizo- versity, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian Olympic Sports Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania. phrenia . Human physical performance is under strong influence of genetic fac- Acknowledgements: Grant support from the Max-Planck Society and tors . I/D polymorphism in the human angiotensin-1-coverting enzyme the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (CMPB) . S . Papiol was sup- (ACE) gene characterised by the presence (I allele) or absence (D ported by a postdoctoral fellowship of the Spanish MEC . allele) of a 287-base-pair Alu repeat within intron 16 is among most extensively investigated ones with respect to ACE activity and its in- P06.326 volvement in various pathophysiological conditions related to endur- Population-based linkage analysis of schizophrenia case-control ance. Nevertheless, the results are still conflicting across studies and cohorts identifies a potential susceptibility locus on 19q13 populations . In the present study, ACE gene I/D polymorphism was C. Francks1, P.Muglia1, D. Rujescu2, D. St Clair3; investigated in 413 Lithuanian professional athletes representing four 1Medical Genetics, GlaxoSmithKline, Via Fleming 4, Verona 37135, Italy., 2Di- functional groups [endurance (N=57); mixed sports (N=44); strength vision of Molecular and Clinical Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Lud- and speed (N=30), and team sports (N=282)], as well as in 120 sam- wig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Mental Health, ples from general population of Lithuanians. Statistically significantly University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. higher D allele frequencies were found in strength and speed group Population-based linkage analysis is a novel method for analysing (P=0 .02) as well as in endurance group (P=0 .06), contrary to the pre- genomewide SNP genotype data in case-control samples that does vailing data from other studies showing association of endurance with I not assume a common-disease, common-variant model . The genome allele . D allele also appeared to be more frequent in the general popu- is scanned for increased identity-by-descent sharing of extended ge- lation of Lithuanians (60,4 %) in comparison to the majority of other nomic segments within case-case pairs, relative to case-control or European populations (30-50%) . Thus, increased D allele prevalence control-control pairs . The method is robust to allelic heterogeneity and in strength and speed group of athletes from Lithuania can be a reflec- is suited to mapping genes which contain multiple, rare susceptibility tion of population frequency of this allele . In conclusion, our results variants of relatively high penetrance . The method has been proposed imply that the role of ACE gene I/D polymorphism in athletic perfor- by Purcell et al . (Am J Hum Genet 2007) and implemented in the soft- mance is not straightforward and can be masked by other genetic and ware PLINK . non-genetic factors . We analysed genomewide SNP genotype datasets for two schizo- phrenia case-control cohorts, collected in Aberdeen (461 cases, 459 P07.003 controls) and Munich (429 cases, 428 controls) . This analysis must be Association of the ActN3 gene variant with endurance athlete performed within homogeneous samples and it was therefore neces- status sary to analyse the cohorts separately. Each cohort was first subjected A. M. Druzhevskaya, I. I. Ahmetov, I. V. Astratenkova, V. A. Rogozkin; to several procedures to improve genetic homogeneity, including iden- St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian tity-by-state outlier detection and multidimensional scaling analysis . Federation. Using the complete cohorts there was no significant overlap in signals Alpha-actinin-3 (ACTN3) is a myofibrillar protein found in fast-twitch between the Munich and Aberdeen cohorts . However, when testing glycolytic muscle fibers. The less common X-allele of the R577X poly- only those cases with a positive family history of major psychiatric dis- morphism in the ACTN3 gene results in a premature stop codon and ease, which would fit better with a model of strongly penetrant sus- alpha-actinin-3 protein deficiency in XX homozygotes. A strong asso- ceptibility alleles, we saw a distinct peak on chromosome 19q in both ciation has been reported between the R577X polymorphism and elite samples (spanning the gene APOE but many others too), that appears athletic performance . The aim of the study was to investigate genotype in meta-analysis (P=0 .000016) to be around the traditional level for and allele distribution of ACTN3 gene in endurance-oriented athletes calling genomewide significance for linkage. and controls . The study involved 501 athletes (biathletes; rowers; longNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  distance runners, swimmers and skaters, road cyclists, skiers, triath- P07.006 letes, race walkers) and 1197 controls . Genotyping was performed by Alpha 1 antitriypsin gene mutation in patients with a suspected restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis . The distribution of alpha 1 antitrypsin protein deficiency ACTN3 genotypes (athletes: RR - 37 .1%, RX - 53 .1%, XX - 9 .8%; C. Mordillo, Y. Robles, J. Seco, L. Alvarez, A. Ortega, E. Massip, D. Gómez; controls: RR - 36.8%, RX - 49.0%, XX - 14.2%) was significantly differ- Balagué Center S.A., Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. ent between athletes and controls (P=0 .038) . While R allele frequency Alpha 1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency is the most prevalent potentially did not differ between athletes (63 .7%) and controls (61 .3%), the fre- lethal hereditary disease of Caucasians. Individuals with AAT deficien- quency of XX genotype was under-represented in athletes compared cy have an increased risk of early onset for severe pulmonary emphy- to controls (9 .8% vs . 14 .2%, P=0 .013) . We therefore conclude that XX sema and for liver disease . The most common variants of AAT are genotype is unfavorable for endurance performance . classified as M, S, and the most prevalent type of clinically important AAT deficiency, the Z genotype. P07.004 MATERIAL AND METHODS: We sequenced the coding region of the Analisis of IGF- gene and PGC- gene polymorphism in AAT gene in 105 patients with a suspected deficiency of AAT protein. newborn and elderly people from North-west region of Russia We analyzed the sequences by comparing all exons amongst them S. V. Potulova1, O. S. Glotov2, V. S. Baranov2; and also with the reported AAT sequence in the databases to identify 1Saint-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott all known and novel allelic variants in the gene . Some patients were Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. also tested for plasma levels . Our goal was to investigate whether a polymorphism in the insulin-like RESULTS: We found eight new genetic variants in the coding sequence growth factor I promoter gene (IGF-1, wild-type, 192 base pairs) and of the AAT gene . Two were small deletions and six were SNP´s . Some in the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor coactivator-1 gene of them changed the amino acidic sequence of the protein and were (PGC-1, Gly482Ser polymorphism) influence life expectancy. found in more than one patient . All new genetic variants were found in Different distribution of IGF-1 (CA repeats) gene polymorphism was an heterozygous state . shown . Increasing of 20/- genotype in elderly people compared with CONCLUSION: Naturally occurring mutations have been very useful in newborn group (26.7%and 44.1%, accordantly, χ2=8.57, p=0.0034) understanding regulation-functionality of proteins . Using the sequenc- and decreasing of 19/19 genotype (51% and 27 .9%, accordantly, ing method for genotyping, has showed to be a very useful tool for dis- χ2=14.815, p=0.0001) were founded. Furthermore, it was shown dif- covering new genetic variants . The knowledge of new genetic variants ferent distribution of IGF-1 (CA repeats) gene polymorphism in man in the AAT gene, specially when they occur in the coding region of the and woman . Increasing of 19/20 genotype in newborn man compared gene, could contribute to identify new genetic risk factors for suffering with newborn woman (23 .2% and 11 .3%, accordantly) as well as sig- the AAT deficiency disease. nificant increasing of 19/20 genotype in elderly man compared with elderly woman (44.4% and 21.1%, accordantly, χ2=5.009, p=0.025) P07.007 was detected . We suggest a possible role of IGF-1 gene CA- polymor- Phenotyping of alpha-1-antitrypsin in hospitals of three regions phism in ageing . of Azerbaijan The prevalent Gly482Ser polymorphism of the PGC-1 gene has not A. B. Ismayilova; been shown to be associated with life expectancy . Increase of Gly/ Baku State University, Baku, Azerbaijan. Gly genotype in elderly woman compared with elderly man (51 .0% è Alpha-1-antitripsin (α1AT) is a low molecular protease inhibitor, syn- 27.3%, accordantly, χ2=4.063, p=0.0438) was registered. Analysis of thesized by liver cells and suppressing the activity of many serine pro- joint contribution of both genes in ageing revealed the significant dif- teoletic enzymes . In our experiments for revealing subtypes of normal ference between groups of newborn and elderly people (20%, 41 .8%, Pi alleles: M1, M2, M3 and diagnosis of mutated alleles - PiZ, PiS we accordantly, χ2=4 .858, p=0 .0275) . We suggest that both genes (IGF-1 used analytical method of isoelectrofocusing (IEF) in thin layer poly- and PGC-1) could be involved in ageing together . acrylamide ampholine gels ( PAAG), pH 4-6. We have done identifica- tion of α1AT phenotypes in quite healthy persons as well as in patients P07.005 with COPD . Capillary blood (0,2 ml) with anticoagulation agent - hepa- Allele frequency distribution for 3 microsatellite marker in rin was collected in eppendorf tubes . Altogether there were screened chromosome 12 in tehran Lipid and Glucose study 919 persons’ blood samples in 3 regions : Siyazan and Khachmas M. S. Daneshpour1, M. Houshmand2, M. Hedayati1, S. Alfadhli3, F. Azizi1; areas are located 110 km northward and Khazakh area 450 km west- 1Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Tehran, northward from Baku city . The frequency of mutated gene PiZ and PiS Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute varied in the limits of 0 .0046-0 .0114 and 0 .0037 and 0 .0066 respec- for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, tively . The lowest frequencies PiZ of the gene were revealed at popu- 3Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, lation of Khazakh, PiS gene at the population of Siyazan . Among the Kuwait, Kuwait. patients with COPD from all centrals region hospitals there were identi- Objective To study the distribution of allele frequency of 3 microsatel- fied the homozygote state for PiZ mutations with phenotypic frequency lite marker (D12S96, D12S1632 and D12S329) in chromosome 12 on 0 .83% (Khazakh) up to 1 .81% (Khachmas) at the average - 1 .16% . a representative sample of Iranian population Only among the patients in Siyazan there was identified compound- Methods 534 members of 110 families were selected from Thehran i .e . double heterozygote state of PiZ and PiS genes . About the three Lipid and glucose Study. The DNA samples amplified by multiplex regions there were revealed 32 mutations of of PiZ heterozygote, ho- PCR in ABI thermal cycler. Electrophoresis of amplification product mozygote - 19 people, mutations of PiS heterozygote - 22, homozy- performed on an ABI genetic analyzer. After PCR amplification and gote one and one compound with PiZ/PiS genotype . separation by electrophoresis, raw data was compiled; analyzed and numerical allele designations of the profiles obtained. Deviation from P07.008 Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and expected heterozygosity, Leukocyte and Plasma Alpha-Galactosidase Enzyme Activity power of discrimination, and power of exclusion were calculated . Bon- Levels in Healthy Young Adults: Evidence that Females Have ferroni’s correction performed before each comparative analysis . Higher Plasma Levels Results: Several new alleles (not yet reported in the NIST Short Tan- J. Oliveira1, S. Ferreira1, J. Barceló1, F. Carvalho1, J. Månsson2; dem Repeat DNA Internet Data Base [http://www .cstl .nist .gov/biotech/ 1Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Sahlgren’s strbase/]) detected in this study . We found 15 alleles for D12S96, 10 University Hospital, Molndal, Sweden. alleles for D12S1632 and finally 10 alleles for D12S329. The most he- Background: Lysosomal α-galactosidase is the enzyme deficient tozygote and informative allele was D12S1632 with 0 .7270 hetrozy- in Fabry disease, an X-linked glycosphingolipid storage disorder af- gosity (208-230bp) and 0.7395 PIC number. There was no significant fecting both genders. Although in males the leukocyte and plasma α- deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all the observed loci . galactosidase assays are used interchangeably for the diagnosis of Conclusion: Comparing Iranian data with those obtained from Fabry disease, in females the enzyme assays are less reliable and other populations, the most informative allele in this population is the plasma assay apperas to have a much lower sensitivity than the D12S1632 . leukocyte assay .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  Methods: To investigate possible biologic gender differences in normal (aged 7-17) were include the study . α-galactosidase activity, plasma and leukocyte enzyme activities were Arterial hypertension was defined as systolic/diastolic blood pressure determined in eight male and nine female healthy unrelated Cauca- measurements higher than 95 age-gender-height percentile of the ad- sian young adults . All subjects had been genotyped and carried the opted reference values . standard genomic sequence for the 5’ untranslated region of the α-ga- DNA was extracted from blood samples according to standard pro- lactosidase gene, a region that may contain single nucleotide polymor- tocols . The Q/E27 polymorphism was genotyped by using the PCR phisms affecting the level of gene expression . Differences in gender restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis . means were compared by the independent samples t-test . The distribution of ADRB2 genotypes and allele frequencies did not Results: The mean (±SD) α-galactosidase activity levels were 28.7 differ significantly between patients with AH and control subjects. (±3.7) and 27.5 (±4.7) μkat/Kg in leukocytes (p=0.57) whereas mean Clinical systolic BP in patients with QQ- genotype was 133,65±11,5 plasma activities±SD were 2 .2 (±0 .5) and 2 .9 (±0 .7) nkat/L (p=0 .03), mm Hg, QE-genotype was 133,43±8,4 mm Hg, EE- genotype was respectively for males and females . 132,52±7,5 mm Hg . Clinical systolic BP differences among genotypes Conclusion: There seems to be a gender difference in normal plasma were not found . α-galactosidase activity. This finding, if confirmed in a larger sample, The allelic and genotypic frequencies of the Q/E27 polymorphism in may have to be taken into account in the definition of normal laboratory hypertensive and control subject reference ranges and may warrant a reassessment of the sensitivity of Q/E27 Hypertensive (n=84) Control (n=90) p the plasma α-galactosidase assay for the identification of females with QQ 17 (20,2%) 14 (15,6%) 0,722 Fabry disease . We hypothesize that a higher fractional post-transla- QE 46 (54,8%) 52 (57,8%) tional sialylation of the newly synthesized enzyme in the female Golgi apparatus may contribute to this difference . EE 21 (25,0%) 24 (26,7%) Q 80 (47,6%) 80 (44,4%) 0,5527 P07.009 E 88 (52,4%) 100 (55,6%) Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (AttR V30m): a change in paradigm? P07.011 A. Sousa1,2, A. M. Silva3, L. Maia3, T. Coelho3; iL4 genetic polymorphisms contribution to madeira population 1ICBAS (Instituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar), U.P., Porto, Portugal, risk of asthma 2IBMC (Instituto Biologia Molecular e Celular), U.P, Porto, Portugal, 3Unidade A. G. Berenguer1, R. Câmara2, A. T. G. Fernandes1, S. Oliveira2, A. Brehm1; Clínica de Paramiloidose, HGSA (Hospital Geral Santo Antonio), Porto, Portu- 1Human Genetics Laboratory, Funchal, Portugal, 2Imunoallergology Unit, Cen- gal. tral Hospital of Funchal, Funchal, Portugal. Andrade first described FAP (1952) as a disease occurring between The allergic disease prevalence is influenced by both environmental 25 and 35 yrs . He reported 64 patients, 13 of which had no family exposure and the population’s genetic predisposition to the disease . history of the disease . Later PE Becker established its AD mode of Five different polymorphisms of previously associated genes to some inheritance and interpreted isolated cases not as a de novo mutation of asthma’s phenotypic characteristics namely IL4RP2 and IL4-590 but as the expression of incomplete penetrance of the gene in one of (C/T) at 5q31-32; ADRB2 16A/G at 5q31-32; ADAM33 S1 (G/A) and the parents. This hypothesis could only be tested after the finding of ADAM33 V4 (C/G) at 20p13 were studied in 28 asthmatic children the mutation in 1985 . with positive skin prick test to house dust mite from affected sib-pair Our aims were: 1) to estimate the number of probands with no affected families composed by two children and their biological parents . Allele parent at time of diagnosis; 2) to study age at onset of proband and its frequencies from asthmatic patients were then compared to a sample changes over time . Between 1939 and 2005, 2075 patients (525 fami- from Madeira general population . Both genotypic and allelic frequen- lies) were diagnosed at HGSA. Families were classified as “new” when cies as well as comparisons between both groups were accessed by the proband reported no similar disease in earlier generations . ARLEQUIN 3 .1 . Age-at-onset varied from 20-80 yrs (mean 37 .1 in women, 32 .4 in We have found significant differences regarding both IL4RP2 and IL4- men) . 209 probands (40%) had no affected parent at time of diagno- 590 (C/T) polymorphisms between the two groups (p<0,05). No signifi- sis . This type of family represented 68% of those diagnosed in last cant differences were detected for the remaining polymorphisms . decade (only 27% before 1985) . Mean age-at-onset of probands of There seems to be an association between asthma development and “new” families was 46 .0 yrs (vs. 32 .3 yrs for “classical” families) and it both RP2 and -590 (C/T) polymorphisms within IL4 gene for Madeira has increased over time, being 49 .5 yrs in last decade . population . These two loci may be useful genetic markers for detecting Regarding FAP two realities coexist in Portugal: families with several atopic asthma disease predisposition in Madeira . generations of affected (where probands have “classical” onset) and probands with late-onset who report no similar disease in previous P07.012 generations . The mutation may cross generations without clinical man- Gene-Environment-interactions: increased Risk for Atopic ifestations, then expresses as late-onset and later anticipation occurs . Eczema C. Gräbsch1, S. Röder1, O. Herbarth1,2, U. Krämer3, H. Wichmann4, J. Hein- P07.010 rich4, M. Bauer1; the ß-adrenergic receptor gene polymorphism and arterial 1Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department for Human 2 hypertension in children Exposure Research and Epidemiology, Leipzig, Germany, 2Universität Leipzig, S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, O. S. Romashkina2, O. A. Mutafyan1, V. I. Medical Faculty, Environmental Medicine & Environmental Hygiene, Leipzig, Larionova2; Germany, 3Institut für Umweltmedizinische Forschung (IUF) an der Heinrich-He- 1St.Petersburg State Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Peters- ine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Helmholtz Zentrum München burg, Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, - German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Epidemiology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Neuherberg, Germany. The ß-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) is thought to be associated with Within the atopic march, atopic eczema (AE) is one of the first clinical 2 arterial hypertension (AH) and its altered function can results in in- manifestations . Possible interaction of genetic disposition and environ- creased blood pressure (BP) . Q/E27 polymorphism of ADRB2 gene is mental factors “in utero” or postnatal could influence the susceptibility considered functionally important . for AE . Though some reports indicate that polymorphism in the ADRB2gene For a reliable prognosis of an individual responsiveness to environ- is associated with essential hypertension, its role in BP levels remains mental factors, children of the epidemiological LISA-study (n=881) unclear . were genotyped for common polymorphic xenobiotica-metabolizing The aim of this study were to investigate distribution of ADRB2 geno- enzymes involving in biotransformation of industrial pollutants, ciga- types and allele frequencies of Q/E27 polymorphism in hypertensive rette smoke and in defence against oxidative stress . and normotensive children and to compare clinical systolic BP levels The study revealed, that children with the genotype combination between carriers of the different genotypes . CYP2D6*1A/*1A, GSTP1*1A/*1A, GSTT1*null/*null and GSTM1*1A/ 84 children with systolic AH (aged 7-17) and 90 normotensive children *null or *1A/*1A (n=26) had a higher susceptibility for AE, when ex-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  posed to tobacco smoke (mother smoked actively) . personal medical history, detailed psychiatric evaluation, dysmorpho- For the exposure scenario “mother smokes during the first trimester of logical and neurological clinical examination . Blood and/or urine sam- pregnancy”, the OR for AE within the first years of the children’s life are ples were collected for genetic testing each time a specific disorder statistically significant (at the age of 1 year: OR . [95%CI: 1 .0-41]; was suggested after the first consultation, or for systematic screen- 11/: OR . [95%CI: 2 .0-43 .9]; 2: OR . [95%CI: 1 .2-24 .6] as well as ing of common ASD-related disorders . Systematic screening com- 2 6 years: OR . [95%CI: 0 .8-15 .5], adjusted to gender, positive fam- prised high resolution banding karyotype, with 22q13 and 15q11q13 ily history of atopy, vaccination and infections and refurbishing during FISH analyses, FMR1 gene triplet expansion testing, and metabolic pregnancy) . Children without tobacco smoke exposure show no as- screening (blood aminoacid and urine organic acid chromatographies, sociation between the genotype combination and a higher risk for AE . AICAR, urinary creatin and guanidinoacetate, N-glycosylation, lactate, Additionally, “smoking after pregnancy” could confirm the previously pyruvate, ammonium). CGH-array analysis was undertaken in 6% of association, but only by a trend due to the small subgroup . patients thus far . Most of the 159 ASD patients (50 females and 106 These associations show a putative role of the gene-environment-in- males) had associated mental retardation ranging from mild to pro- teractions in the manifestation of AE. However, an identification of a found . closer time-frame of risk toward the exposure “mother smokes” is not 21 specific diagnoses were obtained for 30 patients: fragile X (8 pa- yet possible . tients), 15q11q13 duplication (2 patients), 22qter deletion, 22q11 .2 de- letion, 1p36 deletion, Williams syndrome, trisomy X, Turner syndrome, P07.013 interstitial 19q deletion, mosaic ring 15, 8q23q24 duplication, 17p11 .2 Prevalence of mutations in the OTOF, PJVK and DDP genes in duplication, 1q31 duplication, 1q21 duplication, AP1S2 mutation, subjects with auditory neuropathy Prader-Willi, Cornelia de Lange, CHARGE and Rubinstein-Taybi syn- M. Rodríguez-Ballesteros1,2, L. A. Aguirre1,2, H. del Águila1, R. Reynoso3, C. dromes, creatin transporter deficiency (2 patients), GAMT deficiency, Morera4, R. Santarelli5, E. Arslan5, C. Curet3, C. Völter6, C. Vincent7, E. Gómez- phenylketonuria, and histidinaemia . We present a cohort of 159 pa- Rosas1,2, M. Villamar1,2, M. A. Moreno-Pelayo1,2, J. Moreno-Barral3, F. Moreno1,2, tients with ASD. 23 specific genetic disorders were found in 32 patients I. del Castillo1,2; (20,1 %) . These results emphasize the importance of on site evalua- 1Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 2Cen- tion of these patients . tro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Univ. Nacional de Cór- P07.015 doba, Córdoba, Argentina, 4Servicio de ORL, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Va- Analysis of AcE and At1R gene polymorphisms in Balkan lencia, Spain, 5Department of Medical and Surgical Specialities, Audiology and Endemic Nephropathy Phoniatric Service, Univ. of Padova, Padua, Italy, 6ENT Department, University Z. Krcunovic1, I. Novakovic1, N. Maksimovic1, D. Bukvic2, S. Simic-Ogrizovic3, of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 7Department of Otology and Otoneurosur- L. Djukanovic3, S. Jankovic4; gery, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Lille, France. 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Auditory neuropathy (AN) encompasses a variety of disorders charac- Endemic Nephropathy, Lazarevac, Serbia, 3Institute of Nephrology and Urology, terized by normal otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and absent or grossly Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of Epidemiology, Belgrade, Serbia. abnormal auditory brainstem responses (ABR) in the affected sub- Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) is a multifactorial disorder with jects . AN can result from environmental or genetic causes . It can be still unexplained hereditary component . Similarity of BEN and cyclo- part of a systemic neurodegenerative disorder or it can be an isolated sporine nephropathy suggests possible common ethiopathogenetic clinical entity . The primary lesion in AN can be located in the inner hair mechanisms . Considering the role of renin-angiotensin system in cells, in the auditory nerve, or in the synapse in between . In the last emergence of cyclosporine nephropathy and other types of kidney few years, several genes have been shown to be involved in AN . We disease, candidate genes for association studies in BEN were cho- have investigated the prevalence of mutations in the genes encoding sen . We performed analysis of I/D polymorphism in gene encoding for otoferlin, pejvakin and TIMM8a (OTOF, DFNB59 and DDP1, respec- angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and A1166C polymorphism in tively) in subjects with isolated auditory neuropathy . A cohort of 36 un- gene encoding for type I receptor for angiotensin II (AT1R) . The study related subjects with isolated auditory neuropathy were screened for was carried out in a group of 50 patients with BEN diagnosis according mutations in these genes by DNA sequencing of all exons and flanking to criteria of Danilovic, derived from endemic region in Kolubara dis- intronic sequences . In 25 subjects (69%), we found two mutant alleles trict . Two control groups consisted of 50 healthy persons (C) and of 45 of OTOF, two of the mutations being novel . In one subject (2 .8%), we patients with other nephropathies (NBEN), both matched by age and found a novel mutation in the DDP1 gene . Mutations in this gene are gender . DNA for gene analysis was extracted from peripheral blood responsible for Mohr-Tranebjaerg syndrome, an X-linked condition as- leukocytes . For detection of ACE I/D and AT1R A1166C gene polymor- sociating deafness and muscular dystonia . The affected child did not phisms PCR and PCR/RFLPS methods were used, respectively . We present with dystonia at the age at which the study was performed . found that frequency of ACE DD genotype was 41 .66%, 43 .14% and No mutations were found in the DFNB59 gene . Our results show that 84 .61% in BEN, C and NBEN group, respectively . For AT1R A1166C mutations in the OTOF gene are a major cause of inherited auditory gene polymorphism frequency of CC genotype was 10 .41%, 8 .69% neuropathy and suggest that cohorts of apparently isolated auditory and 5 .72%, respectively . Our results showed no difference in analysed neuropathy may contain additional cases of the rare Mohr-Tranebjaerg genotypes between BEN and C group. However, we found significantly syndrome . higher frequency of ACE DD genotype and lower frequency of AT1R 1166 CC genotype in NBEN group . Although these results do not in- P07.014 dicate significant role of ACE and AT1R gene polymorphisms in BEN, Specific genetic diagnoses in Autism Spectrum Disorders. A 10- we will proceed in investigation of other members of renin-angiotensin year genetic study of 159 patients from 5 psychiatric outpatient system . care units S. Lapuyade1, M. Assouline1, S. Martin1, J. Malen2, G. Rolland-Manuel3, A. P07.016 Terkmani4, J. Lena5, J. Amiel5, J. Bonnefont5, L. Colleaux5, V. Cormier-Daire5, compound heterozygosity between Hbs and b-thalassemia. M. De Blois5, S. Lyonnet5, V. Malan5, A. Philippe5, O. Raoul5, M. Rio5, A. Mun- implication for the neonatal diagnostic of hemoglobinopathies nich5, S. Whalen5; S. Pissard1,2, N. Ellachtar3, C. Albert1, C. Godart1, F. Galacteros4, H. Pueh- 1Hôpital de Jour Santos Dumont, Paris, France, 2Hôpital de Jour Sésame Autis- ringer5, C. Oberkanins5, H. Wajcman3; me, Chevilly-La-Rue, France, 3Hôpital de Jour d’Antony, Antony, France, 4IME 1laboratory of genetics, AP-HP,Hop Henri Mondor, creteil, France, 2INSERM, Alternat, Antony, France, 5Département de génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants U841 eq 11, Creteil, France, 3INSERM, U841 eq 11, creteil, France, 4UMGGR, Malades, Paris, France. AP-HP, Hop Henri mondor, creteil, France, 5ViennaLab Diagnostics, Vienna, Since 1998, a collaborative study has been undertaken between the Austria. genetic department of Necker Enfants Malades hospital and 5 psychi- Compound heterozygosity between Hb S and b-thalassemia is a form atric outpatient care units of Île-de-France region . From 1998 to 2008, of sickle cell anemia (SCA) with a clinical severity varying considerably . 159 patients with autistic spectrum disorders (ASDs) have undergone The clinical phenotype depend upon the type of thalassemic defect but on-site genetic consultation gathering the following data: family and also on other factors . To clarify the spectrum of b-thal associated withNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  HbS in the French population, we studied a cohort of about 150 S/bthal mUtAtiON ORiGiN % 2007 % 1988 patients and we found 20 different thalassemic traits, 9 of them repre- Other mutations senting 79% of the patients . Spectrum of mutations vary depending on CD8 -AA 1 Spain 3 Morocco 5 .4 1 .7 the patients origin but one interesting finding is that in the group of pa- IVSI:5 G>C 1 Spain 1 Morocco 2 .7 1 .5 tients of unidentified origin (n = 31) we found the largest spectrum with CD8/9 +G 1 Spain 1 Morocco 2 .7 - 20 different mutations. This finding may be explained by the increasing CD41/42 -TTCT 2 China 2 .7 - heterogeneity of the French population and the admixture of thalas- semic traits from various parts of the world with the HbS . In France, CD24 T>A 2 Subsaharian 2 .7 - newborns belonging to populations at risk are screened for SCA by CD6 -AG* 2 Spain 2 .7 - means of IEF and CE-HPLC of Hb eluted from a dried blood spot . In CD37 G>A 1 Spain 1 .4 - order to know the proportion of incorrectly diagnosed newborns we IVSI:1 G>T 1 India 1 .4 - extracted DNA from blood spot and genotyped the codon 6 . Results IVSII:849 A>C 1 Subsaharian 1 .4 - obtained with 100 spots diagnosed as “S/S” with Hb study, revealed -29 A>G 1 Subsaharian 1 .4 - that 15% of samples displayed one Hb S allele and one normal codon -88 C>T 1 Spain 1 .4 - and thus were improperly diagnosed . These data, lead us to develop a fast and simple method which will allow to provide an “one shot” cor- rect diagnosis of SCA and related syndromes in neonates . P07.018 Polymorphism in caRs A986s gene and serum or urine P07.017 concentration of bone mineral related parameters in random Genetic heterogeneity of β-thalassaemia in Catalonia: molecular selected postmenopausal women . characterization of 74 cases L. Navarro Casado, J. A. Blázquez Cabrera, C. Andrés Fernández, M. Cháfer M. Mañú-Pereira1, A. Cabot2, N. Radó1, J. Vives-Corrons1; Rudilla, J. H. Ontañón Rodríguez, M. L. Quintanilla Mata; 1Hospital Clínic i Provincial, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital de Mataró, Barcelona, CHUA, Albacete, Spain. Spain. Background. Calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is a candidate gene for Introduction: A study performed in Catalonia in 1988 showed 8 muta- osteoporosis susceptibility . There are only a limited number of studies tions responsible for the total of β-thalassaemia cases. The objective available regarding the relationship between the CaSR gene A986S is to investigate the β-thalassaemia underlying mutations to ensure polymorphism and serum or urine concentration of bone mineral re- proper genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis . We also describe a lated parameters . new β-thalassaemia mutation. Objectives. To evaluate whether CaSR gene A986S polymorphism af- Methods: 74 patients for β-thalassaemia were studied. The 8 most prev- fects bone mineral related parameters on serum as: calcium (s-ca), alent mutations (>90%) of β-globin in the Mediterranean: CD39(C>T), phosphorus (s-ph), alkaline phosphatase (s-alp), acide phosphatase IVS1:110(G>A), IVS1:6(T>C), IVS1:1(G>A), IVS2:745(C>G), (s-acp), or on urine as calcium creatinine ratio (u-ccr) . IVS2:1(G>A), -87(C>G), CD6(-A) were screened by ASO . Negative Subjects and methods. 158 women with natural menopause were ran- samples were sequenced for β-globin gene. domly selected (mean age 52 .7±1 .6 yr) . They did not have any dis- Results: Distribution of the identified β-gene mutations and data of eases to affect bone metabolism . Genomic DNA was extracted from 1988 are shown in Table 1 . peripheral blood leukocytes by the Higuchi method . A fragment of exon Discussion: Identification of mutation leading to β-thalassaemia by 7 of CaSR gene containing the A986S polymorphism was amplified by analyzing the most prevalent mutations in the Mediterranean has polymerase chain reaction (PCR). After amplification, all samples were decreased 15-25% . The 4 mutations most prevalent in our study are digested whit Bsa H1 restriction enzymes, and the fragments were common in the West Mediterranean but the last 4 considered preva- separated by agarose gel electrophoresis . The levels of s-ca, s-ph, s- lent are responsible only for 2 .8% of our cases . In comparison with the alp, s-acp or u-ccr were measured by P-module from Roche . 1988 study, analysis of the 8 mutations then identified is responsible Results. Genotype frequencies of CaSR gene A986S polymorphism for 82 .6% in the recent study, changing the relative percentage . Mo- was: AA, 121 (76 .6%); AS, 34 (21 .5%), and SS, 3 (1 .9%) . We found no lecular heterogeneity has increased: 19 mutations, including Chinese association between CaSR polymorphism and s-ca, s-ph, s-alp, s-acp . and sub-Saharan variants are now responsible for all cases . Since Women with the AS/SS genotype had higher u-ccr than those with AA immigration flows and increased rates of rare and even new variants genotype, (AS/SS 0 .205 ± 0 .88; AA, 0 .167 ± 0 .76 mg/mg; p=0 .014 ) . make genetic diagnosis more difficult, this shows the high importance Conclusions . 1) We found no association between CaSR gene A986S of identifying β-thalassaemia mutations in order to provide appropriate polymorphism and serum concentration of bone mineral related pa- genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis rameters . 2) We found association between CaSR gene A986S and calcium creatinine ratio . mUtAtiON ORiGiN % 2007 % 1988 Prevalent mutations P07.019 17 Spain 1 Italy 1 Russia BRcA1 and BRcA2 sequence variants in healthy women in CD39 C>T 1 Morocco 1 Subsaharian 28 .4 64 .0 croatia IVSI:110 G>A 9 Spain 12 .2 8 .5 M. Levačić Cvok, V. Musani, M. Čretnik, P. Ozretić, S. Levanat; Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. IVSI:6 T>C 6 Spain 5 Egypt 14 .9 15 .5 BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the major genes predisposing to breast and 10 Spain 1 Russia IVSI:1 G>A 16 .2 3 .5 ovarian cancer . Mutations in either of these tumor suppressor genes 1 Morocco are associated with both sporadic and hereditary forms of breast can- IVSII:745 C>G 1 Spain 1 .4 1 .7 cer . In hereditary cancer, a person inherits one mutated copy of either IVSII:1 G>A - - - one of these genes . Tumorigenesis occurs when in addition to having -87 C>G - - - a mutated copy individual develops an inactivating mutation of the re- CD6 -A 1 Morocco 1 .4 5 maining healthy allele . Breast cancer is the most common malignant disease of female pop- ulation, and the second most common malignancy-related cause of death . At least ten percent of cases are attributable to familial inheri- tance . In Croatia, more than 2200 new cases of breast cancer are diagnosed each year, and about 800 women die of this malignancy . The screening was performed by high resolution melting approach, which is based on differences in melting curves caused by variations in nucleotide sequence; detected variants were confirmed by direct sequencing . In total, we analyzed 230 samples for BRCA1 gene and 140 samplesNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  for BRCA2 gene . We found 21 different sequence variants in BRCA1 P07.022 (2 novel) and 36 variants in BRCA2 gene (7 novel) . mutations in cARD15 and smoking confer susceptibility to We analyzed the distribution and occurrence of sequence variants crohn´s disease in the Danish population in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes on a healthy population of women in A. Ernst1, I. S. Pedersen1, H. Okkels1, M. Ostergaard2, B. A. Jakobsen1, N. Croatia in an attempt to distinguish non-tumorigenic from tumorigenic Thorsgaard3, E. Dagiliene1, V. Andersen2, A. M. Drewes1, H. B. Krarup1; changes in genomic sequences of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes . This 1Aalborg Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Viborg Hospital, Viborg, Denmark, may contribute to easier distinction of potentially dangerous from 3Herning Hospital, Herning, Denmark. harmless changes in patients with family history of breast cancer . INTRODUCTION: Three mutations in the CAspase Recruitment Do- main gene (CARD15) predispose to Crohn´s disease (CD) in Cauca- P07.020 sian populations . DNA-repair genetic polymorphisms and breast cancer risk The frequencies of the three most common CARD15 mutations differ among cypriot women greatly between ethnic groups . Heterogeneity even exists between the M. Loizidou1, T. Michael1, Y. Marcou2, M. Daniel2, E. Kakouri2, P. Papadopou- European countries . los2, S. Malas3, K. Kyriacou1, A. Hadjisavvas1; AIMS & METHODS: The aim of this study was to investigate the muta- 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Bank of tion frequency in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and healthy Cyprus Oncology Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Limassol General Hospital, Limas- controls in Denmark . Genotyping of the three CARD15 mutations were sol, Cyprus. performed in 388 patients with Crohn´s disease, 565 patients with ul- Breast cancer is the most common malignancy which affects wom- cerative colitis and 796 healthy controls using Real-Time PCR . A com- en worldwide . In an attempt to identify genetic variants which modify parison of allele and genotype frequencies in the three groups was breast cancer risk we are contacting a case-control genetic epidemiol- made . A possible additive effect of smoking on CARD15 mutations ogy study using a cohort of 2286 Cypriot women (1109 breast cancer was also examined . patients and 1177 age-matched healthy controls) . In the present study RESULTS: CARD15 mutations were significantly more common in CD we genotyped 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in BRCA2, patients compared with healthy controls (21% vs . 10%; P<0 .001) . A ERCC2, FANCA, MLH1, MRE11A, MSH2, OGG1, p53, RAD51 and gene-dosage effect was observed (OR 22 .2; P<0 .001 for two adj .smoking RAD52 genes which are all involved in the DNA repair pathway . The CARD15 mutations vs . OR 1 .8; P=0 .01 for one CARD15 muta- adj .smoking prevalence of the 11 SNPs was compared between cases and con- tion) . The 1007insC protein truncating mutation was the major contrib- trols . Genotype frequencies were compared across groups using the uting mutation . Among the Danish CD patients ileal involvement was chi square test and the Mantel-Haenzel test for linear trend . The as- more common among patients having CARD15 mutations (OR adj .smoking sociation between breast cancer and each SNP was examined us- 3 .6; P<0 .001) . Smoking was independently associated with CD (OR ing logistic regression with the SNP genotype tested under models of 1 .8; P<0 .001), and no additive effect of smoking on CARD15 geno- complete dominance and recessive inheritance . Three SNPs showed types was found . significant associations with breast cancer. For the most significant CONCLUSION: In the Danish population CARD15 mutations were as- SNPs, the estimated ORs were 0 .74 (95%CI 0 .59-0 .93) and 1 .41 sociated with Crohn´s disease . The CARD15 mutation frequency was (95%CI 1 .08-1 .83) under a dominant inheritance model, with a com- in agreement with the lower frequency found in Northern European bined Ptrend 0 .0087 and 0 .0076 respectively . These results suggest countries . Smoking was found to be a risk factor for developing CD . that a proportion of the SNPs under study are modifying breast cancer risk . Large numbers of samples will be needed to verify our results P07.023 in other populations . We are currently expanding our analysis to in- cultural practice of consanguineous marriages in morocco : clude a greater number of SNPs and to evaluate potential underlying prospective study in Rabat city gene-gene or gene-environment interactions, in order to advance our H. Hami, A. Soulaymani, A. Mokhtari; knowledge on the effect of genetic polymorphisms on breast cancer Laboratory of Genetic and Biometry, Faculty of Sciences, Kenitra, Morocco. susceptibility in Cypriot women . The practice of consanguineous marriages has been widespread for hundreds of years, and is still very common, especially among various P07.021 Middle Eastern, Asian and African populations . Their health conse- Variants in the vitamin D receptor gene and breast cancer quences are primarily linked to the increased risk of congenital malfor- E. Barroso1, L. P. Fernández1, R. L. Milne1, G. Pita1, P. Zamora2, J. I. Arias3, J. mations and autosomal recessive disease . Benítez1, G. Ribas1; The present study set out to determine the frequency of consanguine- 1CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2La Paz Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 3Monte Naranco Hospi- ous marriages, identify and analyze the factors associated (bivariate tal, Oviedo, Spain. analysis) with a randomly selected sample of 270 mothers postpartum Breast cancer is the most commonly occurring cancer among women, in maternity of the Souissi Hospital in Rabat city (north-west of Mo- constituting 23% of all cancers . 5-10% of all breast cancers are caused rocco), between November 2004 and June 2005 . All information was by germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 . Multiple low-risk genes based on structured face-to-face interviews . with variants common in the general population are thought to produce The Results showed that 21% of marriages were consanguineous a mild susceptibility risk to sporadic breast cancer . (95% CI 12-28%), among which 70% were between first cousins. The vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene is a key mediator in the vitamin D According to these results, several variables are associated with the pathway, and has been of long interest in breast cancer aetiology, since choice of this type of marriage, namely women’s education, their age vitamin D exposure has been reported to reduce breast cancer risk . In at first marriage, place of residence, as well as type of childhood resi- the present study we have explored the implication of VDR in sporadic dence (rural or urban) . breast cancer, in the Spanish population since previous studies have been done in different populations than South European ones . P07.024 A total of 576 healthy controls from the Spanish population and 576 matrimonial choice in the souss massa Draa region in morocco consecutive and non-related sporadic breast cancer cases, collected L. Sbii, D. Benali, H. Hami, A. Mokhtari, A. Soulaymani; from different hospitals in Spain, were used in this study . Genotyping University Ibn Tofail, Faculty of Sciences, Kenitra, Morocco. studies were carried out over four SNPs within the VDR gene, located The study of geographical endogamy has relevance for indications on on exons, in the putative promoter region or in untranslated regions . the genetic variability of the population, given that related parents have Genotyping was performed using TaqMan . more chances to carry the same alleles, favouring homozygosity in We detected associations for two of the selected SNPs: rs10735810 their children . with OR=1 .49 (95% C .I . 1 .01-2 .21; p=0 .045), and rs731236 with The objective of this study was to evaluate geographical endogamy in OR=0 .72 (95% C .I . 0 .51-1 .02; p=0 .064) . We also studied both haplo- the population of the region of Souss Massa Draa in south Morocco, as type and diplotype using PHASE v2 .0, and detected associations with an indicator of the degree of genetic isolation of the population . disease that were considered with the genotype results . Additionally, A prospective study was carried out between October 2005 and April VDR proliferation parameters such as tumor differentiation grade and 2007 on 190 randomly picked families of Souss Massa Draa . The tumor aggressiveness will be discussed . choice of the mate was evaluated according to the geographical originNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  of the couple and their parents . The intensity of the endogamic behav- P07.027 iour is determined by the endogamy ratio . ABCC polymorphisms contribute to level and decline of lung The results indicated clearly a tendency of the couples to geographical function in two general population cohorts endogamy . 95% of the couples involved in the study, chose a mate of M. Siedliński1, H. M. Boezen1, J. M. A. Boer2, H. A. Smit3, D. S. Postma4; the same geographical origin, 98% did so in the generation of their 1Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University parents . of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Centre for Nutrition and Health, Na- The integenerational comparison of the measured endogamy ra- tional Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands, tio shows the same degree of genetic isolation for both generations 3Centre for Prevention and Health Services Research, National Institute of (p>0 .05) . Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands, 4Department of Compared to other results obtained in other regions of Morocco, the Pulmonology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Souss Massa Draa region can be qualified as “closed”, which reflects Groningen, Netherlands. the cultural and traditional heritage of this region . Background:The metabolism of xenobiotics plays an important role in smoking related lung function loss and the development of Chronic P07.025 Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) . The ATP-Binding Cassette, the frequency of cholestryl ester transfer protein taqiB Subfamily C, Member 1 (ABCC1 i .e . Multidrug Resistance Protein 1) polymorphism in the Western Anatolia is a membrane pump excreting a variety of xenobiotics from the cell . C. Kılıncarslan, S. Pehlivan; We previously showed a lower expression of ABCC1 in bronchial epi- University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, thelium of COPD patients than of healthy controls, and even further Gaziantep, Turkey. decrements in more severe COPD stages . The main aim of our studies is to indicate Taq1B polymorphisms in Methods:We tagged ABCC1 using all 51 prevalent (minor allele fre- Cholesteryl Ester Transfer Protein (CETP) gene in healthy Turkish quency>5%) and non-correlated (r2<0 .8) single nucleotide polymor- population as statistically and to explore the difference between other phisms (SNPs) . Effects of SNPs in relation to the level and longitudinal populations . We have examined allele frequencies for cholesteryl ester course of lung function were assessed in two independent, prospec- transfer protein (CETP) gene Taq1B polymorphism in our 100 healthy tive, population-based studies, i .e . the Doetinchem (n=1,152) and control subjects (74 men and 26 women) residing in Izmir (Turkey), Vlagtwedde-Vlaardingen (n=1,390) cohorts . by PCR-RFLP . We found the ratio for B1/B1 carriers as 30 .0% , for Results:Two SNPs (rs212093 and rs4148382) in the 3’ untranslated B1/B2 carriers as 45 .0% and for B2/B2 carriers as 25 .0% . B1 allele region of ABCC1 were significantly associated with a lower Forced Ex- frequency was 52 .5% and B2 allele frequency was 47 .5% . Depending piratory Volume in one second (FEV) in both cohorts . Four moderately 1 on this results we observed that percentage of homozygotes for the B1 correlated (0 .5<r2<0 .8) SNPs (rs4148330, rs4781699, rs8045000, and allele is lower in our samples than other populations (Spain, Greece, rs7190484) in the ABCC1 promoter and intron 1 had a significant ef- Japan, France, Scotchland, Finland, USA) but for the B2 allele, it is fect in both cohorts of the same, negative, magnitude, but on different much more higher than the other populations which have been studied lung function outcomes, i .e . FEV or FEV/VC (Vital Capacity) ratio . 1 1 before in other countries . The percentage of heterozygotes in our pop- One SNP in intron 14 (rs35621) was significantly associated with a ulation is also mostly lower than the other populations except healthy highly excessive FEV decline in both cohorts . 1 Spanish population . Conclusions:This is the first study showing a significant relation be- tween ABCC1 SNPs and lung function level and decline in two inde- P07.026 pendent population-based cohorts . These SNPs are therefore putative Long-term cytogenetic effects of natural radiation on Gudalore candidates for studies to prevent COPD development and pharmaco- inhabitants in india genetics in established COPD . K. Sasikala, V. Balachandar, B. LakshmanKumar, R. Sangeetha, K. Suresh; Human Genetics Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Bharathiar University, P07.028 COIMBATORE, India. the relation of common diseases sNPs and life span: no Some locations in the Indian subcontinent have high levels of natu- evidence for shared genetic component ral radiation due to the presence of monazite along with other heavy O. Y. Byichkova1, O. A. Makeeva1, I. V. Tsimbal’uk2, K. V. Puzyrev3, V. N. minerals suchas ilmenite, zircon, garnet, etc . Gudalore situated on the Maksimov4, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; Nilgiri Mountain, is the oldest and important ecosystem in peninsular 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian India . Indoor gamma radiation dose rates were measured inside resi- State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute of dential buildings in Gudalore using a CaSO4:Dy thermoluminescent Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 4Research Institute of Therapy, Novo- dosimeter for 1 year . The dose rates observed are between 77 .9 and sibirsk, Russian Federation. 229 .3 nGy h -1 and may be attributed to the type of building materials Life span is a multifactorial trait with a strong genetic component . used in the dwellings monitored . The pioneering work on cytogenetics Besides the number of genes has been directly implicated into the has evolved a long way for detection of various clastogenic insults and processes of ageing and longevity, the genes responsible for com- biodosimetry can help to verify the result derived from physical dosim- mon diseases such as cardiovascular (CVD) or immunity disorders eters during latter’s improper use . are also had to be under intent consideration . The persistence and The focal aim of the present investigation was to identify the chro- both elimination from human populations ‘predisposing’ common ge- mosomal aberrations in Gudalore area . In order to investigate the netic variants is forced by a complex interplay of different evolutionary possible cytogenetic damage to the residents of contaminated build- processes; some variants being unfavorable during particular periods ings, a G-banding method was carried out on the lymphocytes of 61 of life can offer their owners advantages on the others . Latter should radiation-exposed individuals and equal number of controls selected . be taken into account e .g . while developing genetic test and interpret- Experimentals and controls were selected by confirmed by TLD mea- ing frequently discrepant genetic data on disease association . Testing surement . In the present study volunteers provided blood samples (5 the hypothesis that CVD predisposing alleles can be related to the life ml) to establish cell cultures at 52 h . For karyotyping, 40 complete span, we investigate several cohorts: healthy controls of childbearing metaphase cells from each subject were evaluated . age (aged from 20 to 45, n=282), nonagenarians (aged 90 and over, All the recognizable structural aberrations of chromosomes or chroma- n=235) and patients with cardiovascular disease (arterial hypertension tid were recorded and statistically analyzed . In 3 experimental cases with different complications) (n=231) from the same geographic region showed dicentric chromosomes . In addition, the chromosomal regions and ethnicity (East Siberia, Russians) and genotyped for several well- close to the centromere were found to break more frequently than known CVD candidate genes polymorphisms (G-308A TNF, C894T elsewhere in the genome . NOS3, and A1166C AGTR1) . While all the three SNPs under study affected several important cardiovascular endophenotypes (arterial blood pressure measurements, cardiac parameters, left ventricular hypertrophy development est.) no significant differences had been re- vealed among nonagenarians and middle aged group . In this study we never found actual proof for the stated hypothesis, though a hugeNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 amount of other genetic variants and the larger samples are needed to region in the etiopathogenesis of familial schizophrenia . be tested before its decline . P07.031 P07.029 Analysis of normal human variation to identify mechanisms of Natural Background Radiation Dictates Extensive structural the monogenic disease, cystinosis Polymorphism in the Human Y-chromosome J. E. Curran, M. P. Johnson, M. A. Carless, H. H. H. Goring, J. Charlesworth, S. Premi, J. Srivastava, S. Ali; K. Freed, T. D. Dyer, S. A. Cole, E. K. Moses, J. Blangero; National Institute of Immunology, Delhi, India. Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio, TX, United Ionizing radiations are known to affect the human genome but its im- States. pact on human Y chromosome still remains unaddressed . Here we Mutations in CTNS on 17p13 cause cystinosis, a rare autosomal re- analyze 300 males residing in an area containing the world’s highest cessive disease characterized by defective transport of cystine out of level of natural background radiation (NBR) and 390 controls from dif- lysosomes . Using complex genomic approaches we studied the biol- ferent parts of India . Random microdeletions were observed in 95% ogy of CTNS in large unaffected families assuming normal human vari- of the NBR exposed males with higher frequency in AZFc region but ation in CTNS expression could inform us about this gene’s function . without gr/gr or b2/b4 phenotypes . Scrutiny of the male fertility associ- Using lymphocyte samples from 1240 individuals, we significantly de- ated genes showed copy number polymorphism (CNP) and tandem tected over 20,000 transcripts, including CTNS . To identify regulatory duplication in 84%, and exclusive deletion of DBY in 25% of the ex- variants, we resequenced CTNS in 191 founders, identifying over 180 posed males . Detailed analysis revealed multiple polymorphic copies SNPs for genotyping . Analysis of these variants with CTNS expression of SRY and CDY1 genes in addition to several known and novel muta- revealed strong evidence for cis-regulation (p-values as low as 2 .4x10- tions of the SRY gene . Amongst NBR exposed males with multiples 39). We performed association analysis on the transcriptional profiles to copies of the DAZ genes, 75% showed varying FISH signals for DAZ identify genes causally downstream of CTNS . Preliminary analyses re- genes with unilocus or bilocus duplications whereas 30% showed vealed multiple genes related to the mediation of polyglutamine tracts mosaicism in terms of presence/absence of the signals in 6-8% cells and the unfolded protein response . To identify trans-acting upstream and unexpected number of signals in 9-12% interphase nuclei . Inter- genes influencing CTNS expression, we performed both genome-wide estingly, all these alterations were exclusively somatic in nature sub- linkage and association scans. Genome-wide linkage results identified stantiating normal fertility status of NBR exposed males . Though the a region at 9q21 (p = 0 .0025) . Examination of the genetic correlations actual mechanism is not known, we hypothesize that some putative of expression levels of genes within this region with CTNS expression innate protective mechanisms are operative in germline to counteract identified a novel candidate gene, VPS13A (vacuolar protein sorting the effect of NBR . Analysis of additional Y linked loci may uncover the 13A) . VPS13A and CTNS expression levels were inversely geneti- overall impact of NBR on the structural and functional attributes of this cally correlated (p = 9 ×10-6), indicating VPS13A as a potential inhibitor chromosome . of CTNS expression . Sequence variation in VPS13A also influenced CTNS expression (p = 0 .009) . Genome-wide association results identi- P07.030 fied five additional trans-acting regions containing several reasonable Genome-wide screen for copy number variation in a Finnish positional candidates . These results show the biological value of inte- schizophrenia case-control sample identifies a submicroscopic grative genomic and transcriptomic approaches for the identification of deletion in 22q disease gene function using normal human variation . O. P. H. Pietiläinen1, T. Paunio1,2, A. Tuulio-Henrikksson3,4, J. Suvisaari3, J. Haukka3, T. Varilo1, K. Rehnström1, E. Jakkula1, A. Loukola1, J. Wedenoja1, S. P07.032 Ripatti1, M. Jussila1, J. Del-Favero5,6, J. Lönnqvist2,3, H. Stefansson7, L. Pel- CYPD genetic polymorphism in mexican Nahuas tonen1,8; M. López1, J. Guerrero2, R. Peñaloza3, L. Buentello4, F. Salamanca3, M. 1FIMM, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland and National Public Health Alonso5; Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Unversity of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central 1Metropolitan Autonomous University, Mexico City, Mexico, 2National Institure Hospital, Department of Psychiatry, Helsinki, Finland, 3National Public Health of Neurology and Neurosurgery Manuel Velasco Suárez, Mexico City, Mexico, Institute, Department of Mental Health and Alcohol Research, Helsinki, Finland, 3Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Mexico City, Mexico, 4Instituto de Inves- 4University of Helsinki. Department of Psychology, Helsinki, Finland, 5Applied tigaciones Antropológicas, UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico, 5National Institute of Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Belgium, Neurology and Neurosurgery, Mexico City, Mexico. Helsinki, Finland, 6University of Antwerp (UA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 7deCODE CYP2D6 catalyzes the metabolism of 25-33% clinically important genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 8Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cam- drugs and is highly polymorphic . There are at least 50 different alleles bridge, United Kingdom. of CYP2D6, which are correlated to ultrarapid, extensive and poor me- Copy number variations (CNV) are likely to comprise considerable tabolizer phenotypes . Interethnic differences in allele frequencies of source for diversity in human genome and in determining heritable sus- CYP2D6 have been documented for Europeans, Asians, Africans and ceptibility to diseases with complex etiology . We utilized Genome-wide Hispanics; however data on Amerindians are scanty and limited to a SNP-array data from Illumina 318K genotyping platform on a Finnish few populations . Nahuas are individuals that speak Nahuatl and com- sample of 200 familial schizophrenia cases and 200 controls with well prise the largest Mexican indigenous population . Nowadays, Nahuas established genealogy to search for CNVs potentially predisposing to can be found at Mexico D .F . Southern area (central group) and in other schizophrenia . Half (47%) of the sample originated from an Internal states (peripheral group) . In this study 315 donors representing 7 dif- Isolate of Finland with an exceptionally high prevalence of schizophre- ferent Nahua populations were genotyped for CYP2D6*3, CYP2D6*4, nia (3% versus 1 .2% for the general population) . The sample was a and CYP2D6*10 by PCR-RFLP . Additionally, CYP2D6*17 was deter- part of a large international EU-funded consortium, SGENE, combin- mined in the Coyolillo group as previous data revealed a predominant ing 1,454 schizophrenia patients and 1,600 controls of European ori- influence from African origin (Buentello-Malo, 2003). The frequency of gin. In the Finnish sample we identified a novel 240-280 kb heterozy- CYP2D6*3, 4, and 10 among 315 Nahuas was 1 .6%, 12 .2% y 1 .9%, gous deletion in chromosome 22q11 .22 in 13 patients and three con- respectively; while CYP2D6*17 frequency was 32% in 36 Coyolillo trols all originating from the Isolate . We extended our investigations to Nahuas . Allelic frequencies for each group are presented in the table 17,808 additional European population controls (2,525 from Finland) and compared to data from Mexican Mestizos (López, 2005). Our find- and 1,254 cases of European origin including the rest of the SGENE ings show that Nahua groups are heterogeneous and different from project . Among these individuals we found 29 carrying the deletion, 22 Mexican Mestizos . This study will extent the knowledge of the genetic of which originated from the Isolate . In a Finnish schizophrenia family structure of Mexican Nahuas; in particular it could have important im- sample we found 27/354 affected family members and 51/736 unaf- plications for the use of drugs that are substrates of CYP2D6 and have fected family members carrying the deletion . One mentally retarded a narrow therapeutic index . individual was homozygous for the deletion . The deletion overlaps with three genes, PPM1F, TOP3B and IGLV2-14, not previously linked to schizophrenia. Our finding confirms the impact of population bottle- neck on the enrichment of large CNV and implies the impact of this 22qNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  CYP2D6 allele frequencies Republic Bashkortostan . Group N CYP2D6*3 CYP2D6*4 CYP2D6*10 Zitlala, Gro . 44 0 .0 7 .4 0 .0 P07.035 Chila, Gro . 27 1 .8 9 .2 0 .0 A study of the insertion-Deletion polymorphism of the gene Ixhuatlancillo, Ver . 47 0 .0 1 .1 2 .1 cYP2E1 Necoxtla, Ver . 36 9 .7 20 .8 2 .8 Coyolillo, Ver . 36 1 .4 16 .7 5 .6 E. M. Vasilieva; Milpa Alta, D .F . 23 2 .2 6 .5 0 .0 Bashkir State Pedagogical University it. M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. Santo Domingo, Mor . 102 0 .0 16 .0 0 .2 INTRODUCTION: We studies gene, encoding ferments of the first Mexican mestizos 243 1 .44 11 .21 12 .45 phase biotransformation xenobiotics, cytochrome P-450 2E1(CYP2E1) . CYP2E1 coding the ferment N,N-dimetilnitrozoamin-n- dimethylazy is P07.033 located on the chromosome 10 (q24 .3) consist of 9 exons and 8 in- Frequency of cFtR mutations in infertile italian individuals trons . . In given gene exists polymorphism, given by insertion 96 p .b . in A. Verri, G. Miano, K. Roda, V. Prina, V. Grazioli; promoter region (the allele: *D - 633 p .b ., *I - 729 p .b .) . The ferment, Centro Diagnostico Italiano, Milano, Italy. coded gene, have charge of removing ethanol and acetone expression In our institute, one of the main italian private healthcare institutions level is significantly lower in other organs and tissues, in particular, focused on out-patient and day hospital services, we perform the anal- kidneys, pancreas, brain, lung, nasal and intestinal mucosa . ysis of 57 mutations and of poly-T polymorphism in intron 8 of the Cys- Materials and methods: We studied 3 groups: individuals living in re- tic Fibrisis gene (CFTR) on patients of Medically Assisted Procreation gion with disadvantage ecological condition, group persons concern- (MAP) Centers . ing with sport, and the general sample . The individuals age made up At the present, more than 1400 different mutations have been regis- from 14 up to the ages of 30 . The analysis genetic polymorphism is tered in the CF Mutation Database (http://www .genet .sickkids .on .ca/ realized by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) . cftr); few of them show frequencies higher than 1% whereas most of RESULTS: In group of the inhabitants region with disadvantage eco- them are “private mutations” . Analysis of the Italian population show logical condition frequency genotype *D/*D vastly increased (96 .2%), patterns of genetic differentiation: the “capture rate” of the test in use but in group athlete tends to reduction (58 .5%) in contrast with the total is quite different for various italian regions, ranging from 74 .7% for sample (69 .2%) . The frequency genotype *I/*D is lowered in group of Lombardia to a maximum of 88 .3% and 88 .1% for Basilicata e Sarde- the inhabitants region with disadvantage ecological condition (3 .8%) gna respectively (data inferred by the frequency of CFTR mutations in and increased beside athlete (41 .5%) in contrast with the total sample different italian regions (1)) . We present results about the analysis on (30 .4%) . In sharing the frequencies alleles in group of the inhabit- 2320 individuals comparing them with those obtained by the authors in ants region significant increasing of the frequency allele exists with other MAP Centers (2): as expected, the frequencies of the analysed disadvantage ecological background *D (98 .1%) and reduction allele CFTR mutations show significative differences. *I (1 .9%) in contrast with the total sample (84 .4% and 15 .6% accord- We do believe that data obtained in infertile individuals could be very ingly) . useful for evaluation of carriers frequency in general population . (1) The molecular genetic epidemiology of cystic fibrosis. Report of P07.036 a joint meeting of WHO/ECFTN/ICF(M)A/ECFS, Genova, 19 Giugno The effect of the DAOA (G72/G30) gene and developmental risk 2002 factors on depression and related temperament traits in Finnish FREQUENZA DELLE MUTAZIONI CFTR IN COPPIE INFERTILI birth cohort (2) Frequenza delle mutazioni CFTR in coppie infertili E. S. Nyman1, P. Soronen1, J. Miettunen2,3, A. Loukola1,4, M. Joukamaa5,6, P. A .Verri, M .Bologna, T .Sarno and A . Montanelli Mäki2, M. Järvelin7,8, N. Freimer9, L. Peltonen1,10, J. Veijola2,3, T. Paunio1,11; 38° Congresso Nazionale della Società Italiana di Biochimica Clinica e 1FIMM, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland and National Public Health Biologia Molecolare Clinica, Torino, 19 - 22 settembre 2006 Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 3Academy of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, P07.034 4Finnish Genome Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Tampere the analysis of polymorphism cYP1A1 and cYP1A2 genes at School of Public health, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 6Department the population of Russia (Republic Bashkortostan) of Psychiatry, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 7Department of O. Kochetova, L. Karimova, T. Victorova; Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. 8Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 9Semel Institute In three ethnic groups of Republic Bashkortostan: Russian (N=451), for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, Tatars (N=333) and Bashkirs (N=171) was studied distribution of al- CA, United States, 10Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United King- leles, genotypes and haplotypes polymorphic loci CYP1A1 (A2455G, dom, 11Department of Psychiatry, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Ò3801Ñ) and CYP1À2 (-2464T/delT, -163Ñ/À) . It was shown the Finland. similarity of groups Tatars and Russian on haplotypes frequencies D-Amino acid oxidase activator (DAOA or G72/G30) encodes for a CYP1A1 gene (χ2=0 .97, df=3, ð=1 .00) è CYP1A2 gene (χ2=1 .55, df=3, protein with a possible role in glutamate signaling, and it has been ð=0.92). We found significant differences in haplotypes frequencies implied in the development of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . It CYP1A1 gene between the ethnic group Bashkirs and groups Tatars has been suggested to increase susceptibility to episodes of mood and Russian (χ2=12.33 df=3, ð=0.008; χ2=9 .22 df=3, ð=0 .034, accord- disturbances across diagnostic boundaries . We investigated the role ingly), that is connected with high frequency of CYP1A1*2B (10 .17%) of DAOA in depression in a population-based Northern Finland Birth among the Bashkirs . Cohort 1966 (n=12058) . We ascertained a sample based on develop- The MspI locus (T3801C) is in linkage disequilibrium with the A2455G mental risk factors (high risk n=285, low risk n=926) with a clinically polymorphism in the Bashkir population, the Tatars and Russian postulated connection to depression susceptibility, including difficul- (1 .61%) populations . The frequency of the CYP1A2*1D haplotypes ties during the perinatal or early childhood periods or related to the was highest in the Bashkir population (11 .02%) compared to frequen- psychosocial environment, to dissect genetic effects increasing liability cies that were found in the Tatars (2 .36%) and Russian (1 .61%) popu- to depression from environmental effects . Depressive symptoms were lations . Similar distinctions of on haplotypes frequencies CYP1A1 gene quantified according to the Symptom Checklist (SCL) and dichoto- an ethnic group the Bashkir with Russian and Tatars (χ2=18 .78, df=3, mous depression was classified as self-reported depressive disorder ð=0.0001 and χ2=14 .33, df=3, ð=0 .003, accordingly) . The CYP1A1*2A diagnosed by a clinician . We also wanted to examine Cloninger’s haplotype was meet with High frequency in all ethnic groups . The Temperament and Character Inventory (TCI) temperament traits be- frequency of CYP1A1*2A haplotype considerably increased in The cause of previous affirmative reports, especially on Harm avoidance Bashkir ethnic group (15 .79%) that is comparable to frequency of to depressive disorder . We genotyped evenly spaced haplotype tag- this haplotype in Asian populations (14 .9%) . The increasing of the ging SNPs at the DAOA locus, and performed linear regression and CYP1A1*2A haplotype frequency in the Russian ethnic group up to case/control association testing against the selected traits . In prelimi- 9.0% in comparison with 5.8% in samples of Europeans also reflects nary analyses we detected an association of DAOA with depression in presence Asian components in origin of Russian ethnic group living in low risk females and with depressive symptoms in low risk males . WeNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  also found suggestive association of DAOA with the Harm Avoidance P07.039 subcomponent 2 (HA2), Fear of Uncertainty, in high risk males and the Accumulated Number of Risk Variants (=Risk Value) Rather females. Our findings support the role of DAOA in depression and in a than Anyone of them Determines Risk of Diabetes mellitus type related temperament trait, HA2 . ii A. A. AlAshtar1, J. Vassallo2,3, J. Azzopardi3, J. Borg1, M. Debono2,3, C. Scerri1, P07.037 A. E. Felice1; DFNB mutations outside the GJB coding region in UK hearing 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malta, and loss referrals: testing and prevalence Section of Molecular Genetics, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 2Diabetes and C. Bosomworth1, L. A. Mavrogiannis1, J. Prothero2, D. J. Cockburn1, J. S. Endocrine Centre, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 3Department of Medicine, Rowland1, A. F. Brady2, H. M. Kingston3, C. P. Bennett1, R. S. Charlton1; University of Malta, Medical School, Msida, Malta. 1Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2Regional Genetics Ser- We determined the distribution of selected SNPs along inflammatory vice, Kennedy-Galton Centre, London, United Kingdom, 3Regional Genetics and metabolic pathways among Diabetic (DM2) patients from two dif- Service, Manchester, United Kingdom. ferent Mediterranean populations, one Southern European (Malta; N GJB2, a component of the recessive DFNB1 locus at 13q, encodes = 200) and one North African (Libya; N = 200) . The reference popula- connexin 26 and is the major gene in non-syndromic sensorineural tions were pools of DNA from consecutive newborn from the Malta deafness . Pathogenic DFNB1 mutations that map outside of the GJB2 BioBank (N = 200) and from Tripoli (N = 200) respectively. Significant coding region exist, but routine clinical testing often focuses on the differences between patients and reference groups in both popula- single coding exon of GJB2 . This bias presents as a high proportion of tions have been found in ADRABβ2 (51.1% vs 23.4%) FABP2 (32% vs unresolved subjects with single GJB2 coding region variants relative to 8 .6%) UCP1 (26 .4% vs 14 .1%) and LEPTIN (35 .8% vs 27 .3%) . Odds the background carrier frequency . Untested or uncharacterised DFNB1 ratios were determined with respect to the inheritance of Sniplotypes, alterations are likely to account for the excess . We investigated the sig- being defined as the non-random association of the 5 more significant nificance of two well-documented DFNB1 changes, the large deletion non-syntenic genetic markers . The frequency of the wild sniplotype g .(GJB6_D13S1830)del and the splice site mutation c .-23+1G>A (also “1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .” (where 1 = wild type homozygote, 2 = heterozygote and 3 known as IVS1+1G>A or 1-3170G>A) of the non-coding exon of GJB2, = mutant homozygote) and Leptin heterozygotes (1 .1 .1 .2 .1) were 1:10 in a large mixed stream of hearing loss referrals from the UK . Our set compared to the reference populations . Additional statistical compari- comprised 1425 apparently unrelated index subjects with a 80:20 ratio sons were confounded by the small number of cases falling in many of Caucasians to non-Caucasians (predominantly British Asians) . We categories . However, the distribution of relative risk / sniplotype sug- developed and validated fluorescent assays for medium-throughput gested that the sniplotypes with increased 2s or 3s carried increased typing and analysed, prospectively and retrospectively, the vast major- risk . In fact, it could be shown that relative risk increased exponentially ity of appropriate cases . In our Caucasian subgroup, the contribution with the number of inherited variant alleles (R2 = 0 .97; N = 800) . Thus, of g .(GJB6_D13S1830)del to the detectable DFNB1 mutation spec- it can be concluded that the probability or genetic risk of developing trum is 5 .5% (95% CI: 2 .9% - 9 .4%) while the relative frequency of type II Diabetes is determined by the number of variant alleles rather c .-23+1G>A is 1 .4% (95% CI: 0 .3% - 4 .0%) . g .(GJB6_D13S1830)del than the pathophysiological impact of any one of them . is absent in our non-Caucasian subgroup, but c .-23+1G>A is detected in around 10% of all pathological genotypes, including homozygous P07.040 occurrence in consanguineous pedigrees . Concentrating on the c .- Biological effect monitoring in cigarette smokers from the 23+1G>A mutation we discuss genotype-phenotype correlations, im- Kudankulam nuclear power project site area exposed to pact on GJB2 expression, and evolutionary origins . radiation, india V. Balachandar1, J. Malathi2, G. Brahmanandham3, B. LakshmanKumar1, D. P07.038 Khanna3, K. Sasikala1, S. Selvasekarapandian3; the investigation of dermatoglyphic samples in patients with 1Human Genetics Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Bharathiar University, Parkinson Coimbatore, India, 2Universita degli studi di Padova, Department of Chemical A. Ozbinar1, H. Samli2, S. Cetin3, T. Fistik1, A. Ozgoz2, M. Solak1, T. Aydemir3, Science,, Padova, Italy, 3Solid state and Radiation Physics Laboratory, School F. Ozer3; of Physics, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. 1Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biol- The chromosomal aberrations (CA) assay is important for monitoring ogy, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, the populations exposed to genotoxic agents because it allows the Department of Medical Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 3Haseki Education evaluation of the entire genome to identify mutagenic and carcinogenic and Research Hospital, Clinic of Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. chemicals . The focal aim of the present investigation was to identify The irregularities in the number and the shape of chromosomes de- the chromosomal alterations in cigarette smokers from Kudankulam stroy dermatoglyphic samples expressed by minor-effective genes nuclear power project site (KNPPS) areas located near to Kanyaku- and helping diagnosis of the hereditary diseases . mari . The levels of primordial radionuclides in Kanyakumari, a High The most valid idea for the reason of Parkinson is that, both genetic Background Radiation Area (HBRA) exceeds 4 .7 times than the nor- and environmental factors associate in the formation of the disease . mal (1 mSv) . The aim of this study is searching the relation between Parkinson and In the present investigation, 72 smokers were selected in KNPPS area dermatoglyphics . Due to this, dermatoglyphic samples of 55 cases and equal numbers of smokers were selected in the normal level radia- with Parkinson were evaluated by comparing the samples of the con- tion area and it was used as a controls . After signing a consent form, trol group including 48 healthy people . volunteers provided blood samples (5 ml) to establish cell cultures at Investigating samples from the patient and the control group by “Ront- 52 h . For karyotyping, minimum 40 complete metaphase cells from gen Film method, an increase in the number of the knots and a de- each subject were evaluated . crease in the number of the loops at the I. finger of the right hand; a de- Chromosomal and chromatid-types aberrations were observed in ex- crease in the number of triradiuses at the left hand interdigital regions perimental subjects and controls . Some Dicentric chromosomes(DC) I and III and the right hand interdigital region I; decrease in the number were particularly observed in experimental subjects . DC which are of triradiuses located on the right and the left hand tenar region and easy to identify also with classic Giemsa staining, represent an at- on the right hand hipotenar region; a decrease in the number of right tractive biomarker, especially for assessment of radiation exposure . hand a-b lines were detected. In our study, significant differences were Statistical significant results were observed between experimental and found in the finger tip and palm samples of the Parkinson patients control groups confirmed by Mann-Whitney U. (p<0 .05) . Even though data were related to a limited number of cases, Information on the induction of radiation effects can be considered in they were found to be interesting due to giving a clue to the genetic the context of cancer risk by exposure to the radiation, this study gives predisposition of Parkinson . Being easy to perform, fast and cheap, potentially important information on the general health effects due to not causing trauma, dermatoglyphic analyse methods suggest taking radiation exposure and the effect of cigarette smokers; it also helps place in the scanning tests of Parkinson patients . people to understand the hazardous nature of chronic radiation ex- posure .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.041 Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3Medical School, University comparative study about digit ratio in two human populations of of Split, Split, Croatia, 4Medical School, “Josip Juraj Strossmayer” University of Bihor county Osijek, Osijek, Croatia. I. Tomulescu1, E. Laslo1, H. Vaida2; In addition to our previous population studies of Croatian human popu- 1Faculty of Sciences, Oradea, Romania, 2Faculty of Socio-Human Sciences, lation at 15 STR loci included in the AmpFlSTR® Identifiler® system Oradea, Romania. we have also analyzed the allele frequency distribution at two addi- In 1892 Sir Francis Galton published his classic treaties on fingerprints. tional STR loci Penta D and Penta E in the representative sample of Specifically, it is the ratio of the length of the index finger (digit 2, or Croatian population since these highly polymorphic pentanucleotide “2D”) and the ring finger (digit 4, or “4D”) that is sexually dimorphic. We loci included in the PowerPlex® 16 enhance the discrimination power investigated 200 individuals . We measured the length of the 2nd, 3rd of that system, which is important in resolving paternity disputes, and and 4th fingers of 100 from each locality (Oradea and Vascau). The are also ideal loci for evaluation of DNA mixtures often encountered in Oradea locality has over two thounsands of inhabitants, which means forensic casework . A total of 200 unrelated Caucasian individuals born the variability of some phenotipical features must be a large one . The in Croatia have been sampled for the analysis . Buccal swabs have Vascau locality has not so many inhabitants, fifty thounsand approxi- been used as the DNA source . The QuiAmp DNA blood mini kit was mative . The individuals of Vascau were at random choosed and from used for DNA extraction . The PowerPlex® 16 System has been used to Oradea are students. We measured the length of the fingers, from the simultaneously amplify 15 STR loci: Penta E, D18S51, D21S11, TH01, finger basis to the superior bound of the phalanx. Then we calculated D3S1358, FGA, TPOX, D8S1179, vWA, Penta D, CSF1PO, D16S539, the digit ratio: 2D:4D, 2D:3D and 3D:4D . Also, we calculated z score D7S820, D13S317, D5S818 and Amelogenin . STR loci were ampli- and F distribution . fied in ABI GeneAmp® PCR Thermal Cycler according to the manu- We compared the 2D:4D digit ratio of the studied localities (F = 7 .39, facturer’s recommendations. Electrophoresis of the amplified products z score =2 .95) . So, we may say the values proceed from two very dif- was preformed on an ABI 3130 genetic analyzer . Raw data have been ferent groups . So, the two studied groups are very different, the 2D:3D compiled, analyzed and numerical allele designations of the profiles digit ratio of the two localities (F=1 .217, z score=1 .24) and the 3D:4D were obtained by using the accessory software: ABI 3130 Genetic digit ratio of the two studied localities (F=2 .06, z score=1 .73) . Analyzer Data Collection v3 .0 and GeneMapperΤΜ ID Software v3 .1 . We may conclude the two studied groups are very different . The varia- Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and expected tion coefficient demonstrated a very small variation of the values of heterozygosity, power of discrimination and power of exclusion were 2D:4D, 2D:3D and 3D:4D values digit ratio in the each of the two stud- calculated . We have also compared our data with data obtained from ied populations . geographically neighboring European populations . P07.042 P07.044 Variants in Disc1 are associated with psychosis related traits in Linkage disequilibrium and distribution of the variable number a large bitrh cohort of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism and 1342 A/G L. Tomppo1, W. Hennah1,2, J. Miettunen3, M. Järvelin4,5, J. Veijola3, D. Lichter- polymorphism in exon 9 of the dopamine transporter gene mann1,6, L. Peltonen1,7, J. Ekelund1,8; (DAt1) in populations of Northern Eurasia 1Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Fin- A. V. Marusin1, A. S. Gureev2, S. A. Borinskaya3, N. K. Yankovsky3, V. A. Ste- land, 2Medical Genetics Section, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United panov1; Kingdom, 3Department of Psychiatry, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Depart- 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of ment of Public Health Science and General Practice, University of Oulu, Oulu, Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Tomsk State University, Insti- Finland, 5Division of Epidemiology, Public Health and Primary Care, Imperial tute of Biology, Ecology, Soil science, Agriculture and Forestry, Tomsk, Russian College, London, United Kingdom, 6Café Ersatz, Bonn, Germany, 7Wellcome Federation, 3N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Department of Psychiatry, Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. The DAT terminates dopaminergic neurotransmission and thus plays DISC1 is among the most studied susceptibility genes to schizophre- the important role in dopamine metabolism . Gene encoding the DAT nia and other major mental illnesses . Based on the genetic studies (DAT1, SLC6A3) localized in the end of p-shoulder 5 chromosome . performed it seems that the risk conferred by the variants of DISC1 is We’ve investigated two polymorphisms of this gene (VNTR in 3’-un- small even in the highly selected populations . We wanted to study the translated region and 1342 A/G polymorphism in exon 9) in seven effect of previously identified risk variants of DISC1 on quantitative en- populations: Buryat (n=105), Dungan (n=44), Persian (n=36), Kyrgyz dophenotypes for psychosis in an unselected population sample . We (n=188), Tadjik (n=39), Ukrainian (n=94) and Uzbek (n=50) . The ob- utilized the large birth cohort collected in Northern Finland (NFBC66) . served genotype frequencies correspond to expected in Hardy-Wein- This study included 4444 individuals born in the area during the year berg equilibrium for both loci of all populations, excluding Tadjik popu- 1966 . We genotyped 41 SNPs covering DISC1, both upstream and lation in exon 9-polymorphism . The alleles spectrum in VNTR poly- downstream of the gene . Principally, we tested an a priori hypothesis of morphism counted 6 alleles (from six tandem repeats to twelve), with the interplay between three SNPs, rs1538979, rs821577 and rs821633 10 tandem repeats allele as prevalent in all groups (average frequen- that had previously been reported to affect risk to schizophrenia and cy=0 .834, variation from 0 .707 in Ukrainians to 0 .932 in Dungans) . The bipolar disorder . The test variables were four psychometric instruments prevalent allele in exon 9 was A allele (average frequency=0 .817) . selected to function as proxies for both positive and negative aspects The largest expected heterozygosity in both loci was founded in Ukrai- of schizophrenia . These were Revised Social Anhedonia Scale (SAS), nian and Persian populations (~0 .4) . The high interethnic differences Revised Physical Anhedonia Scale (PAS), Perceptual Aberration were found by maximum-likelihood chi-square statistics: most popula- Scale and Golden and Meehl Schizoidia scale . The results strongly tions significantly differ from each other for both loci. The total level support an effect of SNP rs821577 on SAS (P = 0 .000021) and PAS of genetic differences measured by Fst statistics was 3 .2% (4 .54 for (P = 0 .021) . Most importantly, certain combinations of the genotypes VNTR and 1 .86% for 1342 A/G polymorphism) . of the three SNPs that modify the risk of schizophrenia dependent on The normalized linkage disequilibrium coefficient was fairly strong the local genetic background in a previous study also correspondingly (D’>0 .6) for all population, exclude Ukrainian (D’=0 .3725), Persian modify the measures of SAS (best P = 0 .0000022) and PAS (best P = (D’=0 .3759) and Tadjik (D’=0 .4212) . This data may be explained by 0 .0075) in the birth cohort studied here . different level of isolation during the ethnic history of Caucasoid (Per- sian, Tadjik, Ukrainian) and Mongoloid (Kyrgyz, Uzbek, Buryat, Dun- P07.043 gan) populations . This work was supported by the Russian Foundation Population study at stR loci Penta D and Penta E in croatian for Basic Research (project no . 06-04-48274-à, 07-04-01629-à) . population V. Skaro1, P. Projic1, N. Pojskic2, D. Primorac3,4, D. Marjanovic1,2; 1Laboratory for Forensic Genetics and Ancient DNA Analysis, Institute for An- thropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute for Genetic Engineering andNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.045 P07.047 investigation of an effect of economic crisis on the prevalence Polymorphisms of iL4 and iL4RA genes are associated with of Down syndrome in st. Petersburg, Russia endometriosis N. V. Kovaleva1, D. K. Verlinskaya2, J. K. Morris3; M. Kozlovskaya, G. Demin, M. Yarmolinskaya, S. Selkov, T. Ivashchenko, V. 1St. Petersburg Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St. Petersburg, Baranov; Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg Centre for Medical Genetics, St. Peters- Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology RAMS, St.-Petersburg, Russian burg, Russian Federation, 3National Down Syndrome Cytogenetic Register, Federation. England and Walles, London, United Kingdom. Endometriosis is defined as a condition which displays features simi- OBJECTIVE: To investigate changes in the prevalence of Down syn- lar to malignancy, proliferation and growth . Typical endometrioid cells drome (DS) births during a global social transition . DESIGN: Data from are characterized by increased cytokine activity . Cytokine genes are St . Petersburg Down Syndrome Register were analyzed with a special polymorphic that results in synthesis of proteins with various functional attention to the period of high social expectations (1983-87) when the activities . The goal of the study focuses on the role of allelic variants of number of births had been increasing (69,406→73,275) and the pe- IL4 and IL4RA genes in pathogenesis of endometriosis . riod of a social frustration (1995-99) when the number of births had DNA samples from the patients with endometriosis (n=82) and healthy declined most dramatically (33,841→29,438). STUDY POPULATION: women without gynecologic complications (n=69) were included in During 1980-1999, 1358 liveborn children with DS were identified the study . Group of patients was divided into two subgroups accoring among 1 046,932 births; a rate of 1 .3/1000 births . Prenatal diagnosis to severity of disease . Polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C) and IL4RA had low impact on the birth prevalence . METHOD: The data obtained (1902A>G) were defined by PCR-RFLP assay. were compared with the expected rates and numbers based on the The alleles and genotypes frequencies of IL4 gene did not differ be- data from NDSCR, 1989-2002 . RESULTS: Maternal age distribution in tween studied groups (p>0 .05) . The frequency of G/G genotype for the general population had changed during the study period: propor- IL4RA gene was significantly higher in endometriosis patients (19.5%) tion of mothers aged ≥ 35 yr increased from 6.8% in 1983-87 to 8.4% as compared to the control group (1 .4%, p<0 .01) . Also the frequen- in 1995-99, however this has not resulted in corresponding increase in cy of allele G was significantly higher in patients (27.6% and 17.4%, DS rate . In contrary, DS rate in 1995-99 was the lowest over the study p<0 .01 respectively) . The relative risk for endometriosis when having period, being 1.18/1000. However, by the model applied, this figure G/G genotype of IL4RA gene was estimated by an odds ratio of 16 .51 does not differ significantly from the expected. The DS infant mortality (95% CI: 3 .57-76 .41) . Also it has been shown that the frequency of rate had fallen from 39% in 1983-87 to 17% in 1995-99 . DISCUSSION: C/C or C/T genotype of IL4 gene in the subgroup with severe endome- There is no evidence for an effect of economic crisis accompanied with triosis is significantly higher than in control group (p<0.05). The pres- psychological stresses and with nutritional deficiency on chromosome ence of allele C may be responsible for increased risk of endometriosis segregation or on surviving of affected children . A suggestion that low (OR=3 .05; CI: 1 .05-8 .83) . DS rate might be explained by better welfare standards of reproducing Our data suggests that polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C) and IL4RA fraction of the population is under the study . (1902A>G) may be treated as prognostic genetic markers of endo- metriosis . P07.046 skeletal muscle Gene ActN3 and Physical Performance: P07.048 O. Kasımay1, D. Sevinc2, S. O. Iseri1, K. Ulucan3, M. Unal1, A. I. Guney4, H. Polymorphism c677t of the methylenetetrahydrofolate Kurtel1; reductase gene and endothelial function in patients with 1Marmara University, School of Medicine, Sport Physiology Department, Istan- essential hypertension of the Kazakh nationality bul, Turkey, 2Maltepe University, School of Medicine, Medical Biology and Ge- G. Junusbekova1, M. Tundybayeva1, G. Svyatova2; netics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, School of Dentistry, 1Scientific-research institute of cardiology and internal diseases, Almaty, Ka- Medical Biology and Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Marmara Univer- zakhstan, 2Scientific centre of obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, sity, School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey. Kazakhstan. ACTN3 gene is responsible from the production of alpha-actinin-3 pro- The purpose: to study association of polymorphic marker C677T of the tein, which has force-generating capacity of muscle fibers, and which methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene (MTHFR) with parameters is restricted to fast fibers. Homozygosity for 577X in ACTN3 (R577XX) of function of the endothelium in patients with essential hypertension results in no production of α-actinin-3 protein. Recent studies show (EH) of the Kazakh nationality . that elite sprint athletes had a higher frequency of the RR genotype . Material and methods: A total of 118 patients (both males and females) Aim: The purpose of the study was to investigate ACTN3 gene varia- of the Kazakh nationality were examined with EH of the IInd and IIIrd tions and their probable phenotypic reflection by using physiological degrees average and high risk . We investigated endothelium - depen- methods, and to show ACTN3 polymorphism in Turkish soccer play- dent vasodilation breakdown with reactive hyperemia by the method of ers (n=31) . Methods: After determining the genotypes by analyzing the D .Celermajer . The level of homocysteine (HC), endothelin-1, soluble blood samples, three groups (XX,RR,RX) were formed . The groups intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), soluble vascular cell ad- were existing R577X variant in both ACTN3 genes (XX,n=4), not exist- hesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and production of sE-selectin in blood ing R577X variant in both ACTN3 genes (RR,n=22), or existing R577X was determined by immunohistochemical test with use of commercial variant only one of the two ACTN3 genes (RX,n=5), respectively . To kits. MTHFR 677C→T genotyping was detected by polymerase chain determine aerobic performance, Bruce protocol was applied on tread- reaction . mill and maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max) was measured by Results: Distribution of genotypes of polymorphic marker C677T of the metabolic analyzer . On a separate day, anaerobic performance was MTHFR gene in patients with EH appeared the following: C/C -45,8 %, evaluated by Wingate test . Student’s t-test or analysis of variance C/T- 39,8 % and T/T-14,4 % . The frequency of the allele C was 65,7 (ANOVA) was used for comparisons . Results: Thirteen % of the soc- %, and of the T allele it was 34,3 % . When comparing patients with cer players had homozygosity for R577XX codon . The VO2max levels genotype C/T and T/T (n=64) with thosee patients, having genotype in XX group tended to be higher from RR (p=0 .09) and RX groups C/C, we observed a smaller value of a gain of diameter of a brachial (p=0 .05) . VO2/HR (pulse oxygen) and VEmax (maximum ventilation) artery on a background reactive hyperemia (6,56±1,08 and 9,86±1,32 levels were not different between groups . Peak power values tended % accordingly, p=0,05) . Besides in patients of the second group a to be higher in RR group from the other groups . Our results evaluated higher level of sVCAM-1 (504,5±23,11 and 596±31,71 ng/ml accord- the effect of genotypic variations on sprint and endurance performance ingly, p=0,026) was observed . of athletes contributing the understanding of genotype-phenotype cor- Conclusions: In patients with EH in the Kazakh population the C677T relation . polymorphism of the MTHFR gene can be associated with develop- ment of endothelial dysfunction .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.049 mA GB (cGG)n Identification of point mutation pattern in the LDLR gene among (N =141) ( N =104) Bulgarians with severe hypercholesterolemia 7 0 .007 - 8 0 .007 0 .009 S. Bichev1,2, L. Vladimirova-Kitova3, J. Genova2, R. Kaneva2, I. Kremenski4, V. 13 0 .007 - Ganev5; 14 0 .035 - 1Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia, 16 0 .007 - Bulgaria, 3Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 4National Genetic 19 0 .028 - Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Sofia University, Sofia, Bulgaria. 20 0 .071 0 .009 Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common, autosomal dominant 21 0 .028 0 .009 22 - 0 .019 disorder of lipid metabolism and is a major risk factor for coronary vas- 23 0 .064 0 .077 cular disease . FH affects approximately 1 in 500 individuals worldwide . 24 0 .014 0 .019 Mutations in LDLR, APOB and recently described PCSK9 genes have 25 0 .014 0 .019 been associated with this disease . The aim of the present study is 27 0 .007 0 .009 to provide information about the spectrum of point mutations in the 28 0 .100 0 .067 LDLR gene in sample of 200 Bulgarian patients with severe hypercho- 29 0 .262 0 .231 lesterolemia . We applied Single Strand Conformation Polymorphism 30 0 .248 0 .221 31 0 .057 0 .144 (SSCP) analysis to screen for sequence variations in the coding re- 32 0 .021 0 .019 gions and splice sites of the LDLR gene . The detected samples with 33 - 0 .009 different SSCP patterns were sequenced . In 29 cases the diagnosis 34 - 0 .019 FH was genetically confirmed. We found 7 point mutations (ex.4bG>A 35 - 0 .019 at 590, ex .9G>A at 1195, ex6C>A at 858, ex .8G>A at 1073 and T>C 36 0 .007 0 .009 at 1061-8, ex .5A>C at 761, ex .11G>A at 1646) and 7 polymorphisms, 38 0 .014 0 .038 39 - 0 .009 one (ex .11C>T at 1705+23) not previously described . Our results have 40 - 0 .009 shown that exons 8, 9, 11 should be considered as “hot- spots” for Bul- 41 - 0 .029 garian population . In 3 out of 9 patients with determined mutations in 43 - 0 .009 the 11th exon we have observed in addition 2 different polymorphisms He 0 .849 0 .870 - C>T at 1705+23 and C>T at 1617 . On the contrary, exons 16, 17, 18, 2, and the previously described as “hot- spots” exons 3 and 14 did P07.051 not show aberrant profiles in the SSCP screening. Exons 7, 13 and 15 The genome-wide patterns of variation confirms significant appear to be very polymorphic, however no mutations were observed substructure in a founder population in those exons . K. Rehnström1,2, E. Jakkula1,3, T. Varilo1,2, O. Pietiläinen1, T. Paunio1, N. Peder- sen4, M. Järvelin5, S. Ripatti1,4, S. Purcell3, M. Daly3, A. Palotie3,6, L. Peltonen1,6; P07.050 1National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, Distribution of FmR1 alleles in two populations with different Helsinki, Finland, 3Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of ethnic background: madeira (caucasian) and Guinea-Bissau Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, (sub-sahara African) Sweden, 5Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Trust Sanger A. T. Fernandes1, A. Ferreira1, R. Gonçalves1, R. Vasconcelos2, A. Brehm1; Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 1Human Genetics Laboratory, University of Madeira, Funchal, Portugal, 2Pediat- The genome-wide SNP genotyping platforms enable detailed asso- ric Service, Central Hospital of Funchal, Funchal, Portugal. ciation studies, but at the same time offer new insight into population The fragile X syndrome is the most common cause for inherited mental genetics . Here we present an example of a founder population by scru- retardation . This syndrome results from an abnormal expansion of the tinizing nine geographically distinct Finnish subpopulations represent- CGG repeat in FMR1 gene which causes the inactivity of the gene, ing different eras in the population history to study the effect of bottle- leading to the absence of the FMRP . The frequency of the alleles of necks and isolation using high-density SNP data . We demonstrate that FMR1 polymorphism was analyzed to the Madeira and Guinea-Bissau population substructure and even individual ancestry are detectable populations. Madeira and Guinea-Bissau population show significant at high resolution and support the concept of multiple historical bottle- differences (P<0,05) but have some similar distributions, being the necks resulting from founder effects . 29 repeats the most common allele followed by the 30 repeat CGG . We performed multidimensional scaling (MDS) of pairwise identity- These two alleles accounts for 51% of all alleles at this locus in a by state (IBS) sharing data to delineate population structure . Within total of 19 different alleles varying between 7 and 38 repeats in the Finland the two primary dimensions of the MDS-analysis correspond Madeira population and in the Guinea-Bissau population 22 different remarkably with the east-west and north-south directions, respectively, alleles varying in size from 8 to 43 repeats were identified and alleles showing a distribution of individuals corresponding closely with the 29 and 30 accounts for 45 .2% of all alleles at this locus (table1) . This geographical distribution of parents’ birthplaces . The youngest subiso- population contains 89.6% of small alleles (≤ 35 CGG) and 10.4% of lates showed higher IBS similarity compared to other subgroups and large alleles (> 35 CGG), a pattern similar to others observed in Afri- separation using an extremely fine resolution. We analyzed linkage can populations but quite different from that of Caucasian populations . disequilibrium (LD) and extended regions of homozygosity (ROHs) to In the Madeira population (n=141) no intermediate or permutated al- further explore the genomic structure of the subpopulations . Highest leles were identified while in Guinea-Bissau population (n=104) 4 inter- LD and the largest number of long (>10Mb) ROHs was identified in the mediate alleles (prevalence: 1/26) were observed . These results can youngest regional population and showed a gradual decline of these explain why there are no X-fragile reported patients in the Madeira measures in older and more outbred, subpopulations . population of 250 .000 inhabitants . The study shows the power of GWA data to trace the population his- tory and also exemplifies the power to identify stratification even within homogeneous populations. A deeper insight into fine-scale population substructure also emphasizes the importance of adjustment of GWA studies aiming at identifying smaller and smaller genetic effects to avoid confounding . P07.052 Epidemiological study of Fraser syndrome in Europe L. Odak1, I. Barisic1, V. Tokic1, M. Loane2, F. Bianchi3, E. Calzolari4, E. Garne5, D. Wellesley6, H. Dolk2; 1Childrens Univ. Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2EUROCAT Central Reg- istry, University of Ulster, Newtonabbey, Co Antrim, United Kingdom, 3Unit of Epidemiology, CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, Italy, 4Department ofNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, Univer- N680S in fertile couples in families indicated for prenatal diagnosis, or sity of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 5Epidemiology, University of Southern Denmark, with risk of cystic fibrosis, risk of trombophilic disorders and chronic Odense, Denmark, 6Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, pancreatitis dispositon in male and female Czech population . Southampton, United Kingdom. Polymorphism -29 (G->A) was examined in 318 females and 303 Fraser syndrome (FS) is rare autosomal recessive condition with clas- males, exon 10 N680S in 317 females and 304 males . The exon 10 sical features of cryptophthalmos, syndactyly, and genitourinary mal- and promotor polymorphisms were analyzed by allelic discrimination formations . Abnormalities of the skull, ears, nose, and larynx are often on ABI Prism 7000 detection system (Applied Biosystems) . present as well . Due to the rarity of FS, population-based epidemio- The promotor polymorphism A/A in females was 5 .03 %, in males 6 .93 logical studies are lacking . We present the results of analysis of 24 %; A/G in females 37 .74 %, in males 35 .31 %; G/G in females 57 .23 cases of FS identified among 10 318 446 pregnancies registered in %, in males 57 .76 % . Exon 10 polymorphism Asn/Asn was 37 .22 % in the EUROCAT network of congenital malformation registries in 1980- females, 27 .96 % in males; Asn/Ser in 47 .32 % for females, 50 .33 % 2004 period . This corresponds to a prevalence of 0 .23/100000 or 1 in for males; Ser/Ser in 15 .46 % in females and 21 .71 % in males . It is 429 .935 births . Prenatal ultrasound examination detected abnormali- apparent, that in both types of FSH-R polymorphisms no differences ties in 13/24 (54 .2%) fetuses . Mean gestational age at discovery of an were disclosed between males and females . abnormality by prenatal ultrasound was 22 .3±3 .2 (18-27) gestational The genotype 680 exon 10 polymorphism Asn/Asn, Asn/Ser, Ser/Ser weeks . There were 2/24 (8 .3%) fetal deaths, 9/24 (37 .5%) pregnancy are not different from so far published prevalence in Caucasian popu- terminations and 13/24 (54 .2%) were live born . One third of live births lation . did not survive the first week of life. Male:female ratio was 3.4 (17/5). These data provide possibility to compare the genotype characteristic The mean birth weight in live births was 2363 ±622 g for males and of FSH-R polymorphisms for association studies in male and female 2133±413 g for females . The mean gestational age at birth was 37 reproductive disorders and for the pharmacogenetic strategy in hor- weeks for both sexes . The most frequent associated congenital mal- monal treatment and stimulation in male and female patients . formations were urogenital (81 .8%; 18/22), eye (72 .7%; 16/22), and Supported by grants NR9448-3/2007 and 00000064203 . limb (59 .1%; 13/22) anomalies . The mean maternal age at birth was 28 ± 5 years and the mean paternal age 31±4 years . Parental con- P07.055 sanguinity was present in 7/14 cases, and four families head already Epidemiologic study of isolated gastroschisis in mexican one affected child (4/13) . All cases were registered in the Western part population: 1978-2006 of Europe, 12/24 (50%) cases being from Great Britain and Portugal J. Arteaga, L. Luna, O. M. Mutchinick; (prevalence 0 .49/100000 or 1 in 202859 births) . National Institute of Medical Sciences and Nutrition “Salvador Zubirán”, Mexico city, Mexico. P07.053 Isolated gastroschisis (IGC) cluster in the offspring of very young moth- Analysis of frequencies of 35delG mutation in connexine 26 ers . Incidence reported range between 0 .40 and 4 .49 per 10000 births . gene in different ethnic groups of Russia Recently has been observed an increase in the frequency without a E. I. Sharonova, S. P. Zinchenko, R. A. Zinchenko; clear explanation, although several studies have identified consistent Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, risk factors (RF) . The increasing prevalence in newborns observed in Moscow, Russian Federation. a sample of the Mexican populations prompted us to analyze the secu- Mutations in the GJB2 gene are a major cause of autosomal recessive lar trend for IGC and the following RF: maternal age, primigravidity, and sporadic non-syndromic hearing loss in many populations . This socioeconomic status, use of vasoactive medications and change of study aims to determine the frequencies of 35delG mutation in differ- paternity . The information was obtained from the RYVEMCE; a hospi- ent ethnic groups of Russia . tal based multicentric case-control study . We studied IGQ in a sample The patients with non-syndromic hereditary hearing loss from four eth- of 1’066,542 newborns analyzing time trends prevalence from January nic groups (Chuvashs, Udmurths, Bashkirs and Russians from Rostov 1978 to December 2006 and the mentioned RF in both, mothers of IGC Regions) were analyzed for 35delG mutation in connexine 26 gene . cases and controls. P <0.05 was accepted as statistical significance. Analysis of 60 patients with non-syndromic hereditary hearing loss We observed a total of 151 cases with IGC, 49% were males and from Chuvash Republic, 85 patients from Rostov Region, 36 patients 51% females . The risk of having a baby with IGC was 2 .4 times high- from Republic of Bashkortostan, 58 patients from Udmurt Republic, er in very young mothers, <20 years (3.08/10000) than mothers ≥20 showed that frequency for 35delG mutation was specific to Russian (1 .17/10000), OR: 3 .44, IC 2 .47-4 .81 . An evident time trend in the in- 95 ethnic group (42 .86%, 45%, 8 .33%, 62 .5%, respectively) . Among the cidence of IGC starting in 1993 was observed, rising from an average patients with non-syndromic hereditary hearing loss from other ethnic of 0,50/10000 during 1978-1992 to an average of 2 .44/10000 during groups, frequencies of 35delG mutation were 5% for Chuvashs, 2 .44% 1993-2006 (p=1x10-6) . Primigravidity was more frequent in cases than for Udmurths, 6 .06% for Bashkirs . controls (66 .2 and 41 .1%) . There were not statistical differences in the More then 2574 healthy donors from five ethnic groups from Russia use of therapeutic drugs, socioeconomic level and change of paternity . (Chuvashs, Maries, Udmurths, Bashkirs and Russians from Tver and Our results confirm an increasing trend for IGC particularly related to Rostov Regions) were analyzed for 35delG mutation in GJB2 gene . mothers of very young age . Significant differencies in mutation frequencies between different eth- nic groups were discovered . Analysis showed that frequency of 35delG P07.056 mutation for Chuvashs ethnic group was 0 .48% (5 chromosomes with the peopling of North Asia: Y and X perspectives mutation 35delG out of 1040 analysed (5/1040)), for Maries - 0 .99% V. A. Stepanov, V. Kharkov, I. Khitrinskaya, O. Medvedeva, M. Spiridonova, A. (8/804), for Udmurths - 0 .25% (3/1184), for Bashkirs - 0 .25% (2/792), Marusin, V. Puzyrev; for Russian - 1 .44% (19/1320) . Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. According to this research, contribution of 35delG mutation in connex- To reconstruct the origin and evolution of human populations in North ine 26 gene to the development of non-syndromic hereditary hearing Asia we investigated the genetic diversity in 50 population samples loss in various ethnic groups of Russia is different . (about 2000 individuals totally) using Y and X chromosome lineages . Y-chromosomal haplotypes were constructed with unique event poly- P07.054 morphisms (UEP) and STR markers according to Y Chromosome con- N680s and -29 (G->A) FsH-R polymorphisms in czech fertile sortium (YCC) classification. SNP markers in a single 60 kb linkage male and female population disequilibrium region of ZFX gene was used to trace the X chromo- M. Macek sr.1, H. Kluckova1, P. Norambuena1, T. Piskackova1, M. Balasca- somal population history . kova1, M. Koudova1, A. Stambergova1, M. Macek jr.1, J. Gromoll2; The genetic diversity of Y haplogroups was quite high (0 .70 - 0 .95) in 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, Second Med- most populations except few very isolated groups . The proportion of ical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of inter-population differences in the total genetic variability measured by Reproductive Medicine, Muenster, Germany. Fst statistics is 17% for binary haplogroups and 19% for YSTR . Mul- The aim of this study was the determination of the genotype charac- tidimensional scaling and principal component analysis revealed four teristics of FSH-R polymorphism in position -29 (G->A) and exon 10 major components in North Asian Y gene pool, reflecting the presenceNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  of Paleoasiatic (Q), Proto-Uralic (N3, N2), Eastern Asian (O, C), and P07.059 Western Eurasian (R1, I, J) lineages . Genetic demography analysis in urban population in Buryatia X-chromosomal haplotypes in North Asia are less divers (gene diver- Republic sity within populations 0 .65 - 0 .80) and less differentiated (Fst = 4%) E. R. Eremina; compared to Y lineages . Buryat Branch State Institution, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation. The population clustering by X and Y gives, to a first approximation, a Ulan-Ude city is center of Buryatia Republic in Trans-Baikal region of similar picture, and matrixes of genetic distances between populations Russia . It was founded about 300 years ago . From that time, both Rus- for X and Y haplotypes significantly correlates. sians and Buryats live there . We have studied genetic demography The age of genetic diversity generation and time of population differ- characteristics in the population of Ulan-Ude and have found some entiation demonstrates the Upper Paleolithic origin of major Y and X differences between these two ethnic groups . First of all, migrations lineages and post-glacial population expansions . pattern for Buryats is bordered mostly by Buryatia region, whereas for This work is supported by RFBR grants ##06-04-48274 and 07-04- Russians migrants from distant regions of Russia are typical . However, 01629 . fraction of homo-local marriages in Buryats is twice lower than in Rus- sians . Frequency of homo-ethnic marriages in the two ethnic groups P07.057 reflects their portions in the city population. Assortative marriage index Genetic differentiation of ethnic groups of Russia evaluated by by ethnicity was 87% for Russians, being slightly higher than for Bury- genes of hereditary disorders ats (81%) . At the same time, assortative marriage indices by local- R. A. Zinchenko, V. A. Galkina, E. K. Ginter; ity were similar for both ethnic groups . Total inbreeding estimated by Research Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation. isonimy index was 0 .0007 for Buryats and 0 .0005 for Russians . These On the basis of genetic epidemiological study the prevalence of auto- estimates were lower than those indices for other Siberian peoples somal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive disor- (Tuvinians, Northern Khantys). Mean age of the first marriage was in ders in 10 regions of Russia (5 ethnic groups: Russians, Maris, Chu- Buryats 25 .9 years for men and 24 .72 years for women, whereas in vashs, Udmurts, Adighes) was estimated . The size of the investigated Russians it was 24 .86 and 22 .69 years, respectively . population was more than 2 .5 millions of persons . Genetic differentia- tion between populations of different hierarchical levels by estimated P07.060 loads of hereditary diseases was established . The prevalence rate of Genome-wide association analysis identifies multiple loci all Mendelian disorders varied in the investigated populations from associated with normal variation in height 1 .34 to 5 .92 per 1000 persons . Genetic diversity of hereditary diseases M. N. Weedon1, H. Lango1, G. Lettre2, .. The GIANT Consortium1,2; in the investigated populations was also under our study . 199 auto- 1Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Broad Institute, Boston, somal dominant, 165 autosomal recessive and 48 X-linked recessive MA, United States. diseases were revealed . Most of them were rare or very rare . There There are many single gene disorders that affect stature, but little is were some cases of local accumulations of hereditary disorders in the known about the genetic variants that explain normal variation of adult investigated populations . Simultaneously with medical genetic study height . The availability of genome-wide association data offers new the population genetic study was performed in the populations . By opportunities to identify the genes involved in normal growth . comparing both studies it was suggested that the genetic drift is a most Recent meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies (GWAS), important factor which determines genetic differentiation of populations using up to 16,000 individuals, have identified 22 independent loci by the prevalence and genetic diversity of autosomal disorders . associated with height (p<5x10-8) . The GIANT consortium has now extended these analyses, using imputation methods, to combine as- P07.058 sociation results from 13 GWAS, with a total sample size of >32,000 Age-dependent genetic polymorphism frequencies and Gene individuals . - Pass Initial meta-analysis identified 111 independent loci with p<1x10-5 and V. S. Baranov1, H. V. Baranova2, O. S. Glotov1; 50 with p<5x10-7. Confirmed loci implicate a wide range of molecular 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, processes involved in normal growth . These include Hedgehog sig- 2European Institute of Personalized Prevention, Nice, France. naling (PTCH1, HHIP, IHH), chromatin remodeling (SCMH1, HMGA2), The report highlights the results of collaborative studies of person- and basic cell cycling (CDK6, ANAPC13) . Some of the variants and alized anti-aging medicine and its impact into longevity and aging . genes have been connected to other diseases, including cancer, sug- Special attention is paid to the gene nets of cardiovascular diseases, gesting that variants associated with height may also influence disease renin-angiotensin system, diabetus mellitus, osteoporosis etc . Poly- susceptibility . Many of the associated loci include genes known to be morphic variants of at least some particular genes such as ACE, AGT, involved in growth based on monogenic human studies . Other loci im- PAII, MTHFR, APOE, also as metabolic genes, like GSTs and other plicate genes previously unsuspected to have a role in growth, and oxidative stress markers (NOS) are considered as the most plausi- represent excellent candidate genes for, as yet unexplained, growth- ble candidates of the genes crucial for aging . Molecular analysis of related single gene disorders . these particular genes supplemented with relevant metabolic genes Combining data from many genome-wide association studies is likely testing, responsible for efficiency of detoxification system might have to result in the identification of hundreds of loci that influence adult substantial contribution into personalyzed anti - aging medicine . The height . These data should result in an unprecedented increase in our data on allele frequencies distribution for 10 differenet genes in new- knowledge of the genetics of growth and development . borns (106), 119 middle age and 148 old people over 69 are presented Relevant gene testing supplemented with its adequate sophisticated P07.061 interpretation and constructive recommendations might have substan- Persons with greater individual genome-wide heterozygosity tial contribution to human health and should be considered as a new show lower increase of cortisol levels during acute highly promising tool in anti-aging medicine “Gene - pass ” term is sug- psychological stress gested for the individual DNA data bank reflecting increased personal L. Zgaga1, C. Hayward2, Z. Biloglav1, I. Kolcic1, O. Polasek1,3, D. Rudan4, A. susceptibility to these common disorders . Tremendous impact to its Vorko-Jovic1, A. Wright2, H. Campbell3, I. Rudan3; practical application could be achieved through wide scale applica- 1Medical School, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2MRC Human Genetics tion of biochip technology . The latter are already available or are in Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United King- progress for a number of multifactorial diseases . Special attention is dom, 4Dubrava University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia. paid to Genetic Pass of Reproductive Health - a version of Genetic Aim: Genome-wide heterozygosity (GWH) was reported to affect a Pass adjusted to the needs of pregnant woman . Life in harmony with range of quantitative traits in humans, animals and plants . Several personal gene makeup remains indispensable prerequisite of longev- studies suggested that the underlying mechanism is increased com- ity and good health . . pensation potential to environmental stressors in outbred individuals . In humans, psychological stress has been consistently linked to an increase in cortisol levels, which eventually impairs immune system function . We studied whether GWH status affects the increase in corti-Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  sol levels in persons reporting acute psychological stress . ing for electrophilic molecule . It is demonstrated that single nucleotide Materials and methods: We studied 1,026 examinees from the Vis polymorphisms (SNP) in various genes revealed a correlation between island, Croatia . Standardised multilocus heterozygosity (sMLH) was the presence of specific allelic variants and cancer susceptibility in di- computed for each person from a genome-wide scan using 317 .000 verse malignancies . Furthermore, it is shown that GST-P1 polymor- single nucleotide polymorphisms . Morning cortisol level was measured phism is involved in risk of development of different types of cancer . In from the blood in all participants . Reported acute psychological stress this study, we investigated the distribution of GST-P1 polymorphism, was measured using General Health Questionnaire 30 (GHQ-30) . at codon 105, among different Iranian populations . The samples were Results: GHQ-30 scores had a significant effect on the increase of collected from healthy population from five different ethnicity groups cortisol (p<0 .001) . All examinees were therefore categorized in 3 (Fars, Mazandarani, Kurd, Turk and Turkmen) . We assessed the gen- groups according to the increasing levels of reported psychological otype patterns of GST-P1 among Iranian ethnic groups in five regions. stress within GHQ-30 . In all groups, the effect of sMLH on cortisol Then, the data was compared with the allele distribution for above levels was investigated using general linear model with inclusion of gene among Tehran population (52 samples), a mix-ethnic population . potential confounding variables . In the group reporting mild stress the The GST-P1 genotypes, Ile105Val, were determined by polymerase effect was weak and non-significant (Beta=-0.058, p=0.34), but with chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) increase of reported stress levels to moderate and strong, the effect analysis in 269 Iranian healthy individuals . Allele frequency of GST-P1 became larger and statistically significant (Beta =-0.125, p=0.003; and genotype, Ile105Val, for above populations were similar, and there is Beta=-0 .188, p=0 .04, respectively) . only significant difference among Fars and Turkmen populations. Conclusion: This study implies that, in humans, the increase in indi- vidual GWH may buffer the effects of psychological stress on cortisol P07.064 levels, thus protecting the physiological function of immune and endo- Contribution of environmental and genetic modifiers to severity crine system . of the typical HFE-related haemochromatosis: a multivariate analysis P07.062 G. Le Gac1, V. Scotet2, I. Gourlaouen1, C. Thèze1, B. Chanu1, A. Mercier1, M. GLA mutations in young adult patients with a first stroke: Mérour1, C. Férec1,2; The PORTYSTROKE study - screening genetic conditions in 1Etablissement Français du Sang-Bretagne, Brest, France, 2Inserm U613, PORTuguese Young STROKE patients Brest, France. S. Ferreira1, M. Viana-Baptista2, I. Costa1, M. Machado1, J. M. Ferro3, J. P. Background/aim: Expression of the common p .C282Y/p .C282Y HFE- Oliveira1, &. PORTYSTROKE Study Group4; related haemochromatosis genotype depends on a balance between 1Faculdade de Medicina, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, accentuating and reducing factors . Some of these factors have been Portugal, 3Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 4(NA), (NA), Portugal. identified, but they have mainly been analyzed independently. Here, Background we aimed to determine contribution of different environmental and ge- Fabry disease (FD), an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder due to netic modifiers to total body iron overload. mutations in the alpha-galactosidase gene (GLA), is associated with Method: We studied 365 p .C282Y/p .C282Y patients (195 men and 170 the early onset of cerebrovascular disease (CVD), most commonly of women), and we used the iron removed by phlebotomy as quantita- the ischaemic small-vessel (ISV) type . Atypical phenotypes have been tive trait (log transformed). We tested the influence of age, gender, recognised and the disease is probably under-diagnosed in the stroke alcohol abuse, body mass index, as well as six common variants: the population . 16189 T>C variant in mtDNA, the -308G>A variant in the TNF-alpha Methods promoter, the well known duplication of the haptoglobin gene (geno- Between 1/November/06 and 31/October/07, all patients aged 18-55 types Hp1-1, Hp1-2 and Hp2-2), and 3 SNPs located in genes involved years presenting with a first stroke event to any of 12 major neurology in regulation of hepcidin synthesis (BMP2 rs23756, BMP4 rs4901474 hospital departments in Portugal were offered genetic screening for and HJV rs16827043) . GLA mutations. Strokes were classified according to usual clinical and Results: Univariate analyses first highlighted the relation between each brain imaging criteria . Mutations were detected by cDNA analysis and potential modifiers and severity of the body iron overload. Factors with confirmed on genomic DNA. a p-value lower than 25% were included in a same multiple linear re- Results gression model . Then, stepwise elimination procedures were succes- Out of a total of 625 eligible patients, 493 (78 .9%) consented to the ge- sively performed until a model presenting only significant predictors netic analysis . Of these, 74% had ischaemic strokes, of which 28 .5% was found . Predictors of this last model were the male sex (p<0 .0001), were cryptogenic . In 5 patients, RT-PCR was unsuccessful . Two pre- the greater age at diagnosis (p<0 .0001), the alcohol abuse (p=0 .0008) viously described missense mutations were identified in 12 patients: and the Hp2-2 genotype (p=0 .0186) . p .R118C (n=6; 3 males) and p .D313Y (n=6; 4 males) . Respectively Conclusion: Our results underline the predominant influence of non- 2 patients (males) with p .R118C and 3 patients (males) with p .D313Y genetic modifiers in expression of the p.C282Y/p.C282Y genotype. had evidence of ISVCVD . Two patients (1 male) had a previously un- Future investigations should address the influence of other genetic described 5’UTR mutation (g .1136C>T) . None of these patients had a modifiers, and further look for gene/gene and gene/environment in- diagnosis or family history of FD . teractions . Conclusions Overall, 1 .23% (95%CI: 0 .25-2 .21) of the patients in this cohort had a P07.065 recognised pathogenic GLA mutation . Despite having been described investigation of polymorphisms in non-coding region of human as a polymorphic allele causing a pseudo-deficiency in plasma alpha- mitochondrial DNA in 31 iranian Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy galactosidase activity, the role of p .D313Y in ISVCVD should be further (Hcm) Patients evaluated . The biologic relevance of the g .1136C>T 5’UTR mutation M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, M. Eftekhrzadeh2, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya3; requires supplementary investigation . 1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Arrhythmia Clinic, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Russian Research Center of Medical P07.063 Genetics, Laboratory of DNA Research, Moscow, Russia., Moscow, Russian Identification of Ile105Val polymorphism for GST-P1 gene in five Federation. iranian ethnic groups: comparison with a mix-ethnic population The D-loop region is a hot spot for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) altera- from tehran tions, containing two HyperVariable Segments, HVS-I and HVS-II . In F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1, S. Tanhaei2, M. Sheidai2, M. Sanati1; order to identify polymorphic sites and potential genetic background 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic accounting for Hypertrophic CardioMyopathy (HCM) disease, the com- Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. plete non-coding region of mtDNA from 31 unrelated HCM patients The glutathione S-transferase P1 (GST-P1) protect cells from chemi- and 45 normal controls were sequenced . The sequences were aligned cal injury and has a function in detoxification of carcinogenic com- upon the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and any pounds . The polymorphism at site of codon 105 in GST-P1 enzyme incompatibilities were recorded as numerical changes in homoPoly- has been described, this site lies in close proximity to substrate bind- meric C Tract (PCT), single base substitutions (SBS), insertions andNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  deletions (Indels) . Nucleotide substitutions were found to make up the P07.068 majority of the mutations, rather than indels. We drew significantly comparison of genome-wide homozygosity-by-descent high transition rate (81 .8%) versus lower frequency of transversions estimates in human isolated population (18.2%). 12 polymorphisms were identified in this study which had not O. Polasek1,2, I. Kolčić2, L. Zgaga2, Z. Biloglav2, A. Vorko Jović2, D. Rudan3, I. been published in the MitoMap database . PCT changes at position Rudan4, A. Wright5, H. Campbell1, A. Leutenegger6,7; 303-309 were detected in 83% of our samples . Our results suggest 1Public Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, that an increased level of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be an 2Andrija Stampar School of Public Health, Medical School, University of Za- indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability . Furthermore, mtDNA mu- greb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Clinical Hospital Dubrava, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Centre for tations may play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest Global Health, University of Split, Split, Croatia, 5Human Genetics Unit, Medical which has remained unexplained for long . Research Council, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6Inserm U535, Villejuif, France, 7Univ. Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France. P07.066 The aim of this study was to investigate several methods of mark- Frequency of the Hemochromatosis gene mutations in patients er based genome-wide homozygosity estimation . The study sample with Hereditary Hemochromatosis and in control subjects from consisted of 118 members of a single extended family living on the serbia Adriatic Croatian island of Vis, where no pedigree based inbreeding M. Saric1, L. Zamurovic1, M. Keckarevic-Markovic1, D. Keckarevic1, M. Kecma- was observed, and therefore no homozygosity by descent, HBD, was novic1, D. Savic-Pavicevic1, J. Jovic2, S. Romac1; expected . Individuals were genotyped for 810 microsatellite markers 1Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, and a 317k Illumina chip . Five approaches were compared: the propor- Serbia. tion of heterozygous loci (multilocus heterozygosity, MLH), two meth- The most common form of hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is HH ods of moments approaches that use different weighting approaches type 1 . It is an autosomal recessive iron-overload disorder associated (ADC and PLINK), and finally 2 maximum likelihood approaches, one with mutations in the hemochromatosis gene (HFE) . The aim of this singlepoint and the other multipoint, using a hidden Markov model for study was to determine the frequency of the C282Y, H63D and S65C marker dependencies (FEstim) . The latter is the only existing multi- mutations of HFE gene in the group of unrelated HH patients (n=28) point method for HBD estimation and gives estimates the closest to and in the healthy population of Serbia (n=318) . the true HBD values, as shown previously in a simulation study . The The C282Y, H63D and S65C mutation frequencies in the healthy pop- results indicated that the two methods of moments approaches corre- ulation were 1 .6%, 15 .7% and 1 .6%, respectively and in the popula- lated highly with MLH and hence did not bring much information about tion of HH patients 25%, 19 .6% and 1 .8%, respectively . The frequency HBD . On the other hand, the two maximum likelihood approaches of C282Y homozygotes was estimated on approximately 1:3900 in- exhibited zero value estimates when homozygosity was likely due to dicating the prevalence of HH type 1 in Serbia . Our results support chance. A total of 68 individuals (57.6%) had no HBD as defined by the previously documented gradient distribution of the C282Y mutation, in FEstim, while a total of 4 individuals (3 .9%) had FEstim values over northwest to southeast Europe. They also confirm that the frequency 0.0625 indicating inbreeding closer than first cousins. These methods of C282Y mutation is not related to the origin of particular population can be used to differentiate homozygosity by chance vs . HBD, which but it is more related to the geographical position of the population . may be important in investigation of the genome-wide heterozygosity This finding could be considered as yet further evidence in favor of the effects on quantitative and health related traits . Viking or Celtic origin of C282Y mutation . The frequency of the C282Y homozygotes (10 .7%) is considerably P07.069 lower than the frequency reported for HH patients in other European A medium-throughput assay for the genotyping and primary populations . It is possible that some of the analyzed HH patients carry screening of useful polymorphisms using High Resolution other mutations in HFE gene, mutation in some other genes already melting analysis related with HH or in some other yet not identified genes. X. Muñoz, F. Marín, N. García, N. Sala; These results have important clinical implications for the detection and Catalan Institute of Oncology - Translational Research Laboratory and Unit of management of HH type 1 in Serbia . Nutrition, Environment and Cancer, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. The High Resolution Melting (HRM) analysis uses highly sensitive fluo- P07.067 rescent dyes specific for double stranded DNA and the Post-PCR melt- Hereditary hemochromatosis and multiple sclerosis. Frequency ing curve, to characterize gene fragments and identify small sequence of common HFE mutations in czech patients with multiple variants such as SNPs . The purpose of this study was to determine the sclerosis performance of LightCycler® 480 High Resolution Melting master and M. Tomková1, P. Strachotová1, L. Barnincová1, E. Krasulová1, L. Pospíšilová1, the LightCycler® 480 Gene Scanning Software, for genotyping and D. Horáková1, E. Havrdová1, J. Horák2, P. Martásek1; gene scanning purposes in the LightCycler® 480 (LC480) System . For 11st School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 23rd School of Medicine, this we setup protocols for the analysis of the MTHFR c .677C>T, FII Prague, Czech Republic. c .20210G>A, and F5 Leiden variants in 60 samples previously geno- Hereditary hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive disorder fre- typed using hybridization probes . Among these samples 20 there were quently found in Caucasian population and caused by iron overload heterozygotes for MTHFR c .677C>T, 10 for FII c .20210G>A and 4 for (mutations in HFE gene) . There have been several reports of a relation- the F5 Leiden variant . The remaining samples were wild-type homozy- ship between HFE gene polymorphisms and multiple sclerosis (MS) . gotes We have also developed a protocol for the mutational scanning MS is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous of Trefoil factor 2 gene (TFF2) . Post PCR HRM resulted in the expected system . In the etiology of MS, both environmental and genetic factors different melting profiles that efficiently discriminated between homo- play a role . In this study we investigated whether HFE polymorphisms zygotes and heterozygotes for the different polymorphisms tested in is associated with Czech MS patients . We therefore genotyped 410 MS all samples . HRM scanning of TFF2 exon 4 in 50 control samples from patients and 481 healthy controls for the C282Y, H63D, and S65C mu- our population, allowed for the identification of a previously described tations by PCR-RFLP analysis. None of the MS patients were identified SNP (rs225334; MAF: 0 .39) and a novel insertion, c .68_69insCTT as homozygous for S65C or C282Y mutation, and seven (1 .70%) for (MAF: 0 .05) in the 3’-UTR region . Both variants could be genotyped H63D mutation . Twenty eight (6 .83%) MS patients were C282Y hetero- simultaneously in the same amplicon melting analysis . zygous, seventy seven (18 .78%) were H63D heterozygous, and eight We conclude that HRM may be an efficient and cost-effective method (1 .95%) were S65C heterozygous . Among them, we have found four for the simultaneous amplification, mutational scanning and genotyp- (0 .97%) compound heterozygotes; three patients were C282Y/H63D ing of amplicons up to 200bp, in a single step and in sets of 96 or 384 compound heterozygous and one was found H63D/S65C compound samples . heterozygous. Our results showed no significant differences in the dis- tribution of C282Y and S65C HFE mutations between MS patients and controls . However, the allele frequency of the H63D mutation was sig- nificantly lower (p < 0,05) in the MS patients than in the control group. (Supported by grant IGA MZ 1A8713 and MSM 0021620806) .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 P07.070 tween genetic variation and the genetic variation associated with the Development of new genetic methods for predictive testing of disease is not absolute, the phenotypic expression of certain abnormal multifactorial diseases and maximum prolongation of the human variations in the DNA depends mainly of the environment . Colombia is active life (analysis of 14 genes) a multi-ethnic country with a variety of geographical areas, therefore, O. S. Glotov, A. S. Glotov, G. S. Demin, M. V. Moskalenko, N. U. Shved, V. G. the behavior of the disease does not maintains a uniform epidemiologi- Vakharlovsky, T. E. Ivashchenko, V. S. Baranov; cal profile in all human groups, and is likely to be established accord- Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian ing to specific profiles frameworks that define the ethnic groups. The Federation. ethnic-pathology would be defined, as the study of disease according It is well-known that diagnostics on early stages and prophylaxis to the affinities of a human community framed on it’s own aspects bio- of different diseases is one of the most actual problems of modern logical and cultural . This paper aims to describe the demographic dis- medicine . Patient usually consults a doctor on the stage when dis- tribution of the disease in the Colombian indigenous groups, according ease is already in progress . At the same time the cause of pathological to their biological determinants, and to analyze how the expression of process often remains unclear . In this case intensive treatment can the disease varies depending on the development of the cultural and improve state of health of patient only for sometime and makes him genetic determinants of a population . dependent on symptomatic drugs . Diagnostic of predisposition to the multifactorial pathologies nowadays becomes an important tool that is P07.073 necessary for solution of the predictive medicine problems . The basic male infertility risk evaluation in inhabitants of radiation polluted directions of these researches are connected to genes of cancerogen- territories of Ukraine esis and cardiovascular diseases . Using pharmacy biochip specially A. V. Klepko, S. Andreychenko; constructed for population studies, 13 polymorphisms of 7 genes: Scientific Center for Radiation Medicine, Kyiv, Ukraine. CYP1A1(C4887A, A4889G, T6235C), CYP2D6(G1934A, DelA2637), Reproductive system has been shown to be highly sensitive to radia- CYP2C9(C430T, A1075C), GSTM1(del), GSTT1(del), NAT2(C481T, tion . Consequently continuous low dose ionizing irradiation may cause G590A, G857A), CYP2C19(G681A) and using RFLP method 7 poly- severe sexual disorders . In this connection present research aims in morphisms of genes: AGT(M235T), ACE(I/D), AGTR1(A1166C), evaluation quality and fertility potential of human sperm from radiation- PAI1(4G/5G), GPIIIa(C1565T), MTHFR(C677T), NOS3(4/5) were in- polluted regions of Ukraine, the role of radiation component in sperm vestigated in 3 age-specific groups from North-West Region of Russia. damaging being assessed . The frequencies of same genotypes and alleles of CYP2C9, GSTM1, Freshly ejaculated semen was obtained from volunteers by masturba- GSTT1, NAT2, AGT, ACE, AGTR1, PAI1, MTHFR, NOS3 genes were tion after 3 days of sexual abstinence . Then sperm motility, morpholo- different between studied groups . In our investigation was demon- gy and concentration were analyzed by light microscopy in accordance strated that people who have certain genotypes of studied genes for with WHO protocol . Although light microscopy is routinely applied for men and for women have some metabolic advantages for their longer the diagnosis of male infertility, however the limitations of such analy- survival . Further, it is necessary to perform studies on various groups sis are well recognized. Therefore flow cytometry (FCM), which allows of different age, taking into account meta-analysis data to estimate the the simultaneous measurement of several biological characteristics role of age-regulating genes and multifactorial diseases in aging . at the single cell level in several thousands of cells, was used as a complementary approach for rapid identification of sperm chromatin P07.071 and membrane disturbances . Genetic structure of rural population of Kazakhstan The following parameters, namely apoptosis development (AD), mito- G. M. Berezina, G. Svyatova, A. Baysbekova, M. Kirikbaeva; chondrial membrane potential ( ΔΨm ) and nuclear DNA ploidy (DP), Scientific Center of obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakh- were identified on flow cytometer PAS (Partec, Germany). AD was fol- stan. lowed by Annexin V - Apoptosis detection Kit I (BD Pharmingen, USA) The study of genetic structure of modern populations of the man is one , ΔΨm was measured by means of Rhodamin 123 dye and DP was of key problems of genetics . Genetic and demographic information for quantified using propidium iodide staining. the Kazakhs population living in the Republic of Kazakhstan is pre- The data received have shown the existence of specific correlations sented . The marital-migrational structure of eight districts of Kazakh- between the radiation dose accumulated by donors and the quantita- stan was studied on the basis of marital recodes . The average value tive distribution of spermatozoa in subpopulations of apoptic, necro- of ethnic marriage assortativeness was found to be 1,78 . The genetic tized, immobile and viable cells . Furthermore, the increase of sperm structure of rural populations of Kazakhstan is formed by respective DNA aneuploidy and DNA fragmentation proved to be concomitant to districts and region . The mean number of children per woman consti- infertility growth tuted 4,71 . Crow index of total selection (I ) and its components (I , tot m I) were 0,36, 0,08 and 0,26 respectively . The size of the portion of the P07.074 f population of reproductive age (34,4% of the total), family size (4,71), iranian Population Data on sixteen short tandem Repeat loci: and the predominance of the portion of the population (49,8% of the to- stR multiplex Assays tal) under reproductive allow us to classify this population as growing . M. A. Saremi1,2, M. Tavallaei (Ph.D.)1, M. Sajedifar2, S. Zeinali (Ph.D.)3; The parameters of isolation of Malecots distance and index endogamy 1Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University – Human Genetics Research Center, in eight districts of Kazakhstan are counted up . Highest local inbreed- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, ing is found out in the district of Abai (0,00103) . The index of endog- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of amy is 53,6% A significant correlation between effective population Iran. size, endogamy and ethnic diversity with a level of local inbreeding A population study on sixteen new short tandem repeat (STR) loci was revealed (r= -0,896; 0,585; -0,658) . Recent social and economic D8S1179,D21S11, D7S820,CSF1PO, D3S1358,TH01, D13S317, changes have led to an increase in general and ethnic isolation of rural D16S539, D2S1338, D19S433, vWA, TPOX, D18S51, D5S818, FGA populations of Kazakhstan . and AMEL(X/Y) was performed on 1511 unrelated Iranian . These individuals were randomly sampled, interviewed and with their P07.072 informed consent added to the sample each donating 5 ml of whole Ethnic-Pathology: distribution of disease, in colombian blood . Whole blood was collected into EDTA tubes which were trans- indigenous groups, genetic and environmental aspects. ferred for storage at 4-8 C . A. Ordonez, F. Suarez; DNA was extracted from whole-blood specimens using the standard Instituto de Genetica Humana, Bogota. D.C., Colombia. salting out method and precipitated with ethanol . The multiplex PCR Ethnic-Pathology: distribution of disease, in Colombian minority was performed using approximately 2 ng of genomic DNA in a total groups, genetic and environmental aspects . reaction volume of 25 µl by the multiplex kit AmpFlSTR Identifiler. The frequency of disease varies among populations, the reasons for DNA quantitised by spectrophotometry. The DNA was amplified by this variation may be social, cultural or due to environment, but the PCR and separation and detection by the ABI 3130 capillary system incidence, prevalence, response to treatment and natural history of instrument (Applied Biosystems) . disease are also influenced by genotype, and although distinction be- All loci meet Hardy ±Weinberg expectations . The results demonstrateNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  that these loci can be useful for human identification in forensic cases in P07.077 Iran . We must pay attention that typing success in loci ranges from 100 Association analysis of G-A and AG polymorphisms in ± 150 base pairs is better especially with degraded DNA samples . the human leptin gene with obesity Z. Tomas1, N. Smolej Narancic1, M. Barbalic1, M. Zajc1, T. Skaric-Juric1, P. P07.075 Rudan1, I. Rudan2, H. Campbell3, A. F. Wright4; Identification of a geographic area characterized by 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2“Andrija Stampar” “reproductive longevity” in the sardinia island School of Public Health, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, P. Astolfi1, G. Caselli2, O. Fiorani3, R. M. Lipsi2, A. Lisa3, S. Tentoni4; Croatia, 3Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Medi- 1Dept. Genetics and Microbiology, University, Pavia, Italy, 2Dept. Demographic cal School, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western Sciences, University, Rome, Italy, 3IGM, CNR, Pavia, Italy, 4IMATI, CNR, Pavia, General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Italy. Leptin is a protein hormone which plays an important role in the regu- Sardinian population differs from the Italian mainland and other Euro- lation of body adiposity, lipid metabolism and reproductive function . pean populations in demographic and biological traits, resulting from It is primarily secreted by the adipocytes and its concentration in the the socio-economic structure and the geographical and historical isola- blood is proportional to the amount of body fat . Many leptin gene poly- tion . Its reproductive behaviour is characterized by the historical and morphisms have been found, but their association with obesity is still still present tendency to late maternity . We hypothesize that areas of controversial . We tested the polymorphisms G-2548A in promoter re- “reproductive longevity” exist throughout the island, where a higher gion and A19G in intron 1 of leptin gene for association with leptin incidence of elderly mothers combines with a lower risk of perinatal concentration in the blood and obesity . A population-based association death . Data regard all 1980-96 births (n=299,793), occurred in 363 study was conducted in the population isolate of the Eastern Adriatic Sardinian municipalities . Through a smoothed isopleth mapping pro- island of Vis, Croatia . Three hundred and twenty randomly selected cedure, we explored the spatial distributions of a late maternity indi- subjects from the Vis population were genotyped . Obesity was de- cator (proportion of 35+year-old mothers), and a perinatal mortality fined as BMI≥30 kg/m2. The results revealed significant association indicator (proportion of deaths within the 1st week of life) associated of G-2548A variant and leptin concentration in a codominant pattern with late maternity . We drew critical isopleths to highlight “excess” ar- (p=0 .026) . The ancestral G allele which displays as a minor allele in eas, where the late maternity indicator exceeds the average Sardinian the Vis population (frequency of 0 .44) was associated with higher value and approaches its upper limit . With respect to the “non excess” leptin levels. The leptin concentration was significantly higher in the area (23% of 35+year-old mothers), in the “highest excess” area (27% obese (60 .1 ng/ml, N=244), than in the non-obese group (20 .7 ng/ml, of 35+year-old mothers) the Odds Ratio of perinatal death was lower N=76) and it was more than three times higher in women (44 .0 ng/ml) (1 .38 vs 1 .78), and the proportion of consanguineous marriages and compared to men . However, no association of G-2548A and A19G the inbreeding coefficient were respectively from 3 to 2.4 fold higher. polymorphisms with obesity was found (with leptin concentration, sex In conclusion we suggest that such area, located in the central part and age as covariates) . The results indicate that the studied polymor- of the island and qualified for “reproductive longevity”, can be target phisms are not relevant markers for common obesity in this isolated of further investigations on eventual protective mechanisms against population, but were found to influence the leptin concentration which adverse perinatal outcomes in late maternity, and of studies on the is an obesity-related phenotype . possible association between reproductive longevity and achievement of an extended life span . P07.078 High level of genetic differentiation in siberian populations P07.076 demonstrated by ZFX haplotypes High frequency of LCHAD deficiency carriers in the northern I. Khitrinskaya, V. Kharkov, V. Stepanov; Poland Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, R. K. J. Olsen2, J. Wierzba3, E. Popowska1, D. X-Chromosome is considered as a convenient instrument used to Jurkiewicz1, K. Czornak1, P. Kowalski1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, E. Ciara1, J. study genetic history of populations . Firstly, since men have only one Sykut-Cegielska1, W. Gradowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, N. Gregersen2, E. copy of X-chromosome it is easy to determine haplogroups . Linkage Pronicka1; disequilibrium is also greater on the X-chromosome, because only 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2University Hospital, two-thirds of this chromosome manages to recombine in each genera- Skejby Sygehus, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Medical Academy, Gdansk, Poland. tion . The size of regions with a single genetic history is expected to be Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is larger than in autosomes, once more making it ideal for human popula- an autosomal recessive disorder of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation . tion genetic studies . In our study we have analyzed 5 SNP (rs2238925, It is the most common defect of the mitochondrial trifunctional protein rs2238926, rs2238928, rs2704843 and rs2704849) in ZFX gene lo- (MTP) complex which catalyzes the last three steps of the β-oxidation cated in Xp21 .3 locus on the X-chromosome . Human populations be- spiral of long-chain fatty acids . The gene HADHA for the α-subunit of longed to 11 ethnic groups residing in Siberia and Middle Asia (Rus- MTP carrying LCHAD activity is located on chromosome 2p23 . 60-86% sians, Altaians, Buryats, Kets, Khants, Kirghizes, Komis, Tajiks, Tuvin- of reported patients with isolated LCHAD deficiency have a prevalent ians, Uzbeks and Yakuts) have been studied . Altogether 1073 male c .1528G>C mutation . individuals were analyzed . Genetic differentiation of the ethnic groups Our earlier screening of urinary GC-MS organic acid profile and MS- under study was estimated using AMOVA analysis . General level of MS blood acylcarnitines profile in Polish children revealed the pres- genetic differentiation for the investigated populations at the level of ence of 40 patients (37 families) with LCHAD deficiency. The common ethnic groups amounted to 3 .6% . The North Siberian population (Kets, c .1528G>C substitution was observed on 89% of mutated alleles . A Yakuts and Khants) is most highly differentiated (F = 11 .2%), for the ST tendency for clustering the LCHAD deficient patients in northern part of other groups (Central Asia, South Siberia and East Europe) a degree Poland, especially in Pomeranian voivodeship, was found . of genetic differentiation does not exceed 1% . Structural analysis of The aim of our study was to identify carrier frequency of the common the selected SNP revealed 19 haplotypes . Median networks demon- mutation in various districts of northern Poland to verify the probability strate the occurrence of two haplotype clusters, which may be condi- of correlation between high number of Pomeranian patients and ex- tionally determined as “Mongoloid” and “Caucasoid” . Linkage analysis pected high carrier frequency of the c .1528G>C mutation carriers . revealed a high LD level for 9 groups, excluding Ket and Uzbek popu- Up to now, 1096 blood samples collected on anonymous Guthrie lations . cards, have been screened . Seven heterozygotes for c .1528G>C mu- tation (including 4 carriers from the Pomeranian region) were detected . No samples homozygous for the c.1528C allele were identified. The preliminary study suggests that LCHAD deficiency carriers are more prevalent in the areas around the Baltic sea than in other parts of the world . The study was partly supported by the Polish Ministry of Science Proj- ect 0678/B/P01/2007/33Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.079 means of CHAID algorithm from SPSS Answer Tree (v .13 .0) . Geno- Population study at fifteen Short Tandem Repeat loci in the typing was performed using PCR and PCR-RFLP . Fisher’s two-tailed Sarajevo (B&H Capitol) residents exact rest (Statistica v . 6 .0) was used for age groups comparison . L. Kovacevic1, N. Bakal1, N. Pojskic1, D. Marjanovic1,2; In group 36-61 years increase of CAT *C allele frequency was observed 1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and (P=0.004). Persons in the age of 55-77 years have significantly high- Herzegovina, 2Institute for Anthropology, Zagreb, Croatia. er GPX1*L allele frequency (P=0 .016) . APOE*3, ACE*D, ACE*D/*D, In our previous population studies of B&H human population, PON2*C, PON2*C/*C, CAT*T, CAT*C/*T, GPX1*P and GPX1*P/*P we used 17 STR loci included in the PowerPlex 16® System and alleles and genotypes frequencies were considerably higher in senile AmpFlSTR®Identifiler®, twelve Y-chromosomal short tandem repeats group (P<0 .05) . ACE*I/*D genotype and PON1*R allele carriers were loci incorporated in the PowerPlex® Y System, as well as 28 Y-chro- more frequent among long-livers (P=0 .026 and 0 .004 accordingly) . mosome NRY bi-allelic markers to generate Bosnian referent data- Thus, we have demonstrated diversity of APOE, ACE, PON1, PON2, base. Wishing to test our database in order to obtain specific results CAT and GPX1 genes polymorphisms genotypes and alleles frequen- in various DNA analysis for the local population of Bosnian Capitol cies between different age groups . Possibly, the same polymorphic vari- - Sarajevo, we have decided to test unrelated healthy 150 individuals ant plays a protective role for an organism at its different age stages . (situated in Sarajevo) at fifteen autosomal short tandem repeats loci. Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit was used for DNA extraction from buccal P07.082 swabs and bloodstains and PowerPlex 16® System for amplification Generation of lymphoblastoid cell lines from frozen whole blood and detection. Amplification was carried out as described previously. N. Baker, J. Cooper, E. Burnett, J. Biggins, P. Bracegirdle; The total volume of PCR reaction was 5μl. PCR amplifications were European Collection of Cell Cultures, Salisbury, United Kingdom. carried out in PE GeneAmp PCR System Thermal Cycler . Electropho- The manufacture of a lymphoblastoid cell line from a single donor resis of the amplification products was preformed on an ABI PRISM blood sample is a means of securing a permanent, expandable and 310 genetic analyzer (ABI, Foster City, CA) . The raw data were com- renewable source of genetic and other cellular material . Once a single piled and analyzed using Genemapper® v3 .2 . Deviation from Hardy- donor cell bank is available, study material can be widely distributed Weinberg equilibrium, observed and expected heterozygosity, power and will be available many years after the initial study for follow-on of discrimination and power of exclusion were calculated . In addition, studies that may not have been originally anticipated, or which may we compared obtained Sarajevo data with the data obtained from the not be possible with existing technologies . In many respects a cell global Bosnian and Herzegovinian population, isolated human popula- bank can be regarded as a means of immortalising a very valuable tion from the Bosnian mountain area as well with geographically closer study cohort and is the soundest means of underpinning a biobank (neighboring) European populations . The results of this study will be and maximising its value in the long term . However, the majority of used as guidelines in additional improving of investigation of recent lo- biobanks participating in organisations such as the Public Population cal B&H populations, both isolated and open, initiated in our previous Project in Genomics (P3G) Consortium do not currently store samples researches . for future cell line generation . ECACC Human Genetic Services has approximately twenty years ex- P07.080 perience in providing strategic support to genetic research throughout study on a possible effect of four longevity candidate genes the UK and Europe, through the provision of a blood processing and (AcE, PON1, PPAR-gamma, APOE) on human fertility EBV transformation and cell banking service . R. M. Corbo1,2, L. Ulizzi1, L. Piombo1, R. Scacchi2; In this presentation we describe the development of a new process for 1La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 2CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and the generation of EBV transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from cryo- Pathology, Rome, Italy. preserved aliquots of whole blood which represents a cost effective A possible effect on fertility of four genes [angiotensin 1-converting alternative to current methods involving separated peripheral blood enzyme (ACE), paraoxonase (PON1), peroxisome proliferator-acti- lymphocytes . vated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ), and apolipoprotein E(APOE)] previ- ously found associated with longevity was sought in order to determine P07.083 whether they have a pleiotropic action at different life ages . The study No significant contribution between M470V and 5T population was 151 Italian subjects whose reproductive life took place polymorphisms and cystic fibrosis phenotype in Iranian patients at the beginning of the demographic transition (declining fertility and F. Mirzajani1, F. Mirfakhraie2, F. Asadi3, M. Rafiee4, H. R. Kianifar5; longer life expectancy) and who had produced a mean number of chil- 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic dren (3 .6±2 .3) such as to be still useful to detect a differential repro- Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshti Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic ductive efficiency associated with different genotypes. of Iran, 3Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Teh- Of these four longevity candidate genes, only PPAR-γ and APOE ap- ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tabriz Children Hospital, Tabriz, Islamic Republic peared to have an effect on fertility, indicating their possible influence of Iran, 5Ghaem Children Hospital, Mashad, Islamic Republic of Iran. on reproductive efficiency. The PPAR-γ Pro/Ala genotype, which in a The most common CFTR polymorphism, M470V, has been shown to previous study (Barbieri et el . 2004) showed a positive association with be relatively frequent among Iranian Cystic Fibrosis patients . Whether longevity only in men, was found associated with a higher number of M470V polymorphism and 5T variant have CF causing contribution children (6 .1 ± 3 .3) than Pro/Pro genotype (3 .3 ± 1 .9, p=0 .001) only in Iranian population is not clear yet and it may increase difficulties in in men . Compared with the other APOE alleles, the APOE*2 allele, genetic counseling . In order to compare the frequencies of these varia- considered as an allele favouring a longer life-span, was confirmed to tions, 100 CFTR alleles from normal controls and symptomatic Iranian be associated with the lowest fertility (p=0 .03) . The logistic regression CF patients were analyzed for the presence of 5T and M470V poly- analysis indicated that APOE and PPAR-γ polymorphisms act as inde- morphisms using PCR-RFLP method . The frequencies obtained for pendent determinants of reproductive efficiency. These data suggest M470V and 5T variants were almost the same in the studied groups, that the APOE*2 allele may follow the model of antagonist pleiotropy, suggesting that these two polymorphisms do not have strong indication whereas the PPAR-γ Pro/Ala genotype seems to exert beneficial ef- of being a disease causing polymorphism . The variation in distribution fects both early in life and in advanced age in a gender-specific way. of such common polymorphisms among very diverse Iranian popula- tion deserves more investigation with higher number of samples . P07.081 Polymorphism of some genes in connection with age gradation P07.084 V. V. Pauk, I. Tuktarova, T. Nasibullin, O. E. Mustafina; Male infertility induced by mtDNA/Y unfavorable combination? Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. An association study on human mitochondrial DNA The aim was to evaluate age dynamics of alleles and genotypes of S. C. Gomes1, S. Fernandes2, R. Gonçalves1, A. T. Fernandes1, A. Barros3, H. APOE (C112R, R158C), ACE (I/D), PON1 (Q192R), PON2 (C311S), Geada4, A. Brehm1; CAT (-262C/T), GPX1 (L198P) and MSRA (-402T/C) gene polymor- 1Human Genetics Laboratory, University of Madeira, Funchal, Portugal, 2Genet- phisms in group of 1627 Tatars in age of 1-109 years old . ics Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Cen- Differentiation of total group on certain age groups was carried out by tre of Reproductive Genetics A Barros, Porto, Portugal, 4Faculty of Medicine,Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  University of Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal. role of vitamin D and its active metabolites in MM susceptibility . Sun- There is growing evidence that certain mtDNA haplogroups determine light induces production of vitamin D that has been associated with a genetic susceptibility to various disorders bringing out the interest antiproliferative and pro-differentiative effects in both melanocytes and in the possible role of mtDNA background on the phenotype expres- cutaneous melanoma cells mediated through the vitamin D receptor . sion of mitochondrial genetic disorders . An association between hap- In this study we explore the interaction between sunlight exposure and logroup T and asthenospermia has been reported and several sub- vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms in the etiology of MM . lineages of haplogroup U were associated with differences in sperm This case-control study included 131 consecutive Spanish MM pa- motility and vitality . The deletion of some DAZ copies gene in 10-15% tients from the Dermatology Unit of the Gregorio Marañón Hospital and of azoospermic and oligospermic patients has been reported but also 245 control subjects frequency matched for sex and age . Phenotypic present in fertile men belonging to certain Y-haplogroups. The findings information was collected using a standardized questionnaire . of one study have rarely been replicated by studies in other popula- Four SNPs in the vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) were genotyped . tions and conflicting associations have been reported. Our focus in this SNPs on exons or in the putative promoter region were selected . We case-control study is to investigate the existence of other influences, were able to identify several individual SNPs and haplotypes associ- besides a weak mtDNA background, promoting male infertility . The oc- ated with tumoral characteristics such as breslow index and melanoma currence of a specific mtDNA variant associated to a certain Y-chro- location . We also discuss the role of VDR variants as possible markers mosome haplogroup could represent a vital link that will compromise for MM and its agresiveness . the sperm function and be responsible for male infertility . A group of 99 infertile men and other one composed by 90 subjects with proven P07.087 fertility were selected and analysed . The frequency of the combina- An Empirical comparison of meta-Analyses of Published Gene- tion mtDNA-haplogroup H (especially with the CRS sequence) and Y- Disease Associations Versus consortium Analyses haplogroup R was higher in fertile than in infertile men seemingly to A. C. J. W. Janssens1, A. M. González-Zuloeta Ladd1, S. López-Léon1, J. P. A. be favorable to fertility . On the other hand, a considerable number of Ioannidis2, B. A. Oostra1, M. J. Khoury3, C. M. van Duijn1; infertile men belonging to mtDNA-haplogroup H (CRS) and to Y-hap- 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2University of Ioannina School logroup I, associated to a specific DAZ gene deletion pattern- 2+4d, of Medicine, Ioannina, Greece, 3Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, suggests a non favorable combination to male fertility . Atlanta, GA, United States. Background: Consortia of investigators currently compile sufficiently P07.085 large sample sizes to investigate the effects of low-risk susceptibility Genetic risks factors for melanoma development in Latin genetic variants . It is not clear how the results obtained by consortia America compare with those derived from meta-analyses of published studies . F. Cuellar1,2, A. Larre-Borges3,4, B. Carlos5,6, J. Puig-Butille1,2, V. Godinez7,6, J. We performed meta-analyses of published data for 16 genetic poly- Salas8,6, Z. Ogbah1,2, J. Malvehy1,2, S. Puig1,2; morphisms investigated by the Breast Cancer Association Consortium 1Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2GenoMEL, Barcelona, Spain, and compared sample sizes, heterogeneity, and effect sizes . 3Hospital de Clinicas, Montevideo, Uruguay, 4GenoMEL, Latinamerica, Uru- Methods and findings: PubMed, Web of Science, and HuGENet da- guay, 5Centro Medico Nacional IMSS, Mexico City, Mexico, 6GenoMEL, Latina- tabases were searched for breast cancer case-control association merica, Mexico, 7Facultad de Medicina UNAM, Mexico city, Mexico, 8Hospital studies. Summary odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals Universitario UANL, Monterrey, Mexico. were calculated for three genetic models (homozygotes, heterozy- Introduction: Genetics of Melanoma network (GenoMEL) is focused in gotes, and per-allele comparisons), using random effects analyses . melanoma genetic susceptibility in Europe, Australia, North America The strength of the epidemiological evidence was evaluated on the and Israel . Nowadays GenoMEL is obtaining samples and data from basis of recently proposed criteria . We found that meta-analyses of Latin America . published data and consortium analyses were substantially based on Objective: To Study well-known genes for melanoma (MM) susceptibil- different data . Published data by non-consortium teams amounted on ity (CDKN2A/ p14arf, CDK4, MC1R) in familial and multiple primary average to 26 .9% of all available data (range 3 .0%-50 .0%) . The cor- MM in Latin America . relation coefficient of the I2 heterogeneity estimates of the two ap- Methods: In a total period of three years (2001-2009) patients with proaches was 0 .47 (p=0 .001), and that of the OR estimates was 0 .44 genetic susceptibility for MM from Latin America . (p=0 .002) . The meta-analyses of published data and the consortium Results: Until now we have analysed 16 pedigrees (25 individuals) analyses both showed statistically significant decreased breast cancer from Mexican and Uruguayan pedigrees and identified the I49T, M52T risks for CASP8 D302H, and all meta-analyses were graded as having CDKN2A mutations in Mexico and E88X, -34G>T, G101W in Uruguay . “strong” evidence . The percentage of CDKN2A mutation was 100% in families with 4 MM Conclusion: Meta-analysis of published gene-disease associations cases (1/1 family), 25% in 3 MM (1/4), 55 .5% in 2 MM (5/9), and no may still have an important role in the synthesis of knowledge on the mutation in 2 MPM without familial history . genetic basis of human diseases . The expense and complexity of Conclusion: CDKN2A mutations are responsible of MM susceptibility consortium-based studies should be considered vis-à-vis the potential in familial MM in Latin America . CDKN2A mutations with founder ef- methodological limitations of synthesis of published studies . fect (G101W, -34G>T) were detected in Uruguay . Nonsense germline E88X CDKN2A mutation was detected in two unrelated Uruguayan P07.088 families . M52T mutation detected in Mexico was not previously de- Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type i in Yakutia: the scribed . One MPM Mexican patient was believed homozigote for I49T frequency of disease gene and age of the mutation by sequencing but later MLPA showed deleted exon 1 alfa . N. Galeeva, V. Spitsin, A. Polyakov; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. P07.086 Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia (RCM) type I is defined Variants in the Vitamin D Receptor Gene and melanoma Etiology by cyanosis due to methemoglobinemia and an isolated deficiency of L. P. Fernandez1, E. Barroso1, R. L. Milne1, G. Pita1, M. Tanic1, J. A. Aviles2, P. NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase (b5R) in erythrocyte . This disease is Lazaro2, J. Benitez1, G. Ribas1; rare in the world but frequent in Sakha Republic (Yakutia) of Russia . 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital In research based on clinical evidence frequency of RCM in Yakutia Gregorio Marañon, Madrid, Spain. amounted to 1:5677 . The aetiology of malignant melanoma (MM) remains unclear but it is In previously investigation has been showed that all RCM cases here known that both genetic and environmental factors influence the de- were caused by single mutation c .806 C>T in DIA1 gene that sug- velopment of sporadic disease . The main reason for the increasing gested presence founder effect for this disease in Yakutia . Allelic fre- incidence of MM in the general population is greater sun exposure . quency of the mutation amounted to 0 .025 and calculated frequency of Epidemiologic studies confirm that UV radiation is the main factor in- disease amounted to 1:1600 . volved in the pathogenesis of the disease . Among phenotypic factors, The date of diffusion of the mutation has been calculated by linkage fair pigmentation and low tanning ability are the most important risk disequilibrium between disease locus and markers closed to it . The factors . In recent years there has been a increasing interest in the age of mutation is approximately 310 years .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.089 P07.091 Population genetics study of three microsatellite markers On the epidemiology of the MTHFR-c677t gene variant in (D3s1358, tH01 and FGA) in two Romanian groups and their mexico: A multiregional and multiethnic study genetic relationships to European populations O. M. Mutchinick, M. A. López, B. E. Sánchez; A. Rodewald1, A. Kroll1, G. Cardos2,3, C. Tesio3, C. Tesio3, D. Banica4; Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición, México, D.F., Mexico. 1Depatment of Human Biology of University, Hamburg, Germany, 2”Victor It is well known the worldwide prevalence differences of the MTHFR Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3Faculty of Biology, University gene C677T variant . Also is well known that the homozygous for the T of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Marius Nasta” Institute of Pulmonary Dis- allele, produce a deficient metylenetetrahidrofolate reductase enzyme eases, Bucharest, Romania. with less than 50% activity, being this considered a risk factor for some In this study three different DNA-Microsatellites (D3S1538, TH01 and birth defects, cardiovascular disease, thrombosis and cancer, among FGA) have been analysed in a sample of 200 individuals from the other health problems . In 1999 we reported a very high T allele preva- Romanian capital Bucharest; this data was compared with the data lence in adult healthy Mexican female sample . from a sample of 110 individuals from Prahova Valley (Carpathian Herein we report the allelic and genotypic prevalence of the MTHFR- Mountains) and with other European, Asian and African populations . C677T variant found in 800 healthy newborns (HNB) from eight dif- Further, we investigated the possible extent of genetic influences by ferent provinces of the North, East, West, Centre and South and 440 migrations of European neighbour populations on the Romanian ge- indigenous people from five different ethnic groups (DEG) of the coun- netic pool . try . The results reveal that there were not any significant differences in the In HNB the T allele prevalence and TT genotype range from 0 .37% allele frequencies from the three microsatellite markers between the to as high as 0 .71% and from 17 .0% to 52 .0% respectively, with a panmictic population of Bucharest and the slight isolated population clear North to Southeast increasing gradient . In the DEG, remarkable from Prahova Valley . differences were also observed, with the lower T allele (0 .58%) and Genetic distance analysis showed a close genetic relationship with TT genotype (33 .3%) prevalence in Tojolabales Indians, to the high- Greek population as well as Slavic populations from Poland and Slo- est prevalence of 0 .81% and 68 .6%, in the Mazateco ethnic group . venia . The same was observed when HNB from distinct provinces were Historically this could be the result of intense trading activities of old compared . All groups studied were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . Thracian and Daco-Gethic tribal groups from Romanian territory and The higher prevalence of the T allele in HNB in the Southeast prov- Greek population groups, who established trading colonies at the west inces concurs with the natural setting of the ethnic groups studied . coast of the Black Sea (actually East-Romania) during the 6th-8th cen- Our findings suggest that the very high prevalence of the T allele and tury. The Slavic influence is thought to be the result of the migrations of TT genotype observed may be the result of inbreeding and advantage Slavic groups in the 6th-9th century across the Danube and Carpath- selection of the variant . ian regions . The study showed a more significant genetic distance from Romanian P07.092 populations to the Croatian, Austrian, Hungarian and German popula- mutation 35delG and m34t screening in GJB (connexin 26 tions . gene) in Estonian population This data can also be used for paternity and forensic analyses in the R. Teek1,2, T. Temberg2, M. Kõiv2, E. Raukas2, N. Tõnisson2, M. Kull1, K. Õu- Romanian population . nap2,3; 1Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, P07.090 2Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Evolutionary process of disease-associated oligonucleotide Estonia, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. repeats until their expansion in humans Hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder worldwide . Muta- S. Martins1, V. C. N. Wong2, P. Coutinho3, J. Sequeiros4,5, A. Amorim1,6; tions in GJB2 (connexin 26) gene are a major cause of autosomal-re- 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Dept Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The cessive non-syndromic hearing loss in Caucasian population . Mutation Univ of Hong-Kong, Hong-Kong, China, 3Hosp S Sebastião, Santa Maria da 35delG in this gene is the most common cause for early onset hearing Feira, Portugal, 4IBMC- Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portu- loss. The purpose of our study was to find out the carrier frequency of gal, 5ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 6Fac Ciências, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal. 35delG and M34T mutation among Estonian population . More than 40 neurological and neuromuscular disorders have been We have screened 524 consecutively born neonates (the investigation identified as caused by the expansion of repetitive sequences. The is planned for up to 1000 newborns born in one month in whole Esto- study of these loci over an evolutionary timescale becomes especially nia) . Our study uses anonymous random samples of dried blood spots relevant to understand better the mechanisms behind these human- on Guthrie cards from mass newborn screening program . We’ve found specific pathogenic expansions. In a previous study of the ATXN3 lo- one homozygote and 29 heterozygotes for 35delG mutation . We’ve cus, responsible for Machado-Joseph disease, we found evidence for also detected 31 heterozygotes for M34T mutation, but no M34T ho- an alternative, multi-step mechanism promoting allelic variation within mozygote so far . The carrier frequency for 35delG was 1 in 18 and 1 the normal range, either by slippage replication of multiple CAGs or in 17 for M34T . The theoretical incidence of homozygotes for 35delG gene conversion . To gain insight into the wild-type alleles that might is 1:1296 and 1:1156 for M34T . Previous studies have shown 1 in 35 have been involved in the expansion process, we have now com- 35delG carrier frequency in South-Europe, 1 in 79 Central and North- pared the flanking STR-backgrounds of different normal-sized alleles ern Europe, and 1 in 22,5 in Estonia on 113 samples only (Gasparini et with the ancestral expanded haplotypes from the same SNP-based al., 2000) . Our study shows similarly the high carrier frequency of mu- lineage, in 67 MJD families (42 from the GTGGCA and 25 from the tation 35delG among Estonian newborns . The incidence of mutation TTACAC haplotypes), analysed as before . Pairwise comparisons did M34T is similar to mutation 35delG and it correlates well with results of not show a direct correlation between the size of wild-type haplotypes our patients with early onset hearing loss . M34T is the second frequent and its genetic distance to expanded alleles . For lineage TTACAC, the mutation in our patient group . genetic background of expanded alleles was identical to those with 20 This work was supported by grant GARLA 6808 from the Estonian and 28 CAGs (R =0); for GTGGCA, a close relationship was found Science Foundation . ST between expanded chromosomes and (CAG) and (CAG) alleles . 23 27 These results led us to propose the possibility of a multi-step mutation- P07.093 al mechanism, underlying also the process of de novo expansions in Physiological splicing variants in the NiPBL gene MJD . Assuming that similar mechanisms may be driving other repeti- B. Puisac, M. Ciero, M. C. Gil, M. Arnedo, M. P. Ribate, J. C. de Karam, J. tive tracts, we plan to study the evolutionary dynamics at the ATXN1, Gomes, S. Menao, A. Pie, F. J. Ramos, J. Pie; DRPLA, ATXN7, KLHL1AS, PPP2R2B, TBP, and FMR1 loci . Selection University of Zaragoza Medical School, Zaragoza, Spain. was based on different allelic distribution, consensus motif and repeat Mutations in a regulator of the cohesin complex, the NIPBL gene, lo- configuration. cated in 5p13 .1, are responsible for Cornelia de Lange Syndrome 1 (CDLS1, MIM 122470) . CdLS is an inherited multisystem developmen- tal disorder characterized by distinctive dysmorphic facial features,Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  growth and cognitive impairment, limb malformations and occasional intake and anxiety manifestations in anxious rats . In humans, some multiple organ defects . The NIPBL gene encompasses 47 exons and studies have associated the Leu7Pro polymorphism in the NPY with produces a 9 .5 kb transcript, which appears in several tissues with alcohol consumption, but the evidence is scarce . In the Spanish Medi- different level of expression. Besides, the identification of multiple tran- terranean population, the Leu7Pro variant is not polymorphic . Thus, scripts in this gene suggest the presence of alternative splicing, a fea- our aim was to identify novel exonic variants in the NPY as well as the ture that has not been yet studied. Here, we report the first systematic study previously described intronic variants, and their association with analysis of the NIPBL splicing variants in human normal tissues . alcohol consumption in this population . NIPBL cDNA from adult brain, fetal skeletal muscle and leukocytes Methods: 911 subjects (321 men and 590 women) from the Spanish was amplified in various overlapping fragments, spanning exons 1 to Mediterranean population were recruited . Alcohol consumption and 47 . PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on agarose gel . demographic and lifestyle variables were measured . Nucleotide se- Additional bands of different length than expected were sequenced . quence determination and SNP analyses were carried out . Several novel splicing variants bearing one or more skipped exons Results: Only one exonic SNP was detected by direct sequencing were found, but only the variant with skipped exon 12 was found in all (1258G>A or rs9785023; allele frequency 0 .47) . From the intronic tissues analyzed. This finding was subsequently confirmed by cloning. markers chosen (483A>G or rs13235938, 2517A>G or rs4722342 and The variant with deletion of exon 43 was present only in adult brain . 7065A>G or rs 4722343), only the last ones were polymorphic (allele Our results provide a basis for more detailed studies of functional frequencies 0 .46 and 0 .40 respectively), and none of them were asso- significance of these transcripts and might expand our knowledge of ciated with alcohol consumption . However, the 1258G>A SNP was as- CDLS1 . sociated (recessive pattern) with higher alcohol intake in drinkers . This This work is supported by a grant from the Ministry of Health of Spain association was particularly relevant in men with a moderate intake (Ref. PI061343) and from the Diputación General de Aragón (Ref. (40±9 g/d in GG, 41±8 g/d in GA and 59±5 g/day in AA; p<0 .05) . B20) . Conclusions: The 1258G>A in the NPY is associated with alcohol con- sumption in the Mediterranean population . P07.094 NOTCH mutations in young adult patients with a first stroke: P07.096 The PORTYSTROKE study - screening genetic conditions in splitting of large and complex pedigrees for linkage analysis of PORTuguese Young STROKE patients quantitative traits S. Ferreira1, M. Viana-Baptista2, I. Costa3, J. M. Ferro4, J. P. Oliveira3, &. POR- A. V. Kirichenko, T. I. Axenovich; TYSTROKE Study Group5; Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Science, Novosibirsk, 1Faculdade de Medicina, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Russian Federation. Portugal, 3Faculty of Medicine, Porto, Portugal, 4Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Pedigree splitting is applied when large pedigrees are used for linkage Portugal, 5(NA), (NA), Portugal. analysis . Several algorithms of pedigree splitting have been proposed . Background They are adapted to MCMC, but not to Lander-Green based methods . Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts The latter methods are sensitive to the pedigree size . None of the ex- and Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a genetic disorder due to mu- isting methods restrict the fragment size, and thus, they do not guar- tations in the NOTCH3 gene, is associated with early onset of small- antee that all of the resultant sub-pedigrees can be efficiently analyzed vessel ischaemic cerebrovascular disease . The clinical spectrum of by the Lander-Green algorithm . Earlier we proposed a fast automatic CADASIL varies widely and the disease is probably under-diagnosed algorithm for splitting large pedigrees for subsequent Lander-Green in stroke patients . based analysis (Liu et al, 2008). The algorithm is specifically aimed to Methods deal with pedigrees obtained in disease-oriented studies in genetically Between 1/November/06 and 31/October/07, all patients aged 18-55 isolated populations, where affected individuals are remotely related to years presenting with a first stroke event to any of 12 major neurology each other through multiple lines of descent . hospital departments in Portugal were offered genetic screening for In contrast to pedigrees with rare diseases, in the pedigrees collected CADASIL. Strokes were classified according to usual clinical and brain for quantitative trait analysis many close relatives having measured imaging criteria. Mutational analysis was limited to PCR amplification phenotypes and genotypes are considered as individuals of interest . and sequencing of NOTCH3 exons 4, 11, 18/19, as these have been We present a graph theory based algorithm for automatic splitting such previously shown to contain ~80% of the mutations identified in Portu- pedigrees on the fragments of restricted size . This algorithm iteratively guese patients with CADASIL . selects the clique with maximum weight of its edges from the cliques Results of restricted size. Weight of edge is defined as kinship between two Out of a total of 625 eligible patients, 493 (78 .9%) consented to the ge- individuals corresponding to clique nodes . The algorithm is implement- netic analysis . Of these, 74% had ischaemic strokes, of which 28 .5% ed in a software package PedStr (http://mga .bionet .nsc .ru/soft/index . were cryptogenic . Seven different missense mutations in the NOTCH3 html) . gene were found in 8 patients (prevalence=1 .6%; 95%CI: 0 .8-3 .1%): We compared our program PedStr and the Greffa (Falchi et al, 2004) p .R163W; p .P167S; p .T577A; p .G595S; p .S978R (n=2); p .H981Y; program and demonstrated that linkage power calculated on the base p.R1036Q. There was no significant association with any particular of sub-pedigrees obtained by PedStr was higher than for sub-pedi- type of stroke . None of these patients had a previous diagnosis or grees obtained by Greffa . family history of CADASIL . Conclusion P07.097 The minimal estimate for the prevalence of NOTCH3 mutations among Association of interleukin-1 polymorphisms with periodontal Portuguese young adults presenting with first stroke is at least 1000 disease in mentally retarded times higher than the estimated population prevalence of CADASIL . F. S. Bayoumi, E. H. A. Abouel-Ezz, H. M. Goumaa; The spectrum of pathogenic NOTCH3 mutations may be more varied National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. than previously recognised . Association between Interleukin (IL-1) gene polymorphisms & in- creased susceptibility to periodontitis were suggested . The intent of P07.095 this study was determining prevalence of IL- 1 α & β genotype poly- Neuropeptide Y gene variation and association with alcohol morphisms among normal & mentally retarded Egyptian individuals . consumption in a spanish mediterranean population Thirty normal volunteers(NV) (15-30 y) & 25 mentally retarded individ- F. Frances, J. V. Sorli, O. Portolés, P. Guillem-Sáiz, J. I. González, D. Corella; uals (MR) (6-16 y) were subjected to dental examination with record- Preventive Medicine Dept. and CIBER obn, Valencia, Spain. ing Gingival index scores (GI). IL -1 α and IL-1β loci were genotyped Background and objective: Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a neurotrans- by standard PCR restriction fragment length polymorphism assay . mitter widely distributed in the central nervous system . Both intraa- Ten of (NV) showed good GI scores (70% were healthy & 30% had mygdalar injection and overexpression experiments in animals have initial periodontitis); .The remaining (20) had fair GI score (15 % with demonstrated that increases of NPY in the amygdala reduces alcohol initial periodontitis, 35% had moderate periodontitis&50% with severeNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  periodontitis);among these individuals, 30% were genotyped positive P07.100 for IL-1( 26.6 % were genotyped positive for IL-1 α & 3.3% for IL-1β) Associations between serotonin transporter gene SLCA .Non of (MR) had good GI score while 13 were fair GI (23 .1% had ini- polymorphism and level of intellectual development (iQ) of the tial periodontitis,53 .8%with moderate periodontitis&23 .1%with severe person periodontitis) & the rest (12) had bad GI score (41 .7 % had moderate O. Gumerova, E. V. Lekontsev, V. Y. Gorbunova; periodontitis & 58 .3 % had severe periodontitis) . From all MR 36% Bashkir State Pedagogical University it. M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. were genotyped positive for IL-1( 24 % were genotyped positive for INTRODUCTION: Serotonin transporter gene SLC6A4 (17q11 .1-12) IL-1 α and 12 % for IL-1β). is one of the basic genes, which define an overall performance of se- Data concluded the important role of polymorphism in genes of IL-1(IL- rotoninergic neuromediators system . Its functional condition can be 1α (+4845) & IL-1 β(+ 3953)alleles presence with periodontitis either in reflected on some aspects of intellectual activity of the person. normal or MR individuals & recommended their detection to determine METHODS: The level of intellectual development (IQ) is certain at 250 patient’s susceptibility for periodontitis . . Evaluation of role of other po- unrelated individuals in the age of 18-35 years by nonverbal Kettel tential candidate genes as contributors to periodontitis are needed . test . According to parameters IQ examinees are divided into three groups: P07.098 with a normal level of intellectual development (IQ within the limits of Frequency of the R229Q NPHs2 functional variant, associated 90-110 points), high (above 110 points) and low (below 90 points) . with increased risk for microalbuminuria, in Bulgarian Roma The analysis of genetic polymorphism 5-HTTLPR is carried out by a population method PCR . RESULTS: Genotypes 1)*L/*L, 2)*L/*S, 3)*S/*S met fre- O. Beltcheva1, P. Botev1, B. Zaharova2, A. Savov2, R. Kaneva1, I. Kremensky2; quency 1) 28%, 2) 42%, 3) 30% in group of comparison, 1) 21 .4%, 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Ge- 2) 59 .5%, 3) 19 .1% in group with high parameters IQ and 1) 33 .3%, netics Laboratory, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. 2) 41 .67%, 3) 25% in group with low level IQ . The analysis of asso- The cardio-vascular diseases are one of the leading causes for morbid- ciations has shown statistically significant distinctions in distribution of ity and mortality in the Western societies . Their major social and health- frequencies genotypes of gene SLC6A4 between group of comparison care system impact warrants the extensive efforts for identification of and group with high parameters IQ (χ2=8.313; P=0.017), owing to in- the genetic factors contributing to the predisposition to cardiovascular crease of frequency of genotype SLC6A4*L/*S (59 .5 % against 42 % events. Microalbuminuria, defined as urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio in group of comparison; P=0 .030; OR=1 .418; 95%CI 1 .069-1 .836) in of 0 .03 to 0 .299 mg/mg, is one of the recently recognised factors as- group of persons with high parameters IQ . sociated with increased risk of developing cardiovascular disorders in Is known, that the presence in genotype of allele SLC6A4*L provides the general population . Multiple genetic epidemiological studies have high level expression of serotonin transporter gene and the high in- shown that there are genetic causes associated with predisposition tensity of metabolism of serotonin, that is accelerating the process of to the excretion of abnormal amounts of albumin in the urine . One of pulse transmission through carrying intensification of serotonin from these is the R229Q functional variant in the podocin gene, NPHS2 . synaptic trough in presinaps . Pereira and co-authors have shown that R229Q is associated with a 2 .77-fold risk for developing microalbuminuric state even after adjust- P07.101 ment for age, ethnicity, hypertension, obesity, and diabetes (Pereira et Genetic variation at nine stR loci in Russian siberian population al ., 2004) . Since the distribution of this NPHS2 variant in the general O. Odinokova; population differs depending on ethnicity, we wanted to evaluate its fre- Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. quency among Bulgarian Roma - an isolated population, with unique STR loci represent a rich source of highly polymorphic markers for genetic background . We genotyped Roma and Bulgarian population medical, forensic and population studies . There are notable differ- control samples from the collection of the National Genetics Labora- ences in allele frequencies and heterozygosities between population tory and the Molecular Medicine Center . Our results indicated that the groups . We present here characteristics of the allelic polymorphism allele frequency of the R229Q variant in Roma (3 .4%; number of al- for nine STRs loci: D7S820, D3S1358, D5S818, D13S317, HumVWA, leles, n=204) was not significantly different from the one we saw in Bul- HumTHO1, HumF13B, HumLPL and HumCD4 in Russians (Cauca- garians (1 .3%; n=238) and from that previously shown for Caucasians sians) living in South-West Siberia . (3%, Franceschini et al . 2006) . Allele typing was performed using PCR and subsequent high-resolu- tion PAAG electrophoresis . We have analysed 320-378 DNA samples P07.099 from unrelated individuals for each STR-system . Nine alleles were investigation of the polymorphism of eight genes among identified in HumVWA (13-21 repeats, 139-171 bp), D5S818 (7-15 re- Russian population peats, 134-166 bp) loci; eight alleles were note in D3S1358 (13-20 re- S. E. Khalchitsky1, M. O. Mkheidze2; peats, 118-146 bp), D13S317 (8-15 repeats, 169-197 bp), HumTHO1 1Saint-Petersburg Scientific research institute of physical culture, St.Petersburg, (5-11 and 9 .3 repeats, 179-203 bp), HumCD4 (7-14 repeats, 130-165 Russian Federation, 2Medical Academy for postgraduate study, St.Petersburg, bp) loci, and seven alleles - in D7S820 (7-13 repeats, 219-243 bp), Russian Federation. HumF13B (6-12 repeats, 169-193 bp) and HumLPL (8-14 repeats, Investigation of the polymorphic human genes sheds light on ge- 109-133 bp) loci . The frequency data obtained can be used for com- netic structure of the different populations . Our study included eight parison to other populations . polymorphic genes (CNB, NFATC4, PGC1A, PGC1B, TFAM, VEGF, Genotype frequency distributions were consistent with Hardy-Wein- UCP2, and UCP3) . Well-known standard methods for DNA analysis berg equilibrium for every STR-systems . The levels of observed het- were used . The study population consisted of 1057 residents of Rus- erozygosity were high: 0,842 (HumTHO1), 0,828 (D13S317), 0,813- sian Federation (female individuals - 574 aged from 16 to 19 yr, male 0,812 (HumVWA, D7S820), 0,778-0,770 (D3S1358, D5S818), 0,701 individuals - 483 aged from 17 to 20 yr) . Rates of alleles investigated (HumCD4), 0,694 (HumF13B) and 0,666 (HumLPL) . are the following: CNB I - 91 .5 per cent, NFATC4 Gly - 43 .6 per cent, Polymorphism information content (PIC), discrimination power (pD), PGC1A Gly - 64 .9 per cent, PGC1B Pro - 4 .9 per cent, TFAM Thr - 9 .1 power of exclusion (W) and marching probability (pM) were performed per cent, VEGF C- 24 .5, UCP2 Val -36 .4 per cent and UCP3 T - 23 .8 for each locus as indicators of their discrimination potential in human per cent identification and paternity analysis. Forensic efficiency data suggest that investigated markers are very discriminating in Russian Siberian population .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.102 cose 5,62±0,19, BMI 30,28±0,59 kg/m2, WC 92,11±1,14 cm; man: tCh comparative studying of polymorphism 3`UtR genes-candidates 6,24±0,25 mmol/l, HDL 1,24±0,08 mmol/l, LDLP 4,13±0,25 mmol/l, TG multifactor diseases in the siberian populations 3,17±0,86 mmol/l, CRP 6,82±2,62 mg/l, glucose 6,41±0,51 mmol/l) . N. P. Babushkina, L. A. Koneva, A. A. Rudko, E. Y. Bragina, A. N. Kucher, V. Careers of V162 allele have higher tCh, LDLP and lower HDL val- P. Puzyrev; ues, but the difference did not reach statistical significance. The V162 Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. careers had higher glucose levels, but the difference did not reach Polymorphisms in 3`UTR in TNFAR (rs36188382), IL4RA (rs2074570), statistical significance (LL162 - 5,93 mmol/l, LV162 - 5,41 mmol/l, p > IL12B (rs3212227), IL12RB1 (rs3746190) and IL12A (rs568408) have 0,05) . No difference between the genotypic groups was observed for been studied in several Siberian populations (Russians, Buryats, Tu- CRP(LL162: 6,24±1,05 mg/l; LV162: 4,69±1,40 mg/l; p > 0,05) . vinians, Yakuts, 383 individuals in total) . Deletion in 3`UTR gene TN- Conclusion . The V162 allele frequency was 0,076, similar to that re- FAR has not been revealed in all investigated groups . This can sug- ported in ischemic heart disease and diabetes mellitus patients and gest that the deletion has either very low polymorphism level, or it is healthy European man. No significant differences were observed be- a mutation . For other loci, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was observed tween the presence of V162 allele and changes in blood lipids, glucose for all genes except IL12A (rs568408) in Buryats (heterozygotes ex- levels and body fatness measurements . cess) . Russians vs all other (Mongoloid) ethnic groups have shown significant differences in allele frequencies of three SNPs: in Russians, P07.105 minor allele frequencies were 0 .042, 0 .229, 0 .189 for IL4RA, IL12A, minor CYPB involvement in the molecular basis of primary IL12B accordingly, where as in Buryats they were 0 .105, 0 .195, 0 .380; congenital glaucoma in Bulgarian Gypsies in Tuvinians 0 .109, 0 .292, 0 .359; in Yakuts 0 .177, 0 .174, 0 .286 . The K. N. Kamenarova1, P. Sivadorai2, S. Cherninkova3, S. Bouwer2, D. Angeli- maximum difference was observed between Russians and Yakuts and cheva2, P. Seeman4, K. Hollingsworth5, V. Mihaylova6, A. Oscar3, G. Dimitrova3, minimum difference was between Tuvinians and Buryats . In contrast, R. Kaneva1, I. Tournev3, L. Kalaydjieva2; locus IL12RB1 (rs3746190) has shown maximum differences between 1Molecular Medicine Centre, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Centre for Medical Research and Tuvinians and Buryats (minor allele frequency 0 .495 and 0 .274 ac- WA Institute for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, Perth, cordingly) . This is additional evidence once again about complex eth- Australia, 3Department of Neurology and Department of Ophthalmology, Al- nogeny and different contributions of European and Asian components exadrovska Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Child in their gene pools . Neurology, 2nd School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Repub- lic, 5Neurodegenerative Disorders Centre, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre, P07.103 Perth, Australia, 6Department of Neurology, Alexadrovska Hospital, Medical the analysis of cFtR mutation frequencies in different University, Sofia, Bulgaria. populations of Russia Primary Congenital Glaucoma (PCG) is characterised by locus and al- N. V. Petrova, E. E. Timkovskaya, R. A. Zinchenko; lelic heterogeneity . Mutations in the cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. gene contribute between 20-30% in cases from ethically mixed popu- 3739 healthy donors from eight regions of European part of Rus- lations and between 50-80% in populations where consanguinity is sian Federation were analyzed for seven CFTR mutations common . The Roma/Gypsies are considered to be a rare example of a (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), F508del, 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2184insA, founder CYP1B1 mutation, with E387K (identified in a Slovak Roma), 394delTT, 3821delT) accounted for 67% of CF alleles . 15 carriers accounting for 100% of disease alleles . In the current study of 21 of F508del mutation, 1 carrier of CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation and Gypsy PCG patients from Bulgaria and of 715 unscreened controls 1 1677delTA carrier were identified in the samples of 1324 Russians from the general Gypsy population unusual genetic heterogeneity was form Rostov, Tver, Pskov and Kirov provinces . Three F508del carriers revealed . In the sample of affected subjects from 16 families, we iden- and one CFTRdele2,3(21kb) carrier were revealed among 780 Chu- tified five different CYP1B1 mutations - four known (E229K, R368H, vashes from Chuvashia, two F508del carriers - among 613 Udmurts E387K and R390C) and one novel and potentially pathogenic (F445I), form Udmurtia and one CFTRdele2,3(21kb) carrier - in 517 Bashkirs which together account for ~30% of disease alleles . Three of the muta- from Bashkortostan . In the sample of 505 Maris from Mary El none of tions have been previously found in PCG patients from India . E387K the analyzed CFTR mutations was found . The population frequency was rare in both the patient and the control group (carrier rate 0 .56%), of F508del mutation is 0,00525 (0,00401÷0,00676) in Russians from indicating that its high frequency in the Slovak Roma is most likely a European region, 0,00112 (0,00006÷0,00530) in Udmurts, 0,00192 product of local founder effect . Sequencing of MYOC and genotyping (0,00052÷0,00496) in Chuvashs, low than 0,00458 in Bashkirs and low polymorphisms linked to GLC3B and GLC3C did not support the in- than 0,00296 in Maris . The differences in F508del mutation frequen- volvement of these loci, previously implicated in PCG pathogenesis . cies between Russians and Maries, Russians and Chuvashs, Rus- The genetic basis of PCG in the Gypsies thus remains not completely sians and Bashkirs are significant at 5% degree, between Russians resolved .The characteristics of the Gypsies as a founder population and Udmurts - at 10% degree . could facilitate the identification of novel unidentified PCG gene yet. P07.104 P07.106 L162V polymorphism of PPAR-alpha gene in patients with Evaluation of a powerful screening tool for hereditary abdominal obesity prosopagnosia O. D. Belyaeva1, A. E. Garanina1, V. V. Ugolnikov1, O. A. Bercovich1, V. I. Lari- I. Kennerknecht1, H. Wang2, T. Elze3, B. Welling4, V. Wong5, J. Liu6; onova2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Mün- 1IP Pavlov State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, Rus- ster, Germany, 2Social Science Department, Chang Chun Taxation College, sian Federation, 2State Pediatric Medical Academy of Saint-Petersburg, Saint- Jilin, China, 3Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig, Petersburg, Russian Federation. Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Mün- Aim . To evaluate the frequency of V162 allele of PPAR-a gene and de- ster, Münster, Germany, 5Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, termine the distribution of L162V genotypes in patients with abdominal The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China, 6State obesity . Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal Uni- Methods . 26 males (BMI 30,58±0,80 kg/m2, waist circumference (WC) versity, Beijing, China. 105,56±2,23 cm), 53 females (BMI 30,28±0,59 kg/m2, WC 92,11±1,14 Prosopagnosia (PA) or face blindness is characterized by a highly se- cm) entered the study (44,48±0,99 years) . Genotypes were determined lective impairment in recognition of faces . Longest and best known by polymerase chain reaction with subsequent restriction analysis . Bio- is the acquired form after e .g . brain injuries, strokes or atrophy of the chemical components were measured by enzymatic methods . right-occipito-temporal cortex . Recently, we could show that (1) the Results . Polymorphisms were determined in 79 participants . The V162 congenital form, in the absence of any traumatic event, is highly fre- allele frequency was 0,076 . Plasma lipids, CRB, glucose, BMI and WC quent, with a prevalence of around 2% worldwide, that (2) it almost did not differ in man and woman regardless of PPAR-a genotype (wom- always runs in families, and that (3) most surprisingly segregation an: total cholesterol (tCh) 5,66±0,17, HDL 1,54±0,06 mmol/l, LDLP pattern is fully compatible with autosomal dominant inheritance . We 3,80±0,17 mmol/l, TG 1,48±0,09 mmol/l, CRP 5,82±0,69 mg/l, glu- therefore coined the term hereditary PA (HPA, Kennerknecht et al .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  2006 AJMG 140A1617ff) . P07.109 Diagnosis of PA is generally established by in-depth testing with stan- RETN polymorphisms (−420C>G and IVS2+181G>A) in the dardized test batteries for visual cognition . As these time consuming turkish population tests are not suitable for large scale screening, a questionnaire based N. Erginel-Ünaltuna1, M. Poda1, A. Onat2, N. Coban1, F. Guclu-Geyik1, G. screening was introduced . In a pilot study in India and Hong Kong we Can3; could show that only a few selected questions easily identify subjects 1Istanbul University, DETAE, Genetics Dept., Istanbul, Turkey, 2Turkish Cardiol- highly suspicious for PA (Kennerknecht et al . 2007, JHG 52:230ff) . ogy Association, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical These tools were then applied at two Chinese Universities (Beijing Faculty, Dept. of Public Health, Istanbul, Turkey. Normal University, Chang Chun Taxation College) . 2,000 question- Resistin hormone (RETN) plays an important role in the insulin re- naires with a five-point-rating scale for 21 test items regarding facial sistance mechanism . The effects of the two variants in the resistin and object recognition as well as some distractors were distributed . gene (RETN −420C>G and IVS2+181G>A) on metabolic syndrome Those students with the highest scores were then invited for diagnostic and cardiovascular events have been studied in the Turkish popula- interview . When starting with the highest scores, every 2nd student tion . 208 healthy individuals, 360 with metabolic syndrome and 75 was a prosopagnosic . Among a total of 40 students who scored above subjects with heart disease were genotyped . The genotype and al- 2 S .D . more than 1/4 (n=11, 27 .5%) were prosopagnosics . lele frequencies of the RETN polymorphisms in the Turkish population have been determined for the −420C>G (CC: 47%, GC: 44%, GG: 9%) P07.107 and IVS2+181G>A (GG: 52%, GA: 39%, AA: 9%) polymorphisms . The A new approach concerning the registries for rare diseases genotype and allele distributions have been found to be similar to other A. Tarniceru, M. Puiu, M. Serban; Europen populations . University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. In our study group the IVS2+181AA genotype has been found to The registries for rare diseases follow to obtain epidemiological infor- be associated with low HDL-cholesterole levels (p=0 .035) . The AA mation useful to understand the dimension of the problem . Knowing the genotype and dyslipidemia showed an association in both obese prevalence of rare diseases is an essential aspect for establishing the (p=0 .012) and non-obese men (p=0 .016) . In the obese group, the car- most adequate methods for detection, prevention and management to riers of IVS2+181AA and AG genotypes had higher trigliceride levels guide the health policy and the need for specialized personnel in differ- (p=0 .044) than the GG genotype . In men, higher triglyceride levels ent regions . In addition the registries for rare diseases represent data have been associated to -420GG genotype (p=0 .029) . Furthermore, in bases useful for research . It is necessary to ask for a well-informed obese men, the -420GG genotype has also been associated with dys- consent which will allow using the recorded data in registers and also lipidemia (p= 0 .036) . On the other hand, the IVS2+181A (p=0 .0001) for future researches . The informed consent must be obtained after a and -420G (p=0 .009) allele carriers had lower log folate levels in the previous preparation and notification of the patient and/or his family. In whole study population . this way they will have all the information connected to the research in This study indicates that the variations in the RETN gene (−420C>G which they are involved: results, risks, limits and benefits. ve IVS2+181G>A) may effect lipid and the folate levels . Particularly, The registries for rare diseases have to be adapted, the criteria and dyslipidemia was present more frequently in IVS2+181AA and -420GG the tracking data have to be standardized in all European countries in genotype-carrying obese men, hence they may further contribute to order to have as many cases possible . For this reason it is absolutely MI risk . necessary to create a new codification system approved by all coun- tries, which will encode all known rare diseases . P07.110 the Bayash Roma: phylogenetic dissection of Eurasian paternal P07.108 genetic elements Genetic characterization in 301 spanish Families Affected by I. Martinovic Klaric, M. Pericic Salihovic, L. Barac Lauc, B. Janicijevic; Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia. A. Avila-Fernandez, E. Vallespin, D. Cantalapiedra, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, J. The Bayash consist of numerous and small Romani groups speaking Aguirre-Lamban, A. Gimenez, M. Lopez-Martinez, I. Lorda-Sanchez, M. Trujillo- different dialects of the Romanian language and living dispersedly in Tiebas, C. Ayuso; Croatia, Hungary, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Romania, Bulgar- Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. ia, and to the lesser extent in Macedonia, Greece, Ukraine, Slovakia Introduction . Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a genetically heterogeneous and Slovenia . Larger Bayash groups migrated to Croatia most likely disorder characterized by progressive loss of vision . We used a geno- during the 19th century, after abolition of slavery in Romania . Molecu- typing microarray (Asper) to study proved or possible recessive cases lar architecture and the origin of the Croatian Bayash paternal gene of RP, in order to optimise the molecular diagnosis of the disease . pool was addressed by analysing 151 Bayash Y chromosomes from Patients and Methods . 301 unrelated Spanish families containing 10 two Croatian regions, 332 Y chromosomes from Romani populations patients diagnosed as LCA, 96 as early onset Autosomal Recessive across Europe, 814 Y-chromosomes from non-Romani host popula- Retinitis Pigmentosa (onset <10 years of age) and 195 as non early- tions living in Southeastern, Southern and Eastern Europe as well as onset ARRP (onset >10 years of age) . The families were also divided with 1680 Y-chromosomes from South Asian populations . The Bayash by genetic classification (138 autosomal recessive cases and 163 in Croatia represent one population of largely shared paternal genetic sporadic cases) . All of them were analysed by a genotype microarray history characterized by substantial percentage (44%) of common H1- specific for arRP (Asper), which tested more than 500 mutations in M82 and E3b1-M78 lineages . Relatively ancient expansion signals 16 recessive RP genes: CERKL, CNGA1, CNGB1, MERKT, PDE6A, and limited diversity of Indian specific H1-M82 lineages imply descent PDE6B, PNR, RDH12, RGR, PLBP1, SAG, TULP1, CRB1, RPE65, from closely related paternal ancestors who could have been settled USH2A and USH3A. in the Indian subcontinent between 7th and 9th centuries AD . Minimal Results . No mutation was found in LCA group . The mutation frequen- time divergence of the Bayash subpopulations is consistent with their cy was slightly higher in non early-onset (21,5%) than in early onset putative migratory split within Romania towards Wallachia and Trans- (16,6%) families but these differences weren’t significatives. The al- ilvania . Substantial percentage of E3b1 lineages and high associated lele frequencies were: CERKL 2,9% (18/602), CNGA1 0,9% (6/602), microsatellite variance in the Bayash men is a reflection of significant PDE6A 0,6% (4/602), PDE6B 0,3% (2/602), RLBP1 0,3% (2/602), admixture with majority populations from the Vardar-Morava-Danube SAG 0,5% (3/602), CRB1 0,6% (4/602) and USH2A 7,8% (47/602) . catchment basin - possibly a common paternal signature of Romani There weren’t significative differences between autosomal recessive populations in Southeastern Europe . Additional traces of admixture and sporadic cases . are evident in the modest presence of typical European haplogroups . Conclusion. The using of the genotype microarray is the first step in molecular diagnosis in Spanish families with Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa . USH2A is the main gene responsible followed by p .Arg257ter mutation in CERKL gene in Spanish population . 95% sporadic cases are inherited as an recessive form .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.111 Biologia Evolutiva. Universitat Pompeu Fabra. Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003, Analysis of Polymorphism of the cAG Repeats in the Barcelona, Spain. spinocerebellar Ataxia type 1 (scA1) Gene in Human Human Y-chromosome short tandem repeat (Y-STR) markers show Populations of the Volga-Ural Region a high level of polymorphism and a significant degree of discrimina- E. Mingazova, E. Khusnutdinova, I. Khidiyatova; tion between individuals . Analysis of human Y-STR polymorphism has Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. become a very useful tool both in evolutionary studies and in forensic Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 1(SCA1) is a neurodegenerative disease, casework, due in part to the loci being recombination free during meio- is characteristic at the molecular level by CAG repeat expansions on sis and paternally inheritance. In order to define the Y-chromosome 6p23 in the SCA1 gene . Distribution of normal alleles of CAG repeats genetic structure in Tunisian population, 17 Y-STRs were typed in in SCA1 gene was analyzed in populations of the Volga-Ural region, 159 unrelated healthy males in two ethnic groups (‘‘Andalusians’’ and including Tatars, Russians, Maris, Udmurts, Komis, Chuvashes, three Berber) and one cosmopolitan population (Tunis) from Tunisia, using ethnogeographical groups of Bashkirs and two ethnogeographical AmpFLSTR® Yfiler™ PCR Amplification Kit (AB Applied Biosystems). groups of Mordovians . 13 alleles (8-12 in different populations), con- Allele and haplotype frequencies, standard diversity indices, pairwise taining 24-37 trinucleotide repeats were found as a result of 956 DNA genetic distances (RST) and analysis of molecular variance (AMO- samples analysis . The allele frequency distribution showed two the VA) were calculated with the software Arlequin version 2 .000 . A total most frequent alleles corresponding to 31CAG repeats with the fre- number of 111 haplotypes were identified by the 17 Y-STR loci in our quency varied from 0,161 in Tatars to 0,328 in Chuvashes, and 32CAG study sample and 91 haplotypes were unique . All the groups analysed repeats - from 0,152 in Mordovians erza to 0,425 in Chuvashes . Al- showed high haplotype diversities, the highest value being observed lele with large number of repeats (CAG) was found in Bashkirs from in the ‘‘Andalusians’’ sample: 0 .9924 +/- 0 .0104 for ‘‘Cosmopolitan’’; 37 the Abzelilovskii, Burzanskii regions, Mordovians erza with frequency 0 .9765 +/- 0 .0132 for Berbers from Sened; 0 .9886 +/- 0 .0131 for Ber- of 0,008, 0,005, 0,022 . Transitional alleles with number of repeats bers from Chenini-Douiret; 0 .8367 +/- 0 .0547 for Berbers from Jeradou (CAG) are unstable triplet repeats and can given subsequent muta- and 0 .9940 +/- 0 .0095 for Andalusians . The highest diversity revealed 37-39 tion. Allele frequency distribution of SCA1 gene is significantly hetero- for Chenini-Douiret using this Y-STR is not expected, as compared to geneity . The observed heterozygosity was the highest (99%) in Bash- mtDNA or autosomic markers analysis . The hierarchical analysis of kirs from the Abzelilovskii region and the lowest (44%) in Mordovians variance carried out between the Berber and Arabic-speaking groups erza; the average heterozygosity was 73,6%, and allows to consider failed to demonstrate any significant differentiation between them. this polymorphic DNA locus to be a highly informative genetic marker These results corroborate the absence of overall genetic differentia- for populations . At present in the Bashkortostan Republic (Russia, tion between Berbers and Arabs in Tunisia . South Ural, population 4069784 people) 10 families with progressive autosomal-dominant spinocerebellar ataxias were revealed, and in 2 P07.114 of the examined families revealed the expansion of (CAG)n-repeats in Population data on the X chromosome short tandem repeat loci SCA1 gene . DXs9895, GAtA172D05, DXs6810, DXs6803 and HPRt in croatia K. Crkvenac Gornik1, K. Štingl2, Z. Grubić2, I. Tonković Đurišević1, L. Letica1, M. P07.112 Burek1, R. Lasan1, D. Mužinić1, D. Begović1; DNA copy number analysis in a case-control study of 1Division of Metabolic and Genetic Diseases, Clinic of Pediatrics, University schizophrenia Hospital Centre Zagreb, Croatia, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Tissue Typing Centre, Uni- F. Torri1, S. Lupoli2, S. Potkin3, E. Salvi1, J. Turner3, G. Guffanti1, A. Orro4, J. versity Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. Fallon3, C. Barlassina1, D. Cusi1, F. Macciardi1; Due to its high polymorphism, the analysis of Short Tandem Repeat 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2INSPE, Milan, Italy, 3Dept. of Psychiatry & (STR) markers using the PCR method has become a widely applied Neuroscience, UCI, Irvine, CA, United States, 4CILEA, Segrate, Milan, Italy. technique in forensic individual identification, rapid detection of chro- Recent studies have highlighted DNA copy-number variations (CNVs) mosome aneuploidies in prenatal and postnatal diagnosis and paterni- as a largely under-explored source of human genetic variation, which ty testing . Until now a large number of autosomal and Y-chromosomal could be responsible for the development of complex disorders . Ac- markers has been forensically evaluated and used for various purpos- cording to this hypothesis, evaluation of DNA copy number in schizo- es, but the application of X-chromosomal markers has played only a phrenia may yield insights into the discovery of genetic risk factors for minor role in forensic practice so far . The X-STR loci (DXS9895, GA- this disease (as aberrations in genes involved in glutamate signalling TA172D05, DXS6810, DXS6803 and HPRT) were investigated in male suggested in a recent report1), as CNVs can also be transmitted as (N=90) and female (N=93) population samples from Croatia . Samples mendelian traits2 . were collected from randomly selected unrelated healthy individuals . We have assayed 317 .511 SNPs in 172 DNA samples from a case- No deviation from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium could be detected control study of schizophrenia, including 91 controls and 82 schizo- and allele frequencies showed similar distribution in male and female phrenics, representing the first wave of a much larger sample, using samples . With the exception of DXS6810 locus for which only 6 alleles the Illumina HumanHap300 Genotyping BeadChip® . In an effort to were observed and PIC value lover than 0 .75 was calculated, all other examine individual chromosomes for structural mutation, we used two loci have demonstrated sufficient polymorphism and PIC value to be different classes of algorithm: cnvPartition (circular binary segmenta- considered valuable in future forensic analyses . tion algorithm) implemented in BeadStudio v3 .0 .22 and quantiSNP3 (Objective Bayes Hidden Markov Model) . P07.115 Statistical analyses performed on genotyping data-sets of our study Epidemiology of monogenic hereditary skeletal diseases in revealed that the overall distribution of CNV assignments is signifi- Rostov region of Russian Federation cantly different between schizophrenic patients and controls, with the R. A. Valkov1, T. I. Valkova2, S. S. Amelina2, R. A. Zinchenko3; main difference observed for duplications, which are more frequent in 1Railroad clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Rostov re- schizophrenics than in controls . gional clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 3Research Center REFERENCES: for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. 1 .Wilson et al .,Hum . Mol . Gen . 15, 743-749, 2006 Monogenic hereditary skeletal diseases have many various clinical 2 . Sebat J . et al ., Science 316, 445-49, 2007 forms and characterized by genetic heterogeneity . The main purpose 3 . Colella S . et al ., Nucleic Acids Research 1-13, 2007 of our research was determination of hereditary factor’s role in com- mon structure of skeletal diseases, and theirs prevalence at popula- P07.113 tion of Rostov region of Russian Federation . 320925 people of eight Analysis of Y-chromosomal stR haplotypes in two ethnic area of Rostov region were examining . All hereditary skeletal diseases groups and one cosmopolitan population from tunisia were dividing into isolated and syndromic forms . In the results 336 K. Fadhlaoui-Zid1, I. Mendizabal2, H. Khodjet Ell Khill1, B. Martinez-Cruz2, M. patients of 226 families are had hereditary skeletal diseases . It was Ben Amor1, A. Ben Ammar Elgaaeid1, D. Comas2; 36% of all patients with hereditary diseases . The total prevalence rate 1Laboratoire de Génétique, Immunologie et Pathologies humaines. Faculté of hereditary skeletal diseases in Rostov region was 1:950 persons . At des Sciences de Tunis. Université Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Unitat de that, the prevalence rate of isolated forms was 1:2700, and syndromicNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology 0 forms - 1:1600 . The most frequently autosomal dominant diseases Russians and other European populations, our results emphasize were Ehlers-Danlos’ syndrome -1:6400, Marfan’s syndrome - 1:20000, need for further investigations of prevalence of candidate SNPs for idiopathic scoliosis - 1:20000, polydactylia postaxialis - 1:21400, syn- common diseases in different populations . Differences in functional dactyly, type I - 1:26700, osteogenesis imperfecta - 1:32000 . In auto- SNPs frequencies suggest population specific character of genetic somal recessive, it was Spondiloepiphysial dysplasia Tarda - 1:64200, structure of predisposition to common diseases which should be taken Spondiloepiphysial dysplasia with mental retardation - 1:80200, Langer into account during development of genetic tests for common diseases type mesomelic dysplasia - 1:107000 . In X-linked, it was Aarskog syn- predisposition in different regions . drome - 1:53500, Coffin-Lowry syndrome - 1:53500, Proud syndrome - 1:80200 . Therefore, our research is enabling to improve genetic con- P07.118 sultation’s activity, directed to decrease of hereditary disease’s pres- Application of mLPA in multiplex sNP genotyping for genetic sure in Rostov region of Russian Federation . epidemiology C. Brasch-Andersen1,2, L. Christiansen3,2; P07.116 1Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Den- smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome mutations in recurrent miscarriage mark, Odense, Denmark, 2Dept. of Biochemistry, Pharmacology and Genetics, E. Dimitriadou1, I. Lalou1, S. Kalantaridou2, M. Pavlou2, A. Sotiriadis2, M. Tzou- Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 3Epidemiology, Institute of fi3, I. Georgiou2, M. Witsch-Baumgartner4, M. Syrrou1; Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. 1Genetics Unit, Laboratory of General Biology, Medical School, University of A method for simple and cost-effective medium-scale genotyping in Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medi- large epidemiological studies is often needed, for instance when inves- cal School, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 3Child Health Department, tigating the entire genetic variation in a single or a few genes . Medical School, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 4Department for The multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay (MLPA) Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck, Austria. was initially developed for detection of DNA deletions or duplications, Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is defined as >3 (or >2) consecutive preg- but is also suitable for genotyping single point polymorhisms (SNPs) . nancy losses before 20 weeks of gestation and affects 1-3% of all We designed an allele discrimination assay for simultaneous genotyp- women . More than 40% of RM are of unknown etiology and assumed ing of at least 10-20 SNPs in a large number of samples using the to be genetic in origin . MLPA technology . Based on the MLPA probe design protocol we con- Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS, MIM270400) is an autosomal structed 3 probes per SNP: 2 allele specific and 1 locus specific, which recessive disorder of cholesterol biosynthesis caused by mutations in after ligation were PCR amplified and size-separated using capillary the gene DHCR7 . The prevalence of SLOS ranges between 1:15000 electrophoresis. In addition to the template specific sequence each of and 1:60000 in European populations, but there is a discrepancy be- the MLPA probes contain a variable length stuffer sequence enabling tween expected and observed incidence of SLOS mutations that might both SNPs and alleles to be discriminated by size, and a primer spe- be in part explained by first trimester miscarriages of affected fetuses. cific sequence common to all probes, thus permitting multiplex PCR Aim: 1 .To compare the prevalence of common SLOS mutations in using only one primer set . Greek women with unexplained RM and in a control group . 2 . To We applied the method on two genes for which the genetic variation correlate common SLOS mutations with RM in order to conclude if was covered by 12 and 19 tagging SNPs, respectively . Genotyping screening for common SLOS mutations in couples with >2 spontane- results were verified using CEPH controls with known genotypes. ous miscarriages should be added in the evaluation of RM . Applying the MLPA method will enable most labs to genotype SNPs in Study group: 124 women aged <41 years, with >2 consecutive first tri- a medium scale without investing in new lab equipment as the method mester miscarriages . Controls: 75 healthy age-matched women, with only requires a PCR machine and a capillary electrophoresis system . proven fertility . The three most common for the Greek population mu- tations of the DHCR7 gene (IVS8-1G>C, p .Trp151X and p .Thr93Met) P07.119 were studied using allele-specific PCR. Large scale screening for spinal muscular atrophy (smA) - effect Two out of 124 women with unexplained RM were heterozygous for of ethnicity on frequency of exon 7 deletion v.s duplication null IVS8-1G>C mutation . No carriers were found among the control R. Sukenik-Halevy1,2, R. Pesso3, N. Garbian3, N. Magal1,2, M. Shohat1,2,3; group . This is an ongoing study . 1Recanati Institute of Medical Genetics, Petach Tikva, Israel, 2Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3Maccabi Health Insurance Genetic Institutes, P07.117 Rehovot, Israel. Prevalence of functional sNPs in candidate genes for common Approximately 95% of SMA patients have homozygous deletions of diseases in four siberian populations exon 7 and/or 8 of the SMN1 gene and 5% are compound for deletion M. V. Golubenko1, M. S. Nazarenko1, A. N. Kucher1, E. Y. Bragina1, N. P. of exon 7 and a point mutation . The carrier frequency varies between Babushkina1, I. A. Goncharova1, V. V. Pogrebenkova1, O. Y. Bychkova1, O. G. 1:150 and 1:35 . Ivanova1, T. V. Zheykova1, I. V. Saltykova2, A. R. Simakina2, L. A. Koneva1, S. V. We undertook a survey to assess the carrier rate among healthy in- Buikin1, O. A. Makeeva1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; dividuals with no family history, evaluate the false negative rate (indi- 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State viduals with three copies of exon 7), and determine any ethnic differ- Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. ences . Genetics of common diseases deals with common polymorphisms (in We analysed data from two medical centres in Israel that conduct car- most cases SNPs) . There are differences in the common diseases rier screening among the normal population using the MLPA kit . We prevalence between human populations which may be explained in studied the copy number of exons 7 and 8 and divided the subjects into part by variation in frequencies of some predisposing SNPs depend- six ethnic groups: Ashkenazi, North African, Iranian/Iraqi, Yemenite, ing on population descent . Furthermore, linkage disequilibrium is also Balkan, other Jewish . Statistical analysis was performed using chi- known to be different in diverse populations . We studied twelve known square . candidate genes for common diseases of cardiovascular and immune Between February-October 2007, 7308 subjects were tested in Mac- systems, in four Siberian populations of different ethnic origin, namely cabi clinics and 1729 at Rabin Medical Center . The carrier rate (dele- Tuvinians, Yakuts, Buryats, and Russians (384 individuals in total) . tion of exon 7) was 1:62 and was not statistically different among the ACE, AGTR1, NOS3, GNB3, TNF and LTA, TNFRSF1A, ADRB2, IL4, various ethnic groups . IL4RA, IL12A, IL12B, IL12RB1 genes were studied . Few SNPs in each Duplication of exon 7 was found in 1 in 9 individuals - a false negative gene were picked for genotyping on the basis of known associations rate of 5.5%. There was a significant difference between the ethnic with common diseases and/or possible functional effect . We have groups: 12% among Ashkenazim, 4 .4% among North African Jews found significant differences between populations in both frequencies and 6%-8% in other groups (p<0 .001) . This difference was also found and LD estimates for most of genotyped SNPs . Few SNP positions for duplication of exon 8 . were not polymorphic in our samples. We confirmed the fact that some This study emphasizes the importance of determining the false nega- SNPs within ACE, NOS3, TNF, IL4RA genes are in strong linkage tive rate for each ethnic group as it may vary markedly . The discrep- disequilibrium. Taking into account that significant differences were ancy between the rates of exon 7 deletions vs . duplications may be found between related populations of Asian origin, as well as between explained by the genetic disadvantage of deletions .Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.120 P07.122 Prevalence of cAt-interruptions in (cAG)n-repeat region in the Association analysis of tryptophan Hydroxylase-1 gene (tPH1) gene for SCA in siberian populations. and suicidal behavior in Russian population L. A. Koneva1, N. P. Babushkina1, M. S. Kuharskiy1, N. R. Maksimova2, A. N. Z. Khalilova1, D. Gaysina2, A. Kazantseva1, E. Khusnutdinova1; Kucher1; 1Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Psychia- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Yakuts Scientific try, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom. Centre, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. Suicide is an important public health problem, ranking among the top Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is a rare autosomal-dominant 10 causes of death for individuals of all ages . There is strong neu- neurogical disorder caused by expansion of an unstable (CAG)-re- robiological evidence showing that serotonergic system dysfunction peats in gene for ataxin-1 (6p22-23) . Normal repeat tract (in healthy predisposes to suicidal behavior . Tryptophan hydroxylase, the rate people) consists of 6-37 triplets with 1-3 CAT-interruptions whereas limiting enzyme in serotonin biosynthesis, is one of the most important mutant alleles contain pure repeat tracts from 39-70 CAG . CAT-inter- regulating factors in the serotonergic system . The aim of our study was ruptions are thought to serve as stabilizing factor . to examine the association of four single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs We have studied frequency of alleles without CAT-interruptions among 4537731, rs211105, rs1800532 and rs7933505) of TPH1 gene and at- normal size alleles from different Siberian populations (855 individu- tempted suicide . DNA samples of 312 cases (101- male, 152- female), als): Yakuts (the highest level of SCA1 accumulation) and Buryats, Tu- who had suicide attempts, and 346 control subjects (194- men, 152- vinians, Russians, Tatars, Kirghiz, Altaians and Khantys (without SCA1 women) from Bashkortostan (Russia) were genotyped using PCR- accumulation). It is the first estimation of prevalence of homogeneous RFLP technique . The distribution of allelic and genotype frequencies (CAG)n of normal length in SCA1 gene in different ethnic groups of was in accordance with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. No significant Siberia with distinct contribution of European and Asian components differences in either allele or genotype frequencies of rs1800532 and in the their gene pools . SfaN I restriction method was used to identify rs7933505 polymorphisms of TPH1 gene were found between suicidal the interruptions . High frequency of chromosomes with normal homo- and control groups . In a male group there was a tendency of under- geneous CAG repeat in Yakuts (15 .66%), Tuvinians (17 .9%), Kirghiz representation of the *G/*G genotype of rs 4537731 polymorphism in (13 .57%), Altaians (9 .56%), Buryats (9 .51%) and rather low preva- suicide group compared to that in control group (11% vs 21%; X2 = lence of such individuals among Tatars (7 .15%), Russians (3 .75%) 3 .81; p = 0 .05; df = 1) . For the females *G/*G genotype of rs211105 and Khantys (2 .83%) is revealed . Thus, high frequency of individuals polymorphism was reported to be protective marker of suicidal behav- without CAT-interruptions in normal length alleles in the populations ior (X2 = 5 .66; p = 0 .017; df = 1; OR = 0 .226; 95%CI 0 .06-0 .85) . The without SCA1 accumulation has been shown. This finding puts a ques- results suggest sex-related differences in the contribution of the TPH1 tion concerning role of CAT-interruptions in (CAG)n-expansion in the gene to susceptibility for suicidal behavior . gene ataxin-1 . The work was supported by RSCI grant 06-06-00163 . The study was supported by RFBR grant N 06-04-49086 . P07.123 P07.121 New candidate gene BGALNT is not associated with type 1 simulation of dynamic spread of triplet Repeat Expansion diabetes Diseases in human populations on example of spinocerebellar T. Zemunik1, V. Torlak2, V. Škrabić2, Z. Kačić3, J. Jakšić4, G. Stipančić5, A. ataxia type i Špehar6, A. Markotić1, V. Boraska1; L. Koneva, A. Konev, A. Kucher; 1School of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 2Clinical hospital Split, Split, Croatia, 3Gen- Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical eral Hospital Dubrovnik, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 4General Hospital Šibenik, Šibenik, Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Croatia, 5University Hospital “Sestre Milosrdnice”, Zagreb, Croatia, 6University Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type I (SCA1) is an autosomal-dominant neu- Hospital Rebro, Zagreb, Croatia. rogenerative disorder caused by expansion of unstable CAG codon Monosialo-ganglioside (GM2-1) can be found on the pancreatic β-cell in Sca1 gene that leads to abnormally long polyglutamine chains in membrane . GM2-1 has recently been shown to be a target for ICA and nuclear matrix protein ataxin 1 . SCA1 is frequent in Yakut populations, GAD autoantibodies associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) with 1 .2% and 0 .3% prevalence in Abyisky uluses (northern Yakutia) development . Beta-1,4-N acetyl-galactosaminyl transferase 1 (Gal- and Ust-Aldansky uluses (central Yakutia), respectively, in 2003 . We NAc-T) is the enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of GM2 gangliosides . developed the computational model in RAD environment Borland Del- GalNAc-T catalyzes the transfer of GalNAc into GM3 by beta-1,4 link- phi 7 for simulation of dynamics of SCA1 in population, and verified it age resulting in the synthesis of GM2 . Enzyme beta-1,4 GalNAc-T is with the epidemiological data from the two separate Yakutia regions . coded with B4GALNT1 gene located on chromosome 12 . The purpose The program is designed for simulation of SCA1 evolution in interactive of this study was to examine the relation of B4GALNT1 gene tag single mode. The user defines the initial parameters, such as population size nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNP) with susceptibility to T1DM . Two and number of mutation carriers, as well as the interactive variables analyzed B4GALNT1 tagSNP-s, rs1008314 and rs715930, capture (demographical coefficients) - birth rate, death rate, migration and 100% of B4GALNT1 common variation at the r2=0 .8, based on the nuptiality, which can be adjusted during simulation . Other variables HapMap data . We performed case-control (213 patients and 199 con- include: threshold number of CAG repeats, probabilities to inherit the trol subjects) and family-based (202 families) studies in Croatian popu- mutation from mother/father, average expansion of trinucleotides tract lation . Case-control study did not observe an association with T1DM during inheritance and reduction in number of mutant progenies due (rs1008314, p=0 .3001; rs715930, p=0 .5256) . Also, transmission dis- to genetic counseling . The model enables prediction of the length of equilibrium test did not detect any discrepancy from the expected mi- CAG repeats, age of onset and life expectancy in individual mutation nor allele transmission (rs1008314, p=0 .6547; rs715930, p=0 .4986) carriers in the lineage, and the prevalence of disease in population . nor from the haplotype transmission from parents to affected child . Comparison of the data produced in simulation with the real values This is the first ever reported association study to examine B4GALNT1 in existing populations was used to verify the computational model . gene polymorphisms with T1DM. We did not find any evidence to sup- This program provides flexible and highly visual way to predict dynam- port our hypothesis of B4GALNT1 T1DM association . ic changes in prevalence and spectrum of clinical characteristics of SCA1 in population in different demographic scenario . P07.124 Quantitative Epidemiology of the Haemoglobinopathies suggests a molecular model of complex Disease Based on Variability in the Assembly of Hetero-Dimeric molecules A. E. Felice, R. Galdies, W. Cassar, M. Pizzuto, M. Farrugia, B. Cauchi, M. R. Caruana, C. A. Scerri; Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malta, and Section of Molecular Genetics, Mater Dei Hospital., Msida, Malta. Between 1998 and 2008 we conducted a comprehensive population based Haemoglobin testing programme . Lately we integrated theNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  phenotypical based testing with genotyping using low cost DNA se- ≤ 0,05 in NOVA t-test) were tested further by univariate analysis using quencing . During this period of time, the birth rate declined from 11 .7 / Bonferroni correction . 1,000 to 10 .3 / 1,000 and the immigrant population of Malta increased The genotype distributions for both UCP3-5C/T and UCP2-866G/ ten fold. Two α globin variants Hb St. Luke and Hb Setif have been A were in accordance with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium . The result- found among 0 .2% of Maltese . The proportion of the variants was be- ing frequencies were 0,75 for UCP2 -866G allele, whereas 0 .78 for tween 3 .9% and 17 .5%, depending on the effect of the mutation on UCP3-55C . After Boneferroni correction the statistical results were as the assembly and the co-current α or β thalassaemia; α thalassaemia follows: In male subjects, UCP3-55TT genotype was associated with is found among 1.3 % of neonates. Several β globin variants were de- decreased total cholesterol (p=0,028) and diastolic blood (p=0,024) tected including Hb Marseilles and Hb S . The Hb Valletta was always pressure levels, while it was associated with higher fasting glucose found in very tight linkage disequilibrium with the γ globin variant Hb (0,0001) and logHOMA-R (p=0,032) .In female subjects, UCP2-866AA F Malta I although a presumed “hot spot” of recombination has been genotype was associated with decreased levels of trigliceride (p=0,021) assumed in between them. β Thalassaemia heterozygotes amount to and ApoB levels (p=0,027) . 1.8% the population with 4 β globin gene mutations accounting for In conclusion, the UCP3-55C/T and UCP2-866G/A promotor polymor- over 95% . The quantitative data suggested a model based on the dif- phisms have gender specific phenotypic effects on human metabo- ferential assembly of molecular subunits into hetero-dimers albeit from lism . non-syntenic variant genes that accounted for a broad range of variant allele expression between less than 5% as in Hb S combined with an α P07.127 thalassaemia or around 100% as in Hb S homozygotes or the Hb S- βo UGt1A genetic polymorphisms in são miguel population Thalassaemia compound heterozygosity . The globin model appears (Azores): implications for pharmacogenetic studies broadly applicable to a variety of possibly complex conditions associ- M. J. Brilhante1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, F. Sigallat1, H. Polena1, R. Cabral1,2, C. C. ated with multiple variant genes having quantitative effects . Branco1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2; 1Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of Ponta Delgada, Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto P07.125 Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. Genetic analysis of a large French canadian tourette syndrome UGT enzymes are responsible for glucuronidation and detoxification family of endogenous and exogenous compounds . Homozygosity for a poly- J. Riviere1, J. St-Onge1, C. Poulin1, F. Richer2, P. Lespérance1, G. Tellier3, S. morphism in the UGT1A1 TATAA box promoter causes Gilbert’s syn- Chouinard1, G. A. Rouleau1,3; drome . This sequence contains six TA repeats (UGT1A1*1), where- 1CHUM Research Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Université du Québec à as seven repeats (UGT1A1*28) imply reduced gene expression . In Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Sainte Justine Hospital, Montreal, QC, UGT1A6, two missense mutations result in three alleles: UGT1A6*1 Canada. (T181-R184), UGT1A6*2 (A181-S184) and UGT1A6*3 (T181-S184) . Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A6*2 are associated with reduced enzymatic principally characterized by chronic motor and vocal tics and often as- activity . sociated with other behavioral abnormalities . Despite evidence of a Here, we determined UGT1A1 and UGT1A6 polymorphisms prevalence strong genetic component, little is known about the genes predispos- in São Miguel population (n=469 healthy individuals), and investigated ing to TS . We conducted a genomewide linkage analysis in a large UGT1A1 association with UGT1A6 polymorphisms . In UGT1A1, we French Canadian (FC) TS family comprising nine affected individuals identified five genotypes: 0.4% (TA)/(TA), 50 .5% (TA)/(TA), 39 .7% 5 6 6 6 and exhibiting an apparent autosomal dominant mode of inheritance (TA)/(TA), 9 .2% (TA)/(TA) and 0 .2% (TA)/(TA) . Five and eight TA 6 7 7 7 6 8 of the disorder . Five-hundred markers with an average marker den- repeats are found only in African-ancestry individuals . These alleles sity of 8cM were genotyped . Multipoint linkage and haplotype analy- confirm our previous results on Sao Miguel genetic ancestry, an admi- ses were performed using GENEHUNTER and SIMWALK2 programs . xed population composed of European, Jews and Africans . UGT1A*6 Multipoint linkage analysis of the genomewide scan revealed four genotype frequencies were 47 .5% (*1*1), 36 .2%, (*1*2), 7 .5% (*2*2), chromosomal regions (2q, 6q, 8q and 13q) with LOD scores greater 4 .7% (*1*3) and 4 .1% (2*3) . A strong association between UGT1A1*28 than 1.5 using an “affected-only” approach. Subsequent fine-mapping and UGT1A6*2 alleles was observed, since 81 .4% homozygous for of these regions resulted in a single significant linkage peak (LOD>3.0) UGT1A1*28 were also homozygous for UGT1A6*2 . Overall, 6 .7% on chromosome 2q . Screening of candidate genes is needed in order were homozygous for both UGT1 polymorphisms, and 39% had at le- to identify the causative TS gene in this family . ast one variant allele for UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A6*2 . These highly prevalent polymorphisms result in modified expression and activity of P07.126 UGTs, may influence susceptibility to cancers and predispose to side The sex specific effects of UCP2 and 3 promoter polymorphisms effects of drugs, such as irinotecan . Currently, we are analyzing three in turkish population missense mutations in UGT1A7, to evaluate the extension of linka- M. Poda1, G. Can2, A. Onat3, E. Bayrak1, G. Hergenç4, S. E. Humphries5, N. ge disequilibrium between UGT1A1, UGT1A6 and UGT1A7 . Funded Erginel-Ünaltuna1; by Azorean Government (M1 .2 .1 ./I/003/2005) . PRP has PhD grant 1Istanbul University, DETAE, Genetics Dept., Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Uni- SFRH/BD/27453/2006 . versity, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Dept. of Public Health, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Turkish Cardiology Association, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Biology, Yildiz P07.128 Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Identification of the rare UGT1A1*36 allele in a Caucasian family BHF Laboratories, Royal Free and University College London Medical School, of the Azores (Portugal) London, United Kingdom. M. Soares1,2, M. R. Santos1,2, A. R. Couto1,2, J. P. Pinheiro1,2, I. Dutra1,2, V. Ro- UCP2 and UCP3 genes are highly homologous,yet they are expressed drigues3, J. Bruges Armas1,2; in different tissues .UCP2 is expressed in white adipose, heart, pan- 1SEEBMO - Hospital de Santo Espirito, 9700-856 Angra do Heroismo, Portugal, creas and kidney, whereas UCP3 is expressed in skeletal muscle 2IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular da Universidade do Porto, and heart preferentially .Promoter region polymorphisms in UCP2 and Porto, Portugal, 3Centro de Saude de Santa Cruz da Graciosa, 9880-320 Santa UCP3 genes (-866G/A and-55C/T respectively) have been previously Cruz da Graciosa, Portugal. associated with obesity, diabetes and lipid profiles in different cohorts. The role of UDP-glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) as a predic- To clarify the contribution of these polymorphisms to dislipidemia and tor of toxicity in cancer patients receiving irinotecan lead to the identifi- related conditions, we investigated the associations with the lipid, blood cation of a rare UGT1A1 genotype in a 69 years old female of Azorean pressure and anthromorphic measurements, with regard to diabetes ancestry . and sex status .The study population consisting of a large (n=1975) The genotype UGT1A1*36/UGT1A1*28 (TA/TA) was identified in the 5 7 representative cohort of Turkey (‘Turkish Adult Risk Factor Study’- index case and after informed consent, three siblings (2 females-F and TARF study, mean age=54,6 ±11,5), was genotyped using sequence 1 male-M) were investigated . DNA extraction was performed from pe- specific Taqman probes.The ANOVA t-test was used to compare the ripheral blood cells. Amplification of region of interest was performed differences in continuous variables among study subjects subdivided by PCR using specific primers; forward primer was labelled for sub- by sex and/or diabetes status .Continuous variables (having P values sequent fragment analysis . Genotyping of (TA) repeats in this regionNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  was performed submiting PCR products to capillary electrophoresis . population (p<0 .01) . The H7 and H8 haplotypes, requiring high war- Analysis revealed the following genotypes: TA/TA (1F; 1M) and TA/ farin doses are predominant in Roma population were 49% together, 5 6 6 TA (1F) . while H1 and H2 haplotypes, requiring low warfarin dose were the 7 TA allele frequencies of 0.044, 0.017 and 0.000 have been identified predominant in Hungarian average samples . Furthermore, 21 .8 % of 5 for African-American, Caucasian and Japanese, respectively . To our Romas were homozygous for the H7 and H8 haplotypes and an ad- knowledge, there is only one Portuguese report with the identification dition 3% were accounted to H9 haplotype . Results presented here of an individual with this genotype . Due to the low frequency of the shown high variability of the Roma people, wich can have therapeutic TA allele on Caucasian population, HLA typing was performed in or- consequences . 5 der to evaluate putative ethnic influences. HLA alleles for loci A, Bw, Cw, DRB1 and DQB1 were typed for all the individuals (SSP, SSO P07.131 and SBT) . HLA extended haplotype inferred for the proband: A*0102- High prevalence of Wilson disease in a small mountain village in B*5801-Cw*1802-DRB1*1301-DQB1*0603 revealed alleles that are Romania extremely rare in Caucasians (e .g . Cw*1802) suggesting that this fam- F. Raicu1,2, R. Cocoş1, A. Şendroiu2, D. Neagoş1, R. Creţu1, C. Glavce2, L. ily may have had influences from other ethnic groups. The Azores ar- Bohîlţea1, I. Şendroiu2; chipelago was populated mainly by the Portuguese however, settlers 1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, from other European, African and possibly Asian countries, are well 2Francisc I Rainer Anthropological Research Institute Romanian Academy, known in these islands history . Bucharest, Romania. Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a P07.129 defect in ATP7B gene, coding for a metal transporting P-type ATPase, Are the moravian Valachs of czech Republic the Aromuns of resulting in cooper overload mainly in liver and brain . Increased num- central Europe? model population for isolation and admixture ber of Wilson disease patients in a small mountain village next to Bran E. Ehler1,2, V. Vančata2; region led us to initiate a population screening. We firstly screened for 1Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Charles University in mutation in five WD patients from five apparently unrelated families. Di- Prague, Faculty of Science, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology rect sequencing of all 21 exons within ATP7B gene was performed for and Ecological Education, Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Education, all five WD patients. Mutation analysis revealed that each of them was Prague, Czech Republic. homozygotes and compound heterozygotes bearing three mutations, Moravian Valachs of Czech Republic are one of the most distinct ethnic one was frameshift mutation (P767P-fs) and two were missense muta- groups from Central Europe . Related to similar populations in Poland tions (H1069G and K832R) . Up to now we screened 20 relatives of the and Slovakia, they emerge at the end of 15th century, as the north- five WD patients and we will screen a total of 152 autochthonous inhab- westernmost prominence of migration that started 250 years earlier in itants to the third generation originating from the same village, in order northern Romania . Being predominately highland sheep herders and to find the total number of carriers for these mutations. The high number of putative Romanian origin, they represent a Central European ana- of mutations and the homozygous/compound heterozygous state made logue of Balkan Aromanian populations . We have gathered Y-chromo- correlation between genotype and phenotype difficult. The high preva- somal, linguistic, ethnographic and historical data for this population lence WD indicates the need for health education intervention, genetic and compared them with surrounding as well as with east European counselling and newborn screening for Wilson disease in this region . populations . Linguistic data show specific parts of shared vocabulary of Romanian P07.132 origin between several pastoral groups in Central and Eastern Europe . Allele frequencies for CYPA, CYPD, CYPC, CYPC, Comparing genetic and linguistic pairwise distance matrices (Mantel GSTT, GSTM, MTHFR, MTRR, NQO, NAT, HLA-DQA and test) in these populations did not revealed any significant correlation. AB0 genes in native Russians Thus we confirmed that plain geographical distance still plays the ma- O. A. Gra1,2, O. N. Mityaeva1, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva2, A. S. Glotov3, D. O. Fes- jor role in genetic distances between populations in Europe . From our enko1, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova2, T. V. Nasedkina1; further analysis it is clear, that the Moravian Valachs, after at least five 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, centuries of admixture, are not overly genetically different from sur- Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vavilov Institute of General Genetics Russian rounding populations . On the other hand, from the point of view of in- Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics tra-population diversity, they are much more similar to isolated Balkan and Gynecology Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Saint-Petersburg, Russian populations (e .g . Aromuns) than to Central European populations . Federation. Xenobiotic-metabolizing genes (e .g . Cytochromes P450, GST, NAT2, P07.130 and NQO1), folate metabolism genes (e .g . MTHFR, MTRR) and ma- Haplotype profile of vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKORC1) as jor histocompatibility complex genes (e .g . HLA-DQA1) play multiple determinant of warfarin sensitivity in Roma population role in the organism functioning . In addition, AB0 is the most clinically C. Sipeky1, V. Csöngei1, B. Faragó1, K. Horvatovich1, L. Járomi1, P. Kisfali1, A. significant high-polymorphic gene in transfusion and transplantation Maász1, L. Magyari1, E. Sáfrány1, I. Takács2, B. Melegh1; medicine . Epidemiological data shows that allele frequencies of these 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, genes exhibit ethnic and geographic diversity . Besides, little is known Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department Institute of Internal Medicine and Haematol- about frequency distribution of the major polymorphic variants in na- ogy, Semmelweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. tive Russians . Oral anticoagulants, including warfarin and acenocoumarol, are the We developed biological microchips which allow to analyze a spectrum most widely prescribed drugs for treating of thromboembolic disor- of allelic variants in twelve different genes such as CYP1A1, CYP2D6, ders . Complications with coumarin therapy include the narrow dos- CYP2C9, CYP2C19, GSTT1, GSTM1, MTHFR, MTRR, NQO1, NAT2, age window, the broad variation of interindividual and interethnic drug HLA-DQA1 and AB0 . Using this composite methodological platform requirement, and the relatively high incidence of bleeding . Coumarins we have studied 352 DNA samples from healthy native Russian vol- target blood coagulation by inhibiting the vitamin K epoxide reduc- unteers. For the first time we have received the allelic frequencies tase complex (VKORC) . Recently, three main haplotypes of VKORC1 of above mentioned genes .The allelic frequencies of gene polymor- *2,*3,*4 have been observed, that explain most of genetic variability in phisms that we studied are close to allelic frequencies observed in warfarin dose among Caucasians . The aim of the work was to study some European populations, as published earlier . These data were the VKORC1 haplotype profile of Roma population in Hungary, and used in comparative studies to determine predisposition to psoriasis, compare with results of the average Hungarian Caucasian population . colorectal cancer, lymphoma and leukemia in adults and to childhood G-1639A, G9041A, C6009T single-nucleotide polimorphisms were leukemia . The HLA-DQA1 and AB0 allele frequencies were used to determined for VKORC1 haplotype-tagging . A total of 455 unrelated estimate forensic population parameters for these loci . Roma and 237 Hungarian controls were haplotyped . The genotypes were analized by PCR-RFLP assay and direct sequencing . Our study revealed significant difference in the prevalence of VKORC1*2 and VKORC1*3 haplotypes between the Roma and average HungarianNormal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology  P07.133 both mtDNA and HLAs . the frequency of XRcc1 DNA repair gene A399G polymorphism The aim of this study was to determine the genetic background of the in the Western Anatolia Madeira population, to search for differences within the Archipelago T. Sever, S. Pehlivan; and find out the influence of the colonization in the actual genetic struc- University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, ture of this population . Gaziantep, Turkey. The aim of our studies, to determine of XRCC1 gene at codon 399 P07.136 region frequencies of polymorphisms in healthy Western Anatolia Prehistoric migrations out of East Europe: phylogeography of population . We aimed XRCC1-399 polymorphism frequencies and Y-chromosome haplogroups N2 and N3a the genotype distribution, with respect to the polymorphic codon 399 V. Kharkov1, O. Medvedeva2, K. Khamina2, V. Stepanov1; of XRCC1 gene by PCR-RFLP (Msp I Restriction Endonuclease en- 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical zyme) in 100 healthy individuals from the region of Izmir, Turkey . The Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Rus- following genotype frequencies were observed in the Western Anatolia sian Federation. population: A/A 44%, A/G 41% and G/G 15% . The frequency of A allele To reveal the structure and phylogeography of N2 and N3a Y-chro- is 64 .5% and the frequency of G allele 35 .5% . The presence of the mosomal haplogroups and to reconstruct their origin, the analysis of Adenin and Guanine allele frequencies in various populations such YSTR-haplotypes was carried out using seven YSTR loci of NRY (DY- as USA, England, Caucasians, Korean and Chinese populations are S389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, DYS393 and DYS394 similar to our results according to the published data . (DYS19)) . A total of 234 samples belonging to N2 and 903 belonging to N3a from different ethnic population samplings of Europe, Siberia, P07.134 Central Asia and Far East were analyzed . The results of the analysis Phylogeography of the human Y chromosome haplogroup E3a evidenced a higher genetic diversity for N2 and N3a haplogroups in F. Cruciani1, B. Trombetta1, D. Sellitto2, C. Nodale1, R. Scozzari1; European populations as compared with Asian ones . Median networks 1Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy, 2Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricer- showed the occurrence of different haplotype clusters for Europeans che, Rome, Italy. and Asians . Age of STR variation for N3a haplogroup was 14 .2 thou- The Y chromosome specific biallelic marker DYS271 defines the sand years (12 .3 only for Europe and 8 .6 for Siberia) and for N2 hap- most common haplogroup (E3a) currently found in sub-Saharan Af- logroup it was 12 .6 . A high frequency of N2 and N3a haplogroups in rica . A sister clade, E3b (E-M215), is rare in sub-Saharan Africa, but some Siberian populations is the consequence of strong founder effect very common in northern and eastern Africa . On the whole, these two events, the age of which reached 3-5 .5 thousand years . Pairwise val- clades represent more than 70% of the Y chromosomes of the African ues of Fst showed that, in Siberia, neighboring populations were char- continent . A third clade belonging to E3 (E3c or E-M329) has been acterized by a highier level of genetic differentiation than European recently reported to be present only in eastern Africa, at low frequen- ones . Cluster analysis also revealed relative proximity of European cies . populations to each other as compared to Asian populations . These In this study we analyzed more than 1,600 Y chromosomes from 55 results suggest that an isolation of the regional group of populations African populations, using both new and previously described biallelic occurred soon after the origin of the N2 and N3a haplogroups . Evenks markers, in order to refine the phylogeny and the geographic distribu- and Yakuts displayed highly specific overlapping N3a haplotype spec- tion of the E3a haplogroup . tra, atypical for other Siberian ethnic groups . Thus Eastern Europe is The most common E-DYS271 sub-clades (E-DYS271*, E-M191, E- the most probable place of N2 and N3a haplogroups origin . U209) showed a non uniform distribution across sub-Saharan Africa . Most of the E-DYS271 chromosomes found in northern and western P07.137 Africa belong to the paragroup E-DYS271*, which is rare in central Y-chromosome lineages in Xhosa and Zulu Bantu speaking and southern Africa . In these latter regions, haplogroups E-M191 and populations E-U209 show similar frequency distributions and coalescence ages R. P. A. Gonçalves, H. Spínola, A. Brehm; (13 and 11 kyr, respectively), suggesting their involvement in the same Human Genetics Laboratory, Funchal, Portugal. migratory event/s . Y-chromosome Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms have been analysed By the use of two new phylogenetically equivalent markers (V38 and in Zulu and Xhosa, two southern Africa Bantu speaking populations . V89), the earlier tripartite structure of E3 haplogroup was resolved in These two ethnic groups have their origin on the farmer’s Bantu ex- favor of a common ancestor for haplogroups E-DYS271 (formerly E3a) pansion from Niger-Congo border towards sub-Sahel regions on the and E-M329 (formerly E3c) . The new topology of the E3 haplogroup is southern tip of the continent, during the past 3000 years . suggestive of a relatively recent eastern African origin for the majority Seven different Y-chromosome haplogroups were found in Zulu con- of the chromosomes presently found in sub-Saharan Africa . trasting with only two in Xhosa . E3a, a common haplogroup among West sub-Saharans associated to Bantu migration was the most P07.135 prevalent in both populations (56 .9% in Zulu and 90% in Xhosa) . The Genetic variability of madeira archipelago inferred from Y second most common haplogroup was E2 (29 .3% in Zulu and 10% in chromosome, mtDNA and HLA system Xhosa), present both in West and East African populations . A. C. N. Lemos, H. Spinola, R. Gonçalves, A. Fernandes, A. Brehm; The present-day Zulu and Xhosa paternal legacy is essentially of West Human Genetic Laboratory, Funchal, Portugal. sub-Saharan origin . Zulu population shows a most diverse genetic The Madeira Archipelago is composed by two inhabited islands, Ma- influence comparing to Xhosa, revealing some pre-Bantu expansion deira and Porto Santo. The first settlers of these islands came from markers and East African influences. Zulu presents 8.6% Y-chromo- north and south of Portugal and Europe (Flandres, France and Italy), some haplogroups (A, B, J1) of non-Bantu influence that could indicate jointly with some African slaves . gene flow from other populations, particularly Khoisan. Three geographic groups were defined within the Archipelago: Funchal (FX), Southwest (SW) and Northeast (NE - including Porto Santo) . The P07.138 Y chromosome haplogroup followed the Y Chromosome Consortium Y-chromosome lineages and kinship relation in central Eastern and comparison with both mtDNA and HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 sardinia genes was performed . Arlequin was used to compare the three geo- P. Rizzu1, L. M. Pardo1, G. Piras2, K. J. van der Gaag3, D. Sondervan1, M. graphic groups within the archipelago and to calculate genetic diversity Monne2, A. Gabbas2, N. Bradman4, P. de Knijff3, A. Ruiz-Linares4, P. Heutink1; of Y chromosome SNPs, mtDNA and HLA systems between and within 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Medical Genomics, Amsterdam, The each group . Netherlands, 2Biomolecular and Cytogenetic Center, Dept. of Hematology and No significative haplotypic differences were found regarding the Y Oncology, San Francesco Hospital, Nuoro, Italy, 3Forensic Laboratory for DNA chromosome SNPs for these three groups, opposite to mtDNA and Research, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4The Galton Laboratory, HLA systems encountered between Southwest and Funchal . We also Department of Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. found major European influence although some African traces are Genetic isolates have been successfully used in the study of com- present . The highest level of genetic diversity was found in Funchal for plex traits, mainly because they allow a reduction in the complexityGenomics, technology, bioinformatics  of the genetic models underlying the trait . Prior knowledge of the ge- sembl genome browser and other bioinformatics resources . netic structure of the isolate is therefore a fundamental prerequisite for DECIPHER provides the architecture for international collaborative ef- designing and carrying out successful association studies of complex fort identifying new syndromes and genes involved in human develop- disorders . ment and disease, forinterpreting array CGH data and improving medi- Sardinians has long been the object of study by geneticists by virtue of cal care for patients with congenital abnormalities . The DECIPHER their ancient origin and long-standing isolation . Some studies suggest Consortium has grown considerably over the last four years with da- that the Sardinians are a relatively homogenous population with no tabase entries of over 1500 patients from approximately 90 centres significant heterogeneity among sub-regions. These reports are how- worldwide . ever in contradiction with several others demonstrating the existence In DECIPHER, molecularly defined rearrangements (e.g. from array- of differentiated sub-regions, molded by natural, cultural barriers and CGH) are mapped on to the reference sequence for viewing in En- historical events . sembl. Genes within the affected region are identified and prioritised Our aim is to determine the extent of homogeneity in the Central-East- according to their relevance to the phenotype . Clusters of rearrange- ern Sardinia that includes the archaic area as defined by archeologi- ments within the same region in patients with comparable phenotypes cal, linguistics and genetic studies . We determined Y-chromosome lin- enable new syndromes to be defined and published. eages in 256 unrelated Sardinian males from this area using a panel Other features in DECIPHER which aid in the interpretation of microar- of informative biallelic markers (SNPs) and microsatellite (STRs) . In ray data include: addition to sex-specific markers we also used autosomal SNPs (500K Trio analysis tool - A trio of an affected individual and parents are anal- Affymetrix chips) in 100 of the DNA samples to determine accurately ysed to determine de novo or familial/inherited conditions . kinship values . Gene prioritisation tool - advanced text mining searches PubMed for Our analysis shows that the frequency of the major Y haplogroups associations between highlighted genes and phenotypes . clearly sets this population apart from the rest of the Europeans hap- Search tool - a search engine for ‘consented’ data within DECIPHER to logroups . facilitate the identification of rearrangement clusters and links between Our results allow to evaluate how past peopling and demographic phenotype and genomic location . events might impact genome wide association study design for com- DECIPHER enables international collaborative research on develop- plex disorders that show a high incidence or a founder effect in this mental disorders and provides a powerful knowledge base for clinical part of the island such as Diabetes type-1 and Breast-cancer . diagnosis and management of patients with congenital abnormalities . P07.139 P08.02 caracterization of the mitochondrial haplogroups of two 3c on FOXL. Andean populations (Aymaras and Quechuas) from the Bolivian D. Beysen1, J. Dostie2, B. D’haene1, A. De Paepe1, J. Dekker2, E. De Baere1; Altiplano: comparison to other south-American populations 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Pro- M. Gayà-Vidal1, N. Saenz2, A. Sevin2, C. Coudray2, C. Thèves2, G. Athanasia- gram in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical dis1, E. Esteban1, M. Villena3, A. Rodriguez3, R. Vasquez3, J. M. Dugoujon2, P. School, Worcester, MA, United States. Moral1; Defective long distance gene regulation is an emerging mechanism 1Unitat d’Antropologia, Dpt. de Biologia Animal, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat underlying human disease . Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), an de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre d’Anthropologie UMR 8555 CNRS, Tou- autosomal dominant condition affecting eyelid and ovary development, louse, France, 3IBBA, La Paz, Bolivia. is caused by mutations in the FOXL2 gene . Its expression is strictly Mitochondrial DNA has been widely used in human population genetic regulated, which was illustrated by the recent identification of deletions studies . It has been used to treat the colonization process of the New upstream and downstream of its transcription unit as underlying cause World . Particularly, in South-America, the Andean region with its geo- of BPES . We demonstrated that these rearrangements remove sev- graphic, environmental and historical particularities is an important eral conserved non-coding sequences (CNCs) harbouring potential area for these studies . long-range cis-regulatory elements . We have analyzed the mitochondrial DNA diversity of two Amerindian Here, we used Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) to identify populations from the Andean Altiplano belonging to the two main Am- long-range interactions of cis-regulatory elements with the FOXL2 pro- erindian linguistic groups in Bolivia, namely Aymaras and Quechuas . moter in two adult FOXL2 expressing cellular systems . We found that The Aymara population is situated between La Paz and the Titicaca in adult ovarian granulosa cells and fibroblasts three long-range cis- Lake and the Quechua population located in the Potosi department . regulatory sequences located 177 kb, 283 kb and 360 kb upstream of Our aim is to provide new mtDNA data from these two Andean Alti- FOXL2 come in close vicinity to the FOXL2 core promoter . Noteworthy, plano populations . 3C in human fibroblasts derived from a BPES patient with a heterozy- Haplogroup (A, B, C, and D) and sub-haplogroup determinations have gous deletion of the region encompassing the regulatory element at been carried out through RFLP analysis in the coding region, as well 283 kb, revealed decrease of interaction of the deleted element and as through DNA sequencing of the HVI and HVII regions (16020-250) the FOXL2 core promoter and the two other regulatory elements . In- in 190 non-related individuals . terestingly, the element at 283 kb corresponds to a sequence deleted After the determinations, the allele frequencies have been calculated in the Polled Intersex (PIS) goat, which is an animal model for BPES . and compared to other South-American populations for which data are In conclusion, we hypothesize that the interaction between the cis- available in the literature . Statistical analyses have been carried out in regulatory element located at 283 kb and the FOXL2 core promoter order to assess the genetic relationships between just the two popula- is essential to establish efficient transcriptional regulation of FOXL2 tions of this study and also regarding three geographical levels: South- expression . America, Central Andes and Bolivia . P08.03 P08. Genomics, technology, bioinformatics study of the antisense transcript to AFAP1 human gene A. V. Marakhonov1, A. Baranova1,2, T. Kazubskaya3, S. Shigeev4, M. Y. Skob- P08.01 lov1; DEciPHER (DatabasE of chromosomal imbalance and 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- Phenotype in Humans using Ensembl Resources) - http:// ences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Molecular and Microbiology Department, decipher.sanger.ac.uk College of Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, United States, S. M. Richards1, R. M. Pettett1, P. A. Bevan1, S. Van Vooren1, H. Fiegler1, H. V. 3Blokhin Cancer Research Centre, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Firth2, N. P. Carter1; Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, 2Cam- Medicine, People’s Friendship University of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federa- bridge University Dept of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, tion. United Kingdom. Antisense regulation of gene expression is a widespread but not well- DECIPHER is a web-based, interactive database which provides a link understood mechanism of gene expression regulation . Recently we between phenotype and chromosomal rearrangement utilising the En- have carried out a whole genome in silico search of cis-antisenseGenomics, technology, bioinformatics  clusters of transcripts in humans . The developed database revealed In the last stage we search all the polynominals created in the first a signicant number of sense—antisense pairs consisting of one EST stage which approximate the minimum requirement of the polynominal cluster expressed predominantly in normal tissues and another clus- representing the input data . ter with tumor-specic expression . The role of antisense transcripts in If the difference doesn’t satisfy the minimal requirement, we consider the regulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes warrants this data inexistent in the original database and we could save this functional research . Here we describe and characterize an antisense data like a new record . mRNA asAFAP overlapping human AFAP1 gene . We applied this method to interpret the 2d coordinates of the points AFAP1 encodes for an actin filament binding protein, which serves as which represent the particularities of the finger prints. a modificator of actin filament structure and integrity. It also is able to relay a signal from receptor tyrosine kinases through PKCα to Src pro- P08.06 tein kinase . It has been shown that AFAP1 is overexpressed in prostate Genomic profiling to identify novel genetic risk factors for cancer and contributes to tumorigenic growth . We hypothesized that Behçet’s disease the transcription of asAFAP antisense mRNA may lead to suppression J. M. Xavier1, T. Krug1, B. V. Fonseca1, F. Barcelos2, G. Jesus3, A. Bernardino3, of sense AFAP1 gene expression and a compensatory restrain added M. Coutinho3, C. Neves3, J. Vedes4, M. Salgado5, J. Crespo3, J. Vaz Patto2, S. to one of the mitogenic signaling pathway that is unlikely to be sup- A. Oliveira1; ported by natural selection in the tumor cell population . To study the 1Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, Oeiras, Portugal, 2Instituto Portugues de intriguing phenomenon of tumor-specic asAFAP antisense expression Reumatologia, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital Infante D. Pedro, Aveiro, Portugal, we performed detailed in silico analysis of asAFAP sequences and 4Hospital de Sousa Martins, Guarda, Portugal, 5Hospital Pediatrico de Coimbra, experimentally quantified this transcript in normal and tumor human Coimbra, Portugal. tissues . Introduction: Behçet’s disease (BD) is a multisystemic immuno-inflam- We have specified the exon-intronic structure of asAFAP antisense matory disorder characterized by a generalized vasculitis, particularly transcript and carried out the expression analysis of AFAP1 sense— at oral and genital mucosa and eye (uveitis) . Although there is evi- antisense pair in normal and tumor human tissues . dence for environmental risk factors, epidemiological and family stud- ies strongly support the existence of genetic risk factors for BD . The P08.04 only established genetic predisposition for BD is the HLA-B*51 alelle High-resolution breakpoint mapping of human chromosome 21 on chr . 6p21, which explains only 19% of its overall genetic suscep- segmental aneuploidies for genotype-phenotype correlation and tibility . Furthermore, a recent linkage study on Turkish families found identification of underlying genomic architecture strong evidence for linkage with BD at 6p22-24 and 12p12-13 . Case- A. Hoischen, B. van Bon, L. E. L. M. Vissers, C. F. H. A. Gilissen, S. Keijzers- control association studies on biological candidate genes have so far Vloet, N. de Leeuw, B. B. A. de Vries, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman; mostly been inconclusive . To identify new susceptibility genes for BD, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. we are conducting the “genomic convergence” approach, which com- As part of the European FP6-sponsored AnEUploidy consortium we bines data from whole genome linkage screens with expression stud- are involved with work package 2: Genotype-phenotype correlations ies to determine which genes will be tested in association studies . in human aneuploidies . The objective of this work package is to study Methods & Materials: We performed gene expression profiling in the phenotypic consequences of gene dosage imbalance in the human peripheral blood mononuclear cells of carefully matched cases and population . controls using Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2 .0 One of our roles in this project is the characterization of segmental microarrays . aneuploidies of HSA 21 . Until now we collected 19 cases with de- Results: Preliminary analyses identified 131 genes differentially ex- tailed clinical information, enabled by using a standardized phenotypic pressed among 11 cases and 11 controls (1 .2 fold-change cutoff and list . Cell lines and/or DNA are available for all patients . Karyotyping p-value<0 .05), 18 of which map to the linkage peaks in Turkish fami- as well as additional analysis (FISH, microarray-based high-resolu- lies . tion genome profiling) were performed for the majority of cases. We Conclusions: These 18 genes differentially expressed among BD pa- have used a chromosome 21 specific oligo-array with 385,000 oligo- tients and controls constitute excellent candidates genes for associa- nucleotides to further delineate the genomic rearrangements in this tion studies in this disease. We are currently confirming the expression cohort. Breakpoint fine mapping of approximately 1kb accuracy has studies in a larger dataset . been performed for the most cases, enabling breakpoint sequencing as a next step . For one case with a partial chromosome 21 deletion P08.07 (46,XY,del(21)(q11 .2q21 .3)) the rearrangement coincide with border- the centralized DNA-extraction, quality control, storage and ing segmental duplications (SDs) that have identical orientation and sample logistics center for EU-project Genetics of Healthy Aging high (>95%) similarity . This suggests that recurring deletions and/or O. M. Törnwall, M. Jussila, P. Laiho, L. Peltonen, M. Perola; corresponding duplications of similar size that are mediated by NAHR National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland. (non-allelic homologous recombination) may exist . These analysis of The National Public Health Institute of Finland (KTL), Department of the underlying genomic-architecture are enabled by in-house devel- Molecular Medicine (MLO) has over the past decade developed an oped software tools . infrastructure for handling an extensive number of biological samples Detailed genotype-phenotype correlations are ongoing for all patients collected in large epidemiological and population based studies (www . to get a better insight into the underlying gene dosage imbalances . Ex- nationalbiobanks.fi). The biobank consists of centralized DNA-extrac- pansion of the patient cohort and transcriptome analysis are planned tion, quality control, storage and sample logistics and has developed a as joined efforts of the consortium . database and sample logistics system applicable to any biobank han- dling DNA samples . The center is equipped with state of the art bar P08.05 coding system, automated DNA extraction equipments, liquid handling Artificial intelligence applied in finger prints identification robots, storage facilities and tailor made data management tools . The E. Laslo, I. Tomulescu; biobank has served as a DNA logistics center for several research Faculty of Sciences, Oradea, Romania. projects, including the EU funded project; Genetics of Healthy Aging In this paper we propose a new database search method with results (GEHA) (www .geha .unibo .it) . in finding the most nearest existing data. The searching method is The aim of the GEHA consortium is to collect DNA samples from 2650 based on the artificial intelligence concepts named Genetic Algorithms long-lived 90+ sib pairs and controls from 15 European countries . The combined with polynomial approximation . samples are shipped to Helsinki, DNA is extracted, stored, quality In the first stage of the process for each record in the database we checked and distributed to the genotyping laboratory CEPH in France . create an algebraic polynominal named characteristic function and we By the end of 2007, 9813 samples from 6867 individuals had been update the database with the polynominal coefficients. extracted . The method of choice for nearly all of the GEHA samples For the second stage we process the input data also to create an alge- has been the automated extraction equipment Autopure LS . The fail- braic polynomial approximation . This method was used in our previous ure rate of extraction has been very low < 1% . Average yield for blood research in numerical approximation with Genetic Algorithms . samples is 31,4µg/1ml of blood and 1,8µg for cheek swab samples .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  From all the subjects 4745 samples have been tested for PCR-func- tions in large volume of data sets . This analysis tool provides improved tionality and monitored in case of sample mix-ups or contamination . algorithm for SNP detection that are trained to discover accurate se- During QC only 0,8% of the samples had to be excluded . quence variations and report review status for traceability . It helps to create expressive Quality Control Data reports for large data sets and P08.08 create annotated projects that contain trace files and data annotation. Using the bioinformatic tools to choose the sNPs with highly Data sharing abilities between users, such as between a bioinformat- possible phenotypic effect ics team and end users, will be demonstrated. The guided workflow D. Ozhegova1, M. Freidin1, V. Puzyrev2; gives a new or advanced user confidence in a short period of time. In 1Siberian State Medicin University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Research this poster we will highlight how core team can use the new Quality Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Control metrics and how end users can share the accurate results . Common polymorphisms, such as SNPs, in human gene promoters are the significant factors influencing differential gene expression un- P08.11 derlying natural phenotypic variation . A number of bioinformatic tools Prevalence of mutations in troponin t (tNNt2) and troponin i were developed recently, which are useful in prediction of “on its own” (TNNI3) in Czech hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HKMP) patients. functionally important SNP in promoters utilizing the knowledge about L. Benesova1, K. Curila2, M. Penicka2, D. Zemanek3, P. Tomasov3, M. Minarik1; transcription factors binding the DNA . We used such the resources for 1Laboratory for molecular genetics and oncology, Genomac International, Ltd., a pilot search of functional SNPs in seven immune response modify- Prague, Czech Republic, 2Cardiocenter, Charles University, Prague, Czech Re- ing genes: STAT1, IL10, IL12B, IFNG, IFNGR1, MCP-1, TLR-2 . Firstly, public, 3Cardiovascular center, Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. all 61 the SNPs were chosen in the promoters of these genes using Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCMP) is a serious cardiovascular dbSNP (http://www .ncbi .nlm .nih .gov/SNP), and Ensembl (http://www . disease with autosomal dominant inheritance, caused by mutation of ensembl.org). Then, the selection of a minimal sufficient number of genes coding for structural or regulation proteins of sarcomers of the SNPs was done using SNPselector (http://www .snpselector .Duhs . heart muscle . Troponin T (TNNT2) and Troponin I (TNNI3) are impor- duke .edu) and PupaSNPFinder (http://www .pupasnp .org) . Finally, Ge- tant part of sarcomere of heart muscle and mutations in their genes are nomatix MathInsprector (http://www .genomatix .de/matinspector .html) responsible for development of HCM . was utilised to predict a possible transcription factors (TFs) binding We have performed complete sequencing of TNNT2 and TNNI3 genes efficiency change due to the SNPs chosen. Eighteen SNPs in pro- in 100 HCMP patients, previously diagnosed by Electrocardiography . moter region of seven genes were analyzed by MathInspector and We have recorded a total of 4 positives . Of the different mutation types it was found that the nucleotide substitution in seven SNPs caused detected, there was 1 novel mutation, which, to date, was not recorded new binding sites for TFs . The potential functionality of these SNPs in any of the major HCMP databases . A wide variability of the mutation is under current experimental validation in our group . Thus, bioinfor- malignancy was recorded with respect to the disease manifestation for matic approaches to the analysis of gene promoters allows reducing different mutation types . the search space for candidate SNPs and focusing on the SNPs with This project was supported by the Czech Ministry of Health Grant specific characteristics. Such in silico analysis facilitate understanding Agency project no .NR9164 . of specific features of gene promoters under the study and provide information on the genes functional variability . P08.12 Disentangling molecular relationships with a causal inference P08.09 test Breast cancer diagnostics: cscE screening using the J. Millstein, B. Zhang, J. Zhu, E. E. Schadt; BioNumerics® software. Rosetta Inpharmatics LLC, wholy owned subsidary of Merck & Co., Inc., Se- K. Janssens, B. Pot, L. Vauterin, P. Vauterin; attle, WA, United States. Applied Maths NV, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium. There has been intense effort over the past couple of decades to iden- INTRODUCTION . CSCE technology can be used for indirect mutation tify loci underlying quantitative traits as a key step in the process of elu- scanning (e .g . BRCA1/2 mutation detection) . The method is sensitive cidating the etiology of complex diseases . However, a stumbling block and more rapid than full gene sequencing and is therefore time and has been the difficult question of how to leverage this information to cost saving . By the use of multi-capillary sequencers, high throughput identify molecular mechanisms that explain quantitative trait loci (QTL) . routine screening becomes feasible, but requires the availability of reli- We have developed a formal statistical test to quantify the strength of able automatic mutation detection software . a causal inference pertaining to a measured factor, e .g ., a molecular DATA ANALYSIS is performed directly on the ABI .FSA files. Files are species, which potentially mediates the causal association between imported in batches through the use of a BioNumerics® plugin, a script a locus and a quantitative trait . We applied the test to infer causal based dynamic extension of the software that uses a file naming strat- relationships between transcript abundances and obesity traits in mice egy to automatically import up to 200 traces with up to 20 samples and also to reconstruct transcriptional regulatory networks in yeast . We each . BioNumerics® provides an adapted database environment to treat the causal inference as a ‘chain’ of mathematical conditions that store all imported data and takes care of all data management activi- must be satisfied to conclude that the potential mediator is causal for ties . The plugin offers a proper analysis tool for the mutation detection: the trait, where the inference is only as good as the weakest link in the Peak matching is done using a proprietary algorithm that uses five chain . This perspective naturally leads to the Intersection-Union Test user-adjustable curve parameters allowing to compare normalized framework in which a series of statistical tests are combined to form peak shapes . The result is a fast, sensitive and reliable peak matching an omnibus test . Using computer simulated mouse crosses, we show that can be used to discriminate typical ‘wild type samples’ from ‘het- that type I error is low under a variety of non-causal null models . We erozygous mutants’ . For each target PCR product, one or more target show that power under a simple causal model is comparable to other variants can be defined, allowing the creation of polymorphic variants. model selection techniques as well as Bayesian network reconstruc- The result is displayed in a clear overview report with color indication tion methods . We further show empirically that this method compares of reference peaks, positive matches, mismatches, failed peaks and favorably to TRIGGER for reconstructing transcriptional regulatory problem cases for which verification is required. For the latter click and networks in yeast, recovering 6 out of 8 known regulators . zoom functions are available to quickly evaluate all matching param- eters on the screen . P08.13 Identification of a potential regulatory element forming a hairpin P08.10 structure within the 3’UTR of CDK5R1 High Quality mutation Detection M. Venturin1, S. Moncini1, P. Zuccotti1, A. Nicolin2, P. Riva1; L. Xu, S. Jankowski, E. Fraser, E. Vennemeyer; 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Milan, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacology, Chemotherapy and Medical Toxicol- Accurate mutation calling and quality data have been identified as key ogy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. components of direct sequencing by many clinical researchers . We CDK5R1 encodes for p35, a regulatory subunit of CDK5 kinase, which used a new bioinformatics software, Variant ReporterTM to detect muta- is fundamental for normal neural development and function . CDK5R1Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  has been implicated in neurodegenerative disorders and proposed tages, we extended the MediaWiki platform to allow the inclusion and as a candidate gene for mental retardation . The remarkable size of the interaction with external data and programs . The current online CDK5R1 3’UTR, which is highly conserved in mammals and contains project contains: (i) genes and gene mutations associated to CHDs AREs and miRNA target sites, suggests a role in post-transcriptional (local curated database), (ii) links from CHD genes to related patient regulation of its expression . The insertion of CDK5R1 3’UTR into lucif- case reports (local cytogenetic database), (iii) links from CHD genes to erase gene causes a decreased luciferase activity in four transfected publicly available descriptions of copy number variants, (iv) an interac- cell lines . A 3’UTR region (named C2) leads to a very strong luciferase tive view of this information on chromosomes . Moreover, CHD candi- mRNA reduction, owing to a significantly lower half-life, indicating ac- date genes can be prioritized (Endeavour1) based on easily selectable celerated mRNA degradation . This fragment was dissected into small- training genes associated to CHD types . CHDWiki promises to be the er regions and a 65 bp sequence (C2 .11), in which no known regula- central resource/reference for CHD genetics . It can be viewed as a dy- tory elements were predicted, has been identified to be responsible namic review of all the knowledge published in this field. Additionally, of the decreased gene expression . A stable structural motif (forming the Wiki goes further by managing information on promising candidate a hairpin) of C2.11 fragment was predicted by RnaProfile and SFold genes . The CHDWiki will be the most comprehensive resource avail- programs, both starting from the isolated fragment and considering it able on genes associated to CHDs with 48 genes, 40 CHDs and 135 within the whole 3’UTR . Lowering of luciferase levels for the construct manually curated associations . While initially dedicated to this con- with an intact hairpin structure in contrast with unchanged levels for crete project, the system is generic and allows the rapid development four mutated/deleted structures suggests that this putative element of Wikis augmented by structured data and analysis results . might really have a regulatory role . Since complementary mutations 1Aerts et al., Nat Biotech, 2006;24:537 restoring the hairpin did not affect luciferase activity, we suggest that both the sequence and the structure are essential for the ability of P08.16 C2 .11 fragment to reduce transcript stability . Further mutagenesis ex- copy number variants and gene expression in the mouse periments, binding assays and RNAse protection assays will disclose E. A. C. Chaignat1, C. N. Henrichsen1, N. Vinckenbosch1, S. Pradervand1, M. the function of this novel CDK5R1 3’UTR regulatory element . Ruedi2, S. Zoellner3, H. Kaessmann1, A. Reymond1; 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of Mam- P08.14 malogy and Ornithology, Natural History Museum, Geneva, Switzerland, 3De- computational analysis of structural and non-structural proteins partment of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. of chikungunya virus - mosquito borne disease as potential Copy number variants (CNVs), defined as large stretches of DNA that target for vaccine vary in number of copies among phenotypically normal individuals, are K. R. Rupesh1, K. Mahdieh2; a source of phenotypic variation . To achieve a more complete mapping 1IFREMER, Plouzane, France, 2Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub- of mouse CNVs, we used whole-genome oligonucleotide array com- lic of Iran. parative genome hybridization to identify CNVs in 13 inbred strains Chikungunya virus (CHIK), an alphavirus borne by Aedes mosqui- and in 21 wild mice . Using a hidden Markov model, we predicted some toes that produces dengue-like illness in humans, characterized by 3800 CNV candidate regions, which we subsequently validated using fever, rash, painful arthralgia, and sometimes arthritis throughout sub- a custom-made array . Thus multiplying by more than three the num- Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, India, and Western Pacific. Recent ber of copy-number variable regions previously reported in the mouse widespread geographic distribution, recurrent epidemics, and infec- genome . tion of military personnel, travelers and laboratory staff working with To address whether CNVs affect gene expression, we assessed the CHIK have indicated need for more understanding and to have safe expression levels of 45’037 transcription units in liver, kidney, brain, and efficacious vaccine. In our present study we have analyzed the heart, lung and testis of of six inbred mouse strains . We found that the characteristics of structural and non-structural proteins synthesized by variance of the expression levels for each of the recorded tissues is CHIK using computational tools and predicted the potential vaccine significantly larger for genes mapping inside than for genes mapping candidates . CHIK contains two proteins - non-structural and structural . outside of CNVs, suggesting that copy number variation affects the Computational analysis of non-structural protein revealed that it is variability of gene expression and must be taken into account when 275 .65 kDa hydrophilic protein, pI 6 .841, while that of the structural considering phenotypic differences between strains . Similarly, the protein revealed a 138 .88 kDa hydrophilic protein of pI 8 .88 . Antigenic genes mapping on the flanks of the CNVs, despite their not varying in prediction sites on non-structural and structural proteins predicted copy numbers, display a modification of their relative expression lev- were examined for their use as vaccine candidates for effective control els . This phenomenon is effective over several hundreds of kilobases of the disease . Positions of alpha helix and b-sheets in the second- away from a breakpoint . It is present in all assessed tissues and per- ary structure of the proteins were predicted which laid the path for 3D sistent throughout mouse development . Thus our results demonstrate structural characterization of the target proteins . On analyzing hydrop- that changes in genome structure influence not only gene dosage but athy plot, structural protein and non-structural protein were found to be also the expression of neighboring genes . hydrophilic . Using nucleotide sequences of the proteins, degenerate primers were designed for its use in PCR based diagnostic identifica- P08.17 tion of the CHIK. Primers designed could find its use as a diagnostic Development of taqman® copy Number Assays for copy tool for identifying CHIK infected patients specifically. The predicted Number Analysis antigenic sites could be used as potential vaccine candidates . K. Li, A. Broomer, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, F. Wang, I. Casuga, M. Xia, X. You, M. Bozzini, T. Hartshorne, G. Janaway, J. Tan, P. White, A. Toeppel, E. Spier, C. P08.15 Chen; cHDWiki: a comprehensive tool to gather and manage Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. cardiogenetic data Copy number variation is an important polymorphism in the human J. Breckpot1, R. Barriot2, B. Thienpont1, S. Van Vooren2, L. Tranchevent2, B. genome that can be associated with genomic disorders or various Coessens2, M. Gewillig3, Y. Moreau2, K. Devriendt1; diseases . Accurate detection of copy number differences is critical for 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Elec- understanding how copy number variation may play roles in diseases trical Engineering (ESAT), Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, such as cancer, immune diseases, and neurological disorders, and 3Paediatric Cardiology Unit, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium, Leuven, also drug response . Although array-based technologies are powerful Belgium. for genome-wide CNV discoveries and micro-deletion/micro-duplica- We present a Wiki based information system designed for the collabor- tion syndrome studies, more quantitative technologies with high ac- ative annotation of genes involved in congenital heart defects (CHD) . curacy, specificity, and sample throughput are necessary to validate In this context, a Wiki has many appealing features such as collabora- identified copy number changes and to detect deletions and duplica- tive user-friendly publication . However, a major obstacle for its use is tions for large sample sizes in candidate regions or genes . that, unlike databases, it lacks structure and semantics, which pre- Here we report our progress on the development of TaqMan Copy vents the use of further computational knowledge discovery approach- Number Assays . High quality targets for assay design are selected es. To benefit from both the Wiki flexibility and the databasing advan- across the whole human genome . A proprietary assay design pipe-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  line generates assays for genomic DNA targets, and includes genome Arrays and positive control templates (available through Gene Link™) specificity checks and screens to minimize oligo interactions. TaqMan offers an easy to use platform for accurate, reliable genotyping of drug Copy Number Assays are run together with a reference assay and metabolism and response variation . gDNA in a duplex real-time PCR . The TaqMan Copy Number Assay detects the target gene or genomic sequence of interest and the ref- P08.20 erence assay detects a sequence that is known to be present in two GEN2PHEN: An international effort towards the universal copies in a diploid genome. Relative quantification is achieved using databasing of gene-disease relationships a data analysis tool which has been developed for copy number de- A. J. Brookes1, D. Atlan2, C. Beroud3, E. Birney4, S. Brahmachari5, A. Cambon- termination . We will discuss progress in development of the assay de- Thomsen6, R. Dalgleish1, J. den Dunnen7, A. Devereau8, C. Diaz9, H. Gudbjarts- sign pipeline, and data analysis tool, and assay development including son10, I. Gut11, T. Kanninen12, H. Lehvaslaiho13, J. Litton14, J. Muilu15, J. Olivei- studies of reference assays, gDNA input titration, and the accuracy ra16, H. Parkinson4, G. P. Patrinos17, G. Potamias18, E. Wingender19, Y. L. Yip20; and precision of TaqMan CN assays . 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2PhenoSystems SA, Lillois, Belgium, 3INSERM, Montpellier, France, 4EBI, EMBL, Hinxton, United Kingdom, P08.18 5Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Delhi, India, 6INSERM, Toulouse, in silico search for the cryptic Rss in repetitive elements of France, 7Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 8Univer- human genome sity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9Fundació IMIM, Barcelona, A. Y. Gubsky1, V. G. Zinkovsky2; Spain, 10deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 11Commissariat à l’Energie 1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2University of Atomique, Paris, France, 12Biocomputing Platforms Ltd, Espoo, Finland, Opole, Opole, Poland. 13University of Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa, 14Karolinska Institute, Cryptic recombination signal sequences (cRSS) are targets sites of Stockholm, Sweden, 15University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 16University RAG1/2 proteins when the V(D)J-recombination system gets out of of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, 17Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, control . Early, we showed that in the human genome (outside the Ig The Netherlands, 18Foundation for Research and Technology, Crete, Greece, and TCR loci) there are 5649 cRSS which supposedly have high re- 19BioBase GmbH, Wolfenbuettel, Germany, 20Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, combination potential (their heptamers and nonamers corresponded Geneva, Switzerland. to CACAGTG and ACAAAAACC sequences or differed from them for With disease studies and genomics research producing ever larger da- 1-2 not functional nucleotides) . Some of them can hypothetically par- tasets, there is an urgent need for advanced informatics solutions that ticipate in the formation of intragenic deletions and inversions . At pres- can handle such extensive information . Launched in January 2008, ent, having matched coordinates of such cRSS with coordinates of the GEN2PHEN project (Genotype-To-Phenotype Databases: A Holis- 9933066 known in the human genome repetitive elements in silico, we tic Solution) aims to help address this need . observed that 3500 (61 %), 265 (5 %), 102 (2 %), 51 (1 %) 7 (0,1 %) The GEN2PHEN consortium (http://www .gen2phen .org/) involves 19 cRSS are the structural elements of non-LTR retrotransposons (AluY, research and company partners; including 17 from Europe, one from AluSx, L1, MIRb, etc), endogenous retroviruses and LTR retrotrans- India, and one from South Africa . Funding of 12 Million Euro from the posons (LTR1B, MLT1C, ERVL-E, etc), DNA transposons (Charlie1, European Commission (7th Framework Programme) is bolstered by MER58A, Tigger1, etc), simple repeats ((CA)n, (CAAAA)n, etc) and additional funds provided by the partner institutions . Being a key Eu- other repeats (not identified) respectively. Having researched the lo- ropean program, GEN2PHEN is intimately connected with other major calization of such cRSS, we observed that in 85 % cases the nucleo- infrastructure projects such as BBMRI and ELEXIR . tide sequences of motives are fully localized inside repeats and in 15 The main objective of GEN2PHEN is to establish the technological % cases are localized partly . In whole, cRSS were found in structure building-blocks needed to evolve today’s diverse databases into a of 414 unique types of repeats of 16 families . We consider, that many seamless genotype-to-phenotype (G2P) biomedical knowledge envi- types of repetitive elements can participate in spreading of motives ronment, tied into genome browsers like Ensembl . which can theoretically mediate instability in human genome when the The project’s specific objectives include: V(D)J-recombination system gets out of control . 1) Analysis of the current G2P informatics 2) Analysis of ethical aspects that need to be addressed P08.19 3) Development of key standards Development of a taqman® cytochrome P450 Panel Array and 4) Creation of generic database components and integration solutions Positive controls 5) Creation of search modalities and data presentation solutions T. Hartshorne, D. Merrill, S. Desai, T. Ceccardi; 6) Facilitation of data flows into G2P databases Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. 7) Creation of a ‘G2P Knowledge Centre’ providing information ex- The Cytochrome P450 enzymes: CYP2D6, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 change solutions, search/analysis tools, and support for primary data metabolize the majority of currently prescribed drugs . Pharmacoge- and comment deposition netic analysis of polymorphic alleles of their genes has demonstrated 8) Deployment of GEN2PHEN solutions to the community numerous links between functional polymorphisms, having absent or 9) Addressing questions of system durability and long-term financing altered enzyme activity, and cases of non-response or adverse drug The research leading to these results has received funding from the reactions. Genotyping these variants can have a significant role in pre- European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007- dictive drug metabolism and safe, efficacious drug therapy. 2013) under grant agreement n° 200754 . Applied Biosystems offers over 2600 TaqMan® Drug Metabolism P08.21 (DME) Genotyping Assays that detect polymorphisms in coding and two-Dimensional Electrophoresis of Nucleic Acids to Assess regulatory regions of over 220 DME genes . To facilitate pharmaco- Quality of Samples and Efficiency of Molecular Methods genetic research, TaqMan® DME Assay panels on TaqMan® Arrays J. J. Jonsson1,2, H. G. Thormar1,3, G. H. Gunnarsson1,3, F. S. Eiriksdottir3, B. were developed including a P450 array containing 48 assays to impor- Gudmundsson3, S. Sigurdardottir1,2, P. Estibeiro3; tant CYP2D6, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 variants . Arrays are 384-well 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Land- microfluidic cards that are pre-loaded with assays, greatly reducing spitali, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3BioCule Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland. experimental preparation time and eliminating the need for liquid-han- Two-dimensional (2D) electrophoresis allows separation of molecules dling robots or multi-channel pipettes . Benchmark tests conducted to based on different characteristics . Although widely used in proteome compare the performance of assays run on arrays to data from 384- studies, 2D electrophoresis of nucleic acids has so far only had lim- well plates showed that assays on arrays can be genotyped with the ited applications mostly in studies on DNA metabolism . We have in- same high success rate as on plates . An interactive data analysis tool, vented several new techniques of 2D electrophoresis of nucleic acids . AutoCaller™ software, enabled overlaying and viewing cluster plots These techniques can be used to simultaneously assess length dis- from multiple arrays and facilitated genotyping analysis . Synthetic tribution and strandness i .e . amount of single-stranded DNA, double- positive control templates for each assay were run on arrays in pools stranded DNA (both A and B forms) and RNA-DNA hybrids in various to represent all 3 genotypes; controls demonstrated assay functional- samples . DNA lesions detected with our technology include nicks, ity for each probe and aided genotype calling . TaqMan® DME SNP double-stranded breaks, base modifications and drop outs leading toGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 00 compromised base pairing or even generation of single-stranded DNA P08.24 molecules . Various lesions in DNA can happen in vivo and in vitro . We meta-analysis in the technology of DNA microarrays have observed extensive damage to DNA due to various types of le- A. Kastrin, B. Peterlin; sions formed in vitro upon storage of biosamples and under conditions Division Of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. simulating various laboratory procedures . These lesions in the origi- With the explosion of microarray technology, an enormous amount of nal samples influence the efficiency and quality of complex molecular data is being generated . Limited overlap among the published lists of procedures such as quantitative amplifications and random labelling discovered genes between similar studies makes it difficult to determine reactions . 2D Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis can also be which, if any, exhibit truly effect of differential expression and prompt- used to assess efficiency of cDNA synthesis, a critical step in genomic ing the question of whether microarray studies are inherently reliable . expression studies . Typical yield of double-stranded DNA is again very To address this issue it is of special interest to combine results across variable reflecting the poor control of such a complex procedure. To multiple studies of various research groups working on similar clinical make these techniques easily available to investigators, BioCule Inc . is entities . Systematic integration of gene expression data from differ- marketing a dedicated automated instrument using 2D microgels . ent sources increases reliability of detecting differentially expressed genes . The challenge, however, is in designing and implementing ef- P08.22 ficient analytic methodologies for combining high-throughput genomic the acidic environment as essential attribute for the DNA data from several related studies . We consider the meta-analysis of functioning different microarray data sets using a fixed and random effect para- T. M. Partskhaladze, T. J. Mdzinarashvili, T. I. Lomidze; digm and demonstrate how relatively standard statistical approach Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia. yield promising results . We illustrated proposed method by integrating Experimental results were obtained that give the possibility to conjec- gene expression profiles from three different prenatal trisomy 21 stud- ture mechanisms by which the proteins (RNA polymerases) carry out ies based on Affymetrix microarray technology. We identified a novel promoter melting, which is important step in transcription process . We set of 14 transcripts of potentially candidate genes, which are active in suppose that process of melting (opening of specific sites of ds-DNA) development of human embrio with trisomy 21 (Table 1) . Our results is induced by acting of acidic residues enriched regions of proteins . Ex- show that this approach would serve as a plausible method for analyz- perimental investigations of the DNA molecule in acidic environmental ing microarrays beyond the specific implications for trisomy 21. condition unambiguously have indicate that acidic area (pH<5 .0), in- Table 1. Statistically significant differentially expressed transcripts duces despiralization of DNA and process is reversible . The calory- across studies . metric measurements performed under different acidity condition have Affymetrix ID Gene Symbol z - value q - value shown, that ds-DNA structural flexibility greatly depends on the value 201086_x_at SON −5.380 0 .002 of solvent pH . It is shown that, by the increase of environmental acid- 200642_at SOD1 −5.204 0 .005 ity (in contrary to the alkaline environment), DNA structure undergose 214988_s_at SON −4.952 0 .005 considerable destabilization . We have demonstrated that if DNA de- 202671_s_at PDXK −4.723 0 .013 stabilysed under acidic treatment (for which stability of double helix 202217_at C21orf33 −4.580 0 .021 considerebly is reduced and most of its sites lack helical structure) 200944_s_at HMGN1 −4.431 0 .030 is trasferred in the neutral physiological environmental condition (pH 219767_s_at CRYZL1 −4.428 0 .030 7 .0), DNA restores its nature helical structure throughout . 201644_at TSTA3 −4.292 0 .049 202749_at WRB −4.246 0 .049 P08.23 218386_x_at USP16 −4.262 0 .049 the stochastic description of DNA hybridization 200740_s_at SUMO3 −4.204 0 .049 A. Arakelyan1, V. Arakelyan2; 213000_at MORC3 −4.192 0 .049 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Ye- 211065_x_at PFKL −4.185 0 .049 revan State University, Yerevan, Armenia. 216954_x_at ATP5O −4.165 0 .049 There are a lot of works devoted to DNA hybridization problem, howev- er practically in all works the process of hybridization is described de- P08.25 terministically . Such description is not full . The full description of DNA Multi-copy amplification of the exon 2 of the dystrophin gene hybridization process should be done in the framework of stochas- in a Duchenne muscular dystrophy patient: A new approach by tic model . For the stochastic description of DNA hybridization, let us Oligo-Array-cGH introduce the conditional probability function, that there are a certain H. Gabriel1, M. Kukuckova2, A. Utkus3, V. Kucinskas3, A. Lott1, M. Gencik1,2; number of DNA duplexes on substrate at moment of time, provided 1Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Medgene, that at a preceding moment of time on substrate there were another Bratislava, Slovakia, 3University of Vinius, Vilnius, Lithuania. number of DNA duplexes . Let us consider DNA hybridization process Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker muscular dystrophy as a discrete Markov process . We obtained equation for the change (BMD) are the most common inherited disorders of muscle . of conditional probability in time . Using this equation it is possible to Deletions are found in 55% of patients with BMD and 65% of patients calculate not only an average number of DNA duplexes, but also dis- with DMD . Point mutations account for ca . 30% of mutations, while persion, correlation function and spectral density of DNA duplexes duplications can be found in 5-10% of DMD patients . number on substrate . It is shown, that with raising the concentration MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification), is widely of single-stranded DNA in solution the dispersion of DNA duplexes on used as a reliable method to detect both deletions and duplications of substrate increases, and then passing through a maximum decreases, dystrophin exons . and at a very high concentration of single-stranded DNA the dispersion Here we describe a 5 years old male patients from lithuania with sus- approaches zero . The results we have obtained can be used in DNA- pected Duchenne muscular dystrophia . He had a positive Gower sign chip technology . In many cases, the basic source of random variations and pseudohypertrophy of calf . Muscular biopsy showed muscular of a signal during information read-out from DNA-chip is fluctuation of dystrophy with lipomatosis and fibrosis. CPK tests revealed a value concentration of immobilized DNA, and this is result of chip production of >22 .000 U/L . technology. Our calculations indicate that another source of fluctuation Analysis of the dystrophin gene by multiplex PCR excluded deletions . is present, which is connected to the stochastic nature of DNA hybrid- MLPA showed a single amplification of the exon 2 of the dystrophin ization process . gene . Surprisingly, calculation of the MLPA data revealed the pres- ence of 4 to 5 copies of the exon 2. To validate this finding quantitative real-time PCR was performed giving also evidence for 4 to 5 copies of exon 2 MLPA testing of the patients mothers demonstrated that the amplifica- tion was de novo . To identify the exact range of the amplification a new approach by oligo-array-CGH was conceived . Shortly, a customer-designed 44kGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 Oligo-Array (Agilent) was created . Multiple probes on this array span- P08.28 ning the amplified region of exon 2 of the dystrophin gene. An in vivo unbiased screen for enhancer activity using In a next step Array-CGH data will provide a basic for the design of lentivector-mediated transgenesis PCR systems for exact determination of the amplification limits. M. Friedli1, I. Barde2, C. Attanasio1, M. Arcangeli1, A. Quazzola2, S. Verp2, F. Spitz3, J. Zakany4, D. Duboule4,2, D. Trono2, S. E. Antonarakis1; P08.26 1University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Role of the kinase DYRK1A in cerebral cortex development: Geneva, Switzerland, 2EPFL, School of Life Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland, effects on the transcriptome 3EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany, 4University of Geneva, Department of Zoology E. Balducci1,2, M. J. Barallobre1,2, M. C. Ruiz de Villa3, A. Sánchez3, M. L. Ar- and Animal Biology, Geneva, Switzerland. bonés1,2; Finding sequences that control spatial and temporal expression of 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedi- genes is important to understand genome function . Here, we present cal Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 3Statistics De- an in vivo screen for enhancers in a contiguous 200-kilobase DNA partment, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. fragment using lentivector-mediated transgenesis . Previous studies DYRK1A is a dual-specificity protein kinase involved in brain develop- have used evolutionary conservation as an indicator of regulatory ment . Human DYRK1A is located in the Down Syndrome (DS) Critical potential, but increasing evidence suggests that this criterion system- Region of chromosome 21 and its overexpression has been associat- atically overlooks functional sequences . We thus designed our study ed to the neurological defects observed in DS . Nevertheless, DYRK1A without any bias towards a particular sequence feature . We chose a function at the molecular level remains poorly understood . As DYRK1A mouse BAC corresponding to a region of Hsa21 because it contains substrates include several transcription factors, we have analyzed the the olig1 and olig2 genes that are expressed specifically in the CNS. impact of Dyrk1a dose reduction on the transcriptome of mouse cere- In order to screen this fragment systematically for enhancer activity, bral cortex at postnatal day 0 (P0) and 7 (P7) . To this end, global gene we generated a library of 121 overlapping clones (sizes: 2-4kb) in a expression of Dyrk1a+/- and Dyrk1a+/+ cortices were compared using LacZ reporter lentiviral construct containing a minimal promoter . We Affymetrix chips . generated lentivectors individually for each segment and injected them Microarray results revealed deep changes in gene expression extend- in pools of 10 or 20 in mouse oocytes . LacZ staining was performed ing into the set of 3169 genes analyzed . Among those, 22% and 5% on E11 embryos to identify expression patterns. The first six pools showed different expression levels between genotypes at P0 and P7 tested yielded 60 of 242 LacZ positive embryos with ~2 .5 transgenes respectively (adj-p<0 .05) . Despite this global perturbation, changes in per embryo. To date, 7 fragments of 52 assessed were identified that the expression of individual genes were subtle: only 1% (at P0) and potentially contain gene expression regulators. To confirm regulatory 3% (at P7) of the differentially expressed genes showed a fold-change activity, 4 sequences were re-injected individually, 2 (one evolutionary >2 . Gene Ontology analysis revealed enrichment in transporters within conserved) of which were confirmed as tissue specific enhancers with the down-regulated genes and in DNA binding molecules within the up- stainings in the spinal chord and trigeminal ganglion compatible with regulated genes both, at P0 and at P7 . Among the genes deregulated olig expression . The method could be scaled up to cover large chro- between genotypes, 61 were common to both developmental stages . mosomal regions, and determine what fraction of the constrained and Interestingly, their regulation showed a similar trend at P0 and P7 but non-constrained genome has regulatory potential . always opposite to the developmental trend (defined by the expression of such genes in Dyrk1a+/+ mice at P7 vs P0) . P08.29 These results suggest that DYRK1A plays a pivotal role in cerebral Enhanced workflow for sequencing PCR products by capillary cortex development acting on the regulation of the transcriptome . electrophoresis P. Kotturi, E. Currie-Fraser, S. Pickrell, M. Johnson, P. McNamara; P08.27 Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. Re-examining the human genome Since the introduction of Sanger dideoxy sequencing, significant ef- R. J. Kinsella, I. Barnes, C. Snow, A. Frankish, J. Mudge, L. Wilming, J. Love- forts have been directed toward increasing throughput by streamlining land, D. Carvalho-Silva, J. Rajan, E. Hart, L. Gordon, J. Gilbert, S. Trevanion, T. workflow. We describe here further enhancements for a PCR product Hubbard, J. L. Harrow; resequencing workflow capable of reducing the total time, from begin- Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom. ning PCR reactions through completion of basecalling, to 6 hours or Recent improvements in sequencing technologies enable the routine less. The workflow shown employs a new AmpliTaq Gold® Fast PCR sequencing of large complex genomes . However the annotation of Master Mix in conjunction with modified thermal cycler conditions to such genomes is still complex and there is no higher eukaryote that substantially reduce the time required for PCR amplification. Process has all its coding sequences predicted to 100% accuracy . The HA- time is further reduced through optimization of cycle sequencing (BDT VANA group (http://www .sanger .ac .uk/HGP/havana/) at the Wellcome v1 .1) conditions . We have coupled these improvements with an ef- Trust Sanger Institute is involved in manually annotating all the coding ficient sequencing reaction cleanup protocol and decreased CE run transcripts within the human genome through various international col- time using the fast plates on a 3130xL . Overall data quality compares laborations . The team is involved in the scale up of the ENCODE pilot favorably with data obtained using previously documented methods . gene annotation project (GENCODE) to the whole human genome . The increased efficiency and generation of high quality results is vital The project includes seven other partner institutes and will integrate to both clinical and research applications in reducing time to discov- computational approaches, expert manual annotation and targeted ery . experimental approaches to generate a reference gene set . This will include analysis of pseudogenes, experimental validation of putative/ P08.30 novel genes and examination of the protein-coding potential of genes Analysis of copy number variation using formalin-fixed paraffin- using comparative and structural analysis . embedded (FFPE) samples on BAc microarrays In addition, the Havana group collaborates with RefSeq at NCBI, D. Postma, S. Snoeijers, M. Lacombe, S. Schoenmakers; UCSC and Ensembl to produce a core set of human and mouse coding Kreatech Diagnostics BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. genes for the Consensus CDS (CCDS) project . Any CCDS candidate Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) has become transcripts where there is disagreement between WTSI/EBI and NCBI a powerful tool to analyze DNA copy number changes . Especially in annotation are manually re inspected, discussed and, where possible, combination with archival tissue samples with well-documented fol- an accord is reached on a structure (18293 human CCDS agreed to low-up data, it enables the analysis of genomic changes underlying date) . The end result is a combined, non-redundant gene set agreed tumour development . Unfortunately, DNA isolated from archival, for- by several of the major genome centers . malin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) material, is often degraded All annotation is displayed on the Vertebrate Genome Annotation and therefore difficult to label. In theory, labelling techniques that skip (VEGA) database, a central repository for high quality manual anno- the use of enzymes would be the best option . Therefore, we compared tation of finished vertebrate genome sequence with a three monthly the non-enzymatic Universal Linkage System (ULS) and conventional release cycle (http://vega .sanger .ac .uk/index .html) . random priming to label DNA isolated from FFPE material . Testing of FFPE samples that had been stored for up to 17 years showedGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 that ULS-labelling yielded satisfying degrees of labelling (DoL~1 .5%), across plates and across manufacturing lots . For assays with CT<32 while the ones for random priming were ~0 .2% . Reproducibility of the the StDev was <0 .3 for all of these comparisons . Finally, data showing analysis of these samples on BAC arrays was better as well (R2=0 .96 reproducibility for plates run by different individuals at different sites for ULS vs R2=0 .88 for random priming) . will be presented . In addition, aCGH applications involve substantial amounts of genom- ic DNA, while the amount of DNA available is often limited, requir- P08.33 ing whole-genome amplification (WGA). Recently, Qiagen’s REPLI-g EUREXpress, a transcriptome atlas of the developing mouse has been optimized for degraded samples . Therefore, we compared embryo: a valuable resource to study mechanisms of gene BAC aCGH experiments using 100ng of FFPE DNA, labelled using expression either direct random priming or a combination of REPLI-g and ULS G. Diez Roux, EURExpress consortium; or REPLI-g and random priming . Correlation with data obtained using Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy. conventional microgram amounts of input DNA data was best for the Genome-wide expression analyses have a crucial role in functional REPLI-g/ULS combination (R2=0 .84 vs 0 .70 for random priming), as genomics . The EU-funded EURExpress consortium has generated was reproducibility . a transcriptome-wide acquisition of expression patterns by means of In conclusion, ULS allows aCGH analysis of archival DNA, while mini- ISH and established a web-linked, interactive digital transcriptome mizing labelling-induced bias . atlas (www .eurexpress .org) . To date we have generated over 12000 expression patterns, which have been thoroughly annotated . This in- P08.31 terface includes 1420 anatomical structures and correlative trees re- Functional SNP candidates identified by genome wide ChIP garding ontological (embryological) and topological relations allowing analyses advanced queries . In order to perform more global analysis we divided A. Ameur1, A. Rada-Iglesias2,3, O. Wallerman2, M. Motallebipour2, S. Enroth1, J. the genes studied into two main categories, based on their annotated Komorowski1,4, C. Wadelius2; expression patterns, namely a) “regional”, i .e ., genes with clearly de- 1The Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Rudbeck Labora- tectable patterns which however were not widespread to all the tis- tory, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Current address: The Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformat- sues, and b) ubiquitous/undetectable, i .e ., genes which either did not ics, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Interdisciplinary Centre for Mathematical and Computer give any clearly detectable pattern in any tissue or were detected in all Modelling, Warsaw, Poland. tissues . The analysis of the data has determined that 35-40% of genes Disease-associated SNPs identified in large association studies are at E14 .5 present a restricted/regional expression pattern . We sought often located in non-coding regions and it is possible that some SNPs to establish possible correlations between the genomic properties of affect the interaction between transcription factors and DNA . In HepG2 regional genes vs . undetectable/ubiquitous genes including gene size, cells we mapped binding sites for the transcription factors USF1 and number of annotated alternative transcripts, and degree of evolution- USF2 along the genome using ChIP-chip . Using the novel BCRANK ary conservation . Statistical analysis revealed that regional genes have algorithm, we detected 1754 binding sites for USF1 with the predicted a) an average genomic length considerably higher than undetectable/ binding motif . In dbSNP, we found 140 candidate functional SNPs in ubiquitous genes, a) a higher number of alternative splice isoforms these motifs . Eight of the SNPs were heterozygous in at least one of and c) are conserved in a higher number of species across evolution four human cell samples . In 5 of 6 cases where the SNP was inside the as compared to undetectable/ubiquitous genes . In addition, the data core predicted USF1 binding motif CACGTGAC, ChIP and sequence has also allowed performing detailed molecular characterization of the analysis of the enriched DNA showed that USF1 was, with statistical CNS and has identified, for example, novel molecular regionalization significance bound to the allele containing the USF1 consensus and of the thalamus, diencephalons and the telencephalic pallium . less to the other. We detected significant allelic differences for USF2, POLR2A and H3K27me3 . As a negative control, we analyzed 2 cases P08.34 where the SNP was located just outside USF1 core sequence and saw Functional exploration of the fibrinogen gene landscape to no differences for any investigated factor . By high resolution genotyp- identify new regulatory mechanisms ing in the HepG2 genome we have a dense map of potential functional A. Fort1, L. Palumbo1, R. J. Fish1, M. Neerman-Arbez1,2; SNPs . We have mapped additional factors along the genome using 1University Medical Center, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Division of Angiology and ChIP-sequencing, identified individual binding motifs containing hun- Haemostasis, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland. dreds of SNPs. Furthermore, we found significant enrichment of one The transcription of the three fibrinogen genes is coordinately regu- allele at heterozygous positions as indication of allele specific DNA- lated and previous studies have described cis-acting elements situ- protein interactions. Thus, individual binding sites can be defined at ated in each of the 5’-promoter regions . Recent advances in verte- base pair resolution and large numbers of candidate functional SNPs brate genome sequencing and annotation allowed us to search for can be predicted in genome wide experiments . more distant cis-/trans-regulatory elements involved in the regulation of the fibrinogen gene cluster and investigate the molecular mecha- P08.32 nisms by which these elements participate in transcriptional regulation . TaqMan® Express: A format for easy mRNA quantification using Multi-species genome comparisons revealed remarkable conservation pre-plated taqman Gene Expression Assays of the fibrinogen gene cluster structure as well as a conserved adja- K. Poulter, F. Chan, J. Rappleye, P. Hegerich, D. N. Keys, K. Y. Lee, G. Mar- cent syntenic gene desert region (130kb) . We therefore speculate that cus, S. Koepf, C. Chen; regulatory element of the fibrinogen gene cluster have also been con- Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. served throughout the vertebrates’ evolution and reside in the syntenic TaqMan® Express Plates contain up to 96 pre-spotted and dried Taq- regions including the cluster . Analyses of the conserved block of syn- Man Gene Expression Assays on an optical 96-well plate . Pre-plated teny bearing the fibrinogen cluster (200kb), using the VISTA browser, assays simplify, accelerate and help error-proof mRNA quantification revealed 33 conserved non-coding sequences (CNC) . We tested the experiments . This is especially important when there is more than one regulatory potential of 17 of the CNCs in a reporter assay, by insert- operator in a lab, when a study is being done across multiple labs, or ing each CNC upstream of a Luciferase gene . Regulatory activity was when a study is extended over a period of time . The assays in Taq- measured in hepatoma cell lines (Huh7, HepG2) and in HEK-293T man® Express plates are user-selected from a catalogue of >50,000 cells. We identified 3 CNCs with hepatocyte-specific enhancer activity, Taqman assays targeting human, mouse, rat, Rhesus and dog genes . one residing between FGB and FGA and two situated in the adjacent Here, we show that TaqMan assays which are aliquoted and dried for syntenic non-coding region . We are also performing chromosome con- storage perform comparably to standard wet assays aliquoted imme- formation capture (3C) experiments to identify cis or trans DNA-DNA diately before use . Dynamic range for dried assays showed >6 logs interactions between the proximal fibrinogen gene promoters and cur- of linearity, detection of 2-fold discrimination with 99.7% confidence rently unknown sequences . was demonstrated, and limit of detection was <10 copies . When the Future work will focus on the functional characterization of these newly wet vs dry performance of a defined set of assays was compared, identified cis-regulatory elements. the difference between the normalized CT values (ddCT) was <0 .3 . The data also shows strong reproducibility for replicates within andGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 P08.35 P08.37 complete sequencing of the cFtR gene using the new methylation-sensitive High Resolution melting Analysis as a generation Gs-FLX sequencing technology diagnostic tool for Beckwith-Wiedemann and silver-Russell H. Cuppens, L. Vliegen, J. Cassiman; syndromes. Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. M. Alders, J. Bliek, K. vd Lip, R. vd Boogaard, M. Mannens; In most genes involved in genetic diseases, a broad spectrum of muta- Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. tions is found. Even for diseases such as cystic fibrosis, genetic test- The Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and Silver-Russell syn- ing can be very challenging . Indeed, routine CFTR genetic tests only drome (SRS) are caused by disturbed imprinting at 11p15 . This region screen for the most common mutations (88-92% sensitivity in most harbors two independently regulated clusters of imprinted genes . The European countries) . first cluster is under control of the IC1 upstream of the H19 promoter, New generation sequencing technology, such as picotiter pyrose- which is methylated only at the paternal allele . The second cluster is quencing on a GS-FLX system, has been recently introduced . Howev- controlled by IC2 upstream of the KCNQ1OT1 promoter and is meth- er, this technology was initially developed for whole genome sequenc- ylation on the maternal allele only . ing purposes . BWS is an overgrowth syndrome . The majority of the patients display We adopted this technology for complete sequence analysis of the hypermethylation of IC1, hypomethylation of IC2 or both . SRS is a CFTR coding region, and its exon/intron junctions . growth retardation syndrome and in a subset of patients a hypometh- To this aim we have developed a robust multiplex amplification assay ylation of IC1 is found, opposite to the aberration found in BWS pa- in which biotinylated amplicon-specific primers are locally restricted tients . through streptavidin/biotin crosslinking . Indeed, 30 amplicons should Molecular confirmation of BWS and SRS is done by methylation analy- be analyzed for the CFTR gene, which can be only economically feasi- sis of IC1 and IC2 . Since the methylation defects in BWS and SRS are ble if amplified in one, or a limited number, PCR multiplex reaction(s). mosaic the test must be quantitative . For a 50x coverage, only half a million nucleotides are needed for We set out to validate High Resolution Melting Analysis (HRMA) for CFTR sequence analysis, i .e . 0 .5% of the full capacity of the GS-FLX methylation analysis in BWS/SRS diagnostics . Advantages of this system . Therefore, 100-200 samples should be pooled in order to use method are that it is fast, cost effective and requires no post PCR the full capacity of the GS-FLX system . We therefore also developed handling . We tested a group of 17 BWS/SRS patients with different an universal sample tagging approach allowing the pooling of more levels of hyper- and hypomethylation at IC1 and/or IC2 and 45 normal than 100 samples with one set of 260 primers (60 amplicon-specific controls. All patients showed a melting profile different from the normal and 200 tagging primers) . This compares to 6000 primers if amplicon- controls and the degree of deviation was consistent with the degree specific PCR primers are tagged as such. of hypo- or hypermethylation as determined by southern blotting . In This technique is readily transferable to any gene, allowing sequenc- conclusion, HRMA analysis proofs to be a fast, reliable and sensitive ing of more than 100 samples for the same gene, or even different diagnostic tool for BWS and SRS . genes, in an economically feasible way . P08.38 P08.36 calibraton improves methylation-sensitive high resolution Nuclear localization of sm22 alpha during heart development melting results E. Bregant1, R. Lonigro1, N. Passon1, A. Scaloni2, G. Renzone3, M. Pandolfi4, C. N. Gundry1, M. Wall1, J. McKinney1, J. D. Phillips2, M. K. Yu3, D. H. F. Teng1; C. Di Loreto4, G. Damante5; 1Idaho Technology, SLC, UT, United States, 2University of Utah, SLC, UT, 11.Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technologies, Udine, Italy, 22.Pro- United States, 3Myriad Genetics, SLC, UT, United States. teomics and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM , Napoli, Italy, 32.Pro- High resolution melting has been shown to be a sensitive method for teomics and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM, , Napoli, Italy, 43.De- methylation detection of CpG sites . In high resolution melting, multiple partment of Medical Morphological Research , Udine, Italy, 51. Department of CpG sites within the same PCR fragment can be detected homoge- Biomedical Sciences and Technologies, Udine, Italy. neously. Unlike the common real-time methylation-specific PCR tech- The molecular mechanisms that control heart development have been nique (MethylLight Taqman probe detection) hi-res melting provides the subject of intense investigation . The transition of embryonic to more information with fewer PCRs . As 5-methylcytosines are resistant adult cardiomyocytes is associated to changes in the expression pat- to conversion to uracils, there can be substantial sample-to-sample terns of different proteins . melting differences depending on the number of CpG dinucleotide Aim of this study is the identification of nuclear proteins whose expres- sites and the sequence context within the fragment . However, depend- sion is modified during cardiac differentiation. A proteomic approach, ing upon fragment and the exact number of 5-methylcytosines actually based on two-dimensional electrophoresis was utilized . The experi- converted during the bisulfite treatment, there can be both variation in mental model is the H9C2, a myoblast cell line derived from embry- replicate conversions of the same sample and very subtle melting dif- onic rat ventricle . These cells proliferate in medium with 10% serum, ferences between samples . Both of these problems are resolved with instead low serum and stimulation with retinoic acid induce differentia- calibrated melting . Calibration has especially been helpful to increase tion versus cardiomyocytes . accuracy of genotyping when melting differences are subtle . This tech- We have analyzed the nuclear extracts of H9C2 that are grown in niques improves hi-res melting reproducibility and genotyping calls via proliferation medium and in differentiation medium by proteomic ap- synthetic oligonucleotide probes . We used melt calibration in conjunc- proach . tion with amplicon methylation analysis to improve our detection in a Seven different proteins have been identified as differentially expressed highly methylated region . We obtained excellent resolution of amplicon after MALDI-TOFF, LC-ESI-MS/MS mass spectrometry . An interesting fragments within a hypermethylated region of the miRNA-195 genomic protein is SM22 alpha (transgelin), a 22-KD cytoskeletal protein that is sequence. Sequence verification showed that our homogeneous tech- a marker of smooth muscle cells . nique is comparable to this gold standard in accuracy . The level of the SM22 alpha is reduced at 20 th day of differentiation condition. These data are confirmed by Western-Blot analysis and P08.39 quantitative RT-PCR . interlaboratory validation of High Resolution melting (HRm) for By immunochemistry, we confirmed the nuclear localization of the pro- BRcA1 and BRcA2 on the Lightcycler® 480 tein in H9C2 cell line . Furthermore, in histological section of human T. Janssens1, N. van der Stoep2, R. Buser3, G. Michils1, A. Corveleyn1, E. De- embryonic heart we show that SM22 alpha is located at nuclear level queker1, P. Maillet3, E. Bakker2, G. Matthijs1; in heart vessels and in myocytes of the cardiac outflow. 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human and Clini- Thus, our data indicate that SM22 alpha can be localized in the nucle- cal Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Laboratory of Oncogenetics, Geneva, us and suggest that this localization is regulated during development Switzerland. High Resolution Melting (HRM) was selected as a technology for which a thorough validation would be very timely . In a collaborative EuroGen- test study, we extensively tested it on the LightCycler® 480 . HRM is a fast, simple and cost-effective high-throughput scanningGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 method to detect sequence variations . PCR is performed in the pres- tially competent NCC progenitors continue to reside in many tissues ence of a saturating dsDNA binding dye . Single-base variations in the in animal models . Due to their inaccessibility and despite their devel- amplicon result in altered melting behaviour after heteroduplex forma- opmental importance, the original properties and restriction of hNCC tion, visualised by HRM plots . The LightCycler® 480 performs both potential over time have never been examined . Here, we demonstrate PCR and HRM in one run . when and how to isolate self-renewing hNCC and report the resul- BRCA1 and BRCA2 were chosen as target genes, because their size tant study of their transcriptome by serial analysis of gene expression and mutation spectrum represent a challenge in molecular diagnos- (SAGE) . In addition to highlighting candidate disease genes, we have tics . Current methods, like dHPLC and DGGE, despite their good per- identified novel markers that distinguish hNCC from other human cell formance, are limited by throughput or labour-intensity . types and distinguished between evolutionarily conserved and spe- HRM is potentially useful for solving these problems . However, it needs cies-specific NCC properties. Genome-wide analysis, using multiple to be shown that the sensitivity and the user-friendliness are at least as statistical criteria, demonstrates that the global molecular signature of good as the current state of the art . We set up an extensive validation early migratory hNCC is remarkably similar to that of pluripotent hu- in 3 laboratories . man embryonic stem cells . We show that most cell types of the human The first objective was to design a complete primer set for BRCA1 pharyngula express a number of genes in situ that, individually, do not and BRCA2 . Indeed, the performance of HRM is largely depending on autonomously confer pluripotency but taken within the context of the PCR quality. Critical criteria were specific banding patterns after gel transcriptome, may be permissive for the unique plasticity of hNCC electrophoresis, sigmoid curves on real-time PCR plots and less than over time. Our findings pave the way for further studies of hNCC thera- 3 melting domains per amplicon . peutic potential in neurocristopathies such as peripheral demyelinating About 300 known variations are being tested in a blinded way . This will disorders . allow us to determine whether HRM reaches a sensitivity close to 99%, which would make it a suitable new method for diagnostic use . P08.42 Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) typing and sequence-Based P08.40 typing (sBt) for Blood stem cell transplants interlaboratory validation study of High Resolution melting N. Cereb1, L. L. Xu2, E. Vennemeyer2, S. Jankowski2, S. Y. Yang1; curve Analysis for mutation scanning of BRcA1 using the 1HistoGenetics, Ossining, NJ, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Lightscanner (it) CA, United States. N. van der Stoep1, C. D. M. van Paridon1, A. Stambergova2, P. Norambuena2, Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) are protein markers that are found M. Macek2, T. Janssens3, G. Matthijs3, E. Bakker1; on most of the body’s cells . The immune system uses HLA to recog- 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Institute nize which cells belong in your body and which do not . These protein of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center for Human markers help identify a person’s tissue type . The HLA proteins are im- Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. portant in matching patients and donors for a bone marrow, peripheral The current set up for mutation scanning of BRCA1 occurs through blood cell (PBSC)or cord blood transplant . When a transplant center sequence analysis, DGGE, PTT and DHPLC . All these techniques looks at the match level, it is looking at how alike the HLA tissue types are time consuming and expensive . Therefore we have evaluated the of the patient and the donor are to each other . High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis (HR-MCA) as a high-through- We will demonstrate that directed sequencing of over 40 PCR-ampli- put mutation-scanning tool for the BRCA1 gene using LightScanner cons (including forward/reverse) in the HLA-Class I region provides a from Idaho Technology (IT) and the LightScanner-MasterMix . This complete test result for each patient . Even one amino acid variation in study was implemented in the EuroGentest evaluation program for each HLA gene between the donor and recipient increases transplant new techniques in genome diagnostics . Investigations were carried out mortality risk by 10% . Using an exact sequencing match will greatly using a panel of >189 variants and 327 wt controls . We optimized and improve the patient’s chances of transplant success . evaluated 58 primer-sets that cover BRCA1 . All heterozygous variants Direct sequencing for HLA typing gives the accurate and ultimate an- could be detected using the Call-IT-1 .5 software resulting in a 100% swer, without a timely screening step prior to sequencing . Using state- mutation-detection sensitivity . These variants also include small DNA of-art automated capillary electrophoresis instrumentation and bioin- deletions and insertions . Out of 327 wts we observed 3,7% false posi- formatics tools to deliver these results saves lives by reducing time tive curves (FP) resulting in a specificity of 96%. Re-evaluation of ten before a donor is located, increasing successful transplant outcome BRCA1-amplicons in the two other diagnostic laboratories gave rise and lowering subsequent healthcare cost . to identical results . Moreover using unlabeled probes we were able to identify many frequent occurring polymorphisms, omitting unnecessary P08.43 sequence analysis . Finally we selected a set of 41 best-performing conserved and non-conserved transcription regulatory elements primers that encompass the entire BRCA1 gene using stringent criteria associated with siNEs in mammalian promoters and performed 2 blind tests on 27 patient DNA samples that were se- N. V. Tomilin; quenced in parallel. Optimal HR-MC analyses setting were fixed based Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. on the results obtained with our large set of known control samples . In About half of promoters of protein-coding genes in the mouse and both series we detected all heterozygous variants and observed a FP- human genomes contain sequences of interspersed repeats which score of 1,8% . In conclusion, HR-MCA with the LightScanner appears can effect gene expression . Recent estimations suggest that some of to be a rapid and sensitive method for mutation scanning . these sequences are evolutionary conserved and may represent >5% of all constrained nonexonic elements which are under strong purifying P08.41 selection in mammalian genomes . However, major fraction of impor- Isolation and transcriptional profiling of embryonic human tant regulatory elements is not constrained in evolution . These ele- neural crest cells ments can be recruited from a large pool of lineage-specific dispersed S. Thomas1, M. Thomas1, P. Wincker2, P. Xu3, M. C. Speer3, A. Munnich1, S. repeats . For example, human Alu and mouse B1 repeats contain short Lyonnet1, M. Vekemans1, H. C. Etchevers1; conserved segments with potential binding site for transcription factor 1INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2GENOSCOPE (CEA) and UMR 8030 CNRS- PitX2 (binding motif YTGGGATTANW) which is important for estab- GENOSCOPE-Université d’Evry, Evry, France, 3Center for Human Genetics, lishement of left-right asymmetry in development of multiple organs . Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United Alu-associated binding sites for PitX2 regulate expression of human States. PLOD1 and ANF genes but most of downstream target genes for PitX2 Developmental and stem cell biology ask the common question of how is not established . Our results indicate that >1000 of mouse or human functionally distinct cell types arise from one self-renewing founder genes contain Alu/B1 associated PitX2 binding sites and these genes population . Human neural crest cells (hNCC) form in the embryo at the are expressed in almost all tissues . >100 of these promoters also have end of the first month of pregnancy, although the precise dates have potential binding site for transcription factor Nkx2 .5 (motif TYAAGTG) remained elusive . Most NCC differentiate completely into melanocytes, which frequently cooperates with PitX2 in gene regulation . Among all components of the peripheral nervous system, certain endocrine PitX2 and Nkx2 .5 targets in the mouse genome we found promoters cells and connective and structural tissues in the head, although par- of SMARCD3, PRKCZ and NIPA1 genes expressed at high level inGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 brain . However, in human genome other brain-expressed genes hav- P08.46 ing SINE-associated PitX2/Nkx2.5 sites are identified (e.g. KIF17). It is confocal morphometry of the transfected human mesenchymal likely that SINEs contributed to regulatory evolution of brain-expressed stem cells genes through their associated binding sites for PitX2 in a lineage spe- A. V. Lavrov1, T. V. Karamysheva2, N. B. Rubtsov2; cific manner. 1Research Center of Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. P08.44 Transfected human stem cells (SC) demonstrate grate potential for KingFisher® Flex - Versatile automated nucleic acid, protein and clinical applications . They are extensively investigated to elucidate cell purification their efficiency and safety. We focused on studying the reaction of SC S. Suomalainen, M. Partanen, V. Puro, A. Lamberg; on the introducing the genetic construction . Morphometry of nuclei of Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland. the transfected mesenchimal stem cells (MSC) was performed . Sample preparation is often a limiting step for genomics and pro- Materials and methods: The culture of MSC at the “late” passage (12) teomics studies. Rapid and efficient isolation of nucleic acids, proteins was used . Lipid-mediated transfection was performed with a non-viral and cells from complex biological matrixes is needed to get high qual- vector based on ps415 containing VEGF121 using UF-56 as the lipid ity starting material for various experiments . KingFisher, the magnetic media . After 90 minutes media was changed . Cells were washed and bead based, automated purification system from Thermo Fisher Sci- cultivated for two days, then seeded on cover-glasses and cultivated entific, provides a quick and easy solution to achieve high quality and 24 hours more. Cells were fixated with paraformaldehyde. Nuclei were reproducible results in purification of nucleic acids, proteins and cells contrasted with DAPI . Scanning was performed using confocal micro- with minimal hands-on time . The technology is based on magnetic scope Axioimager A1 . rods which move particles through the various purification phases - Results: average nucleus dimensions of the transfected human binding, mixing, washing and elution . The KingFisher is an open and mesenchimal stem cells: 14,6x8,7x8,3mkm and of control MSC - flexible system, letting the user to choose any available magnetic par- 14,8x8,9x8,3mkm . ticle based purification kit suitable for the application. Conclusions: transfected MSC have the same nucleus dimensions Thermo Scientific KingFisher family consists of three instruments with as the control MSC . Additional studies should be performed to check different throughput and working volume capacities . The latest mem- chromatin structure and the form of the nuclei which appeared slightly ber of the family is KingFisher Flex, which is truly flexible solution for different in our study . Objective formal criteria should be formulated to different types of sample processing needs . There are four magnetic perform such analysis . The integrity of the nucleus may prove the sta- heads available for the instrument depending of the needed process- bility of MSC after transfection forming the basis for further application ing volumes. With the 24-rod configuration the processing volume can of the transfected MSC in clinical trials . be raised up to 5 ml and with the 96-rod configuration it is possible to achieve the highest throughput in working volumes 20-1000 µl . The in- P08.47 strument is compatible with robotic platforms providing a high through- RmetaWeb: meta-analysis online tool put automated solution for all biotech and pharmaceutical laborato- A. Kastrin; ries . The data from different applications shows that KingFisher Flex Division Of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. provides a rapid method for purification of high quality and quantity Meta-analysis is a statistical procedure that integrates the results of biological molecules . several independent studies . The number of papers published on meta-analyses in biomedical domain has increased sharply in the past P08.45 15 years . The merits and perils of the somewhat mysterious proce- Diagnosis optimization by using mLPA in the investigation dure of meta-analysis, however, continue to be debated in the medi- protocol in mentally retarded children - Romanian experience cal community . Given the increasing pace of published meta-analysis A. Sireteanu1, E. Neagu2, G. Schobers3, V. Bica4, C. Skrypnyk5, M. Puiu6, V. studies, their methodological quality, however, still leaves much to be Cret7, L. Barbarii2, C. Rusu1; desired . We have developed RMetaWeb, an online system for com- 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, prehensive, fast, and reliable research synthesis analysis . The web Romania, 2”Mina Minovici” Forensic Medicine Institute, Bucuresti, Romania, interface is based on a Perl CGI script that communicates with R us- 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical ing the CGIwithR library . An interactive viewer provides straightforward Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Institute for Mother and Child, Bucuresti, navigation through various procedures . Output is exported to an HTML Romania, 5Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Oradea, Oradea, and PDF, which offers convenient views on the results in both tabular Romania, 6University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 7Chil- and graphical formats. RMetaWeb is intended to serve to the scientific dren’s Hospital, Cluj, Romania. community and it is hoped that it will become a useful tool on conduct- Mental retardation (MR) is a heterogeneous entity, genetic causes ing reliable meta-analysis in biomedical research . The RMetaWeb is being involved mainly in moderate/severe forms . Subtelomeric rear- freely available from http://genepark .mf .uni-lj .si . rangements (SR) play an important role in idiopatic MR determinism . Recently introduced MLPA (Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification) P08.48 technique seems to provide good results in SR’s identification. We Optimizing bisulfite DNA conversion method for methylated CpG have used MLPA to identify SR in children with idiopatic MR, the proto- island discovery and screening col consisting of the following sequence: clinical selection based on de E. Currie-Fraser, B. Finkelnburg, S. Jankowski, L. Xu; Vries score; karyotype; antiFMRP test for Fragile X syndrome screen- Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. ing; PCR for Fragile X syndrome diagnosis; MLPA testing using 2 inde- DNA methylation at the 5’ position of cytosine in promoter CpG islands pendent kits in order to separate polymorphisms . Parents were tested plays a critical role in regulating gene expression . Typically methyla- if an abnormality was detected in their child (by karyotype/MLPA) . tion is inversely correlated with the transcription status of the gene . The study group was formed of 223 children that had a de Vries score Bisulfite DNA conversion is one of the most used techniques for meth- of 3/more . All patient data were recorded in a database specially de- ylation studies because of its relative simplicity, whereas other meth- signed . In 28 of them (12 .5%) the karyotype revealed different abnor- ods are frequently cumbersome and require significant optimization. malities . 17 cases (7 .6%) presented speech delay/ autism, but anti- The bisulfite conversion method allows precise analysis of methyla- FMRP test and PCR were normal . Out of the 195 MLPA tests done: tion in a target region by converting all nonmethylated cytosines into 168 cases (86 .1% were normal, 13 (6,7%) abnormal and 14 (7 .1%) uracils, while methylated cytosines remain unchanged. The workflow had polymorphisms . The most frequently involved SR were 1p del and described here provides an effective solution for methylation analysis 7q del. Clinical features of the cases identified with different SR will be with straightforward protocols. We recognize that bisulfite conversion illustrated with photos and discussed . rate and primer design are the most critical steps in this approach . In In conclusion, we appreciate that the diagnostic score is useful in case this presentation, we demonstrate that a promoter region’s methylation selection for further testing, MLPA proves to be efficient in diagnosing status can be identified with confidence using an optimized approach, SR and the frequency of SR as a possible cause of idiopatic MR is which requires small amounts of genomic DNA and generates high similar to other studies in the literature . quality data. This workflow, therefore, is very useful for the analysis ofGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 clinical samples, where the amount of material is limited and analysis been applied for the detection of different pathogens and mRNAs . time is an important factor . Several labeling protocols for many amplification methods have been described in literature previously, but none of them are for NASBA P08.49 amplification products. Commercial NASBA amplification method was combined analysis of altered promoter methylation and gene modified to meet the needs of microarray experiment. Extra aminoal- expression changes in non-small cell lung cancer lyl-UTPs were added to the NASBA solution in order to add fluorescent N. Tõnisson1,2,3, K. Fellenberg4, R. Kuner4, M. Meister5, T. Vooder2,1, K. Välk1, marker Cy3 to the aminoallyl modified RNA products after the reaction. K. Kirotar1, A. Metspalu1,3, J. D. Hoheisel6; Two different commercial aaUTP reagents (aaUTP-Na and aaUTP-Li 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, salts) were investigated over wide concentration range (0,125mM to 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 4German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 8mM) . Strongest microarray signal intensities were achived with 2mM Heidelberg, Germany, 5Thorax Clinic, Heidelberg, Germany, 6University of Tar- final concentration of aaUTP-Li salt used in NASBA reaction. Modified tuGerman Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. NASBA method enabled accurately detect pathogens from solution Combined analysis of promoter methylation and gene expression containing total RNA from as low as 0,1-1 CFU . helps to reveal causative links between the epigenotype and pheno- type of malignant tumours . Methylation changes in cancer are frequent P08.52 and relatively stable, therefore they’re also attractive biomarkers for Identification of mir-21 (MIRN21) targets in breast cancer cells tumour profiling, as well as potentially for monitoring the efficiency of by gene expression profiling anticancer therapy . D. Selcuklu1,2, M. Donoghue1, C. Spillane1, C. Yakicier3, E. Erson2; We have performed an analysis of 48 genes in 60 surgically treated 1University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 2Middle East Technical University, An- lung adeno- and squamous cell carcinoma patients, using in situ syn- kara, Turkey, 3Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. thesized oligonucleotide microarrays . The samples were analysed for Increasing numbers of microRNAs have been shown to target cancer promoter methylation, as well as the corresponding gene expression related genes . Our aim was to identify mir-21 targets which are regu- changes . The analysis included known and putative tumour suppres- lated through mRNA cleavage, deadenylation, or other processes that sor genes, genes controlling cell growth and differentiation, antiangio- can lead to mRNA up- or down-regulation . Our experimental approach genetic factors and genes participating in cell to cell and cell to ex- involved silencing of endogenous mir-21 expression by 2’-Ome-inhibi- tracellular matrix connections . A panel of tumour-free lung tissue was tors (anti-mir-21) in MCF7 cells . Total RNAs from anti-mir-21 trans- used as the negative control . The dual level data was analysed with fected, control oligo transfected and untreated cells were further M-CHIPS platform and showed clear differences between cancer and processed and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus cancer-free tissue . 2 .0 arrays . Statistical and clustering analyses were conducted using A similar study with more complex setup is underway in a different Bioconductor to identify the effects of mir-21 silencing on the transcrip- clinical center . tome . Using p<0 .05 and fold change>1 .5 as cut-off values, 134 tran- scripts were differentially expressed only in anti-21 treated samples . P08.50 The transcriptome responsive to mir-21 silencing was analysed further the new mLPA based approach for HLA-DQA1, -DQB1 typing by GO (gene ontology) based clustering of functionally related genes E. Bliznetz, N. Galeeva, A. Polyakov; and biochemical pathway analysis (GO, KEGG) to gain better under- Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. standing of mir-21 function in cancer pathways . Over 25 % of the mir- The genetic complexity of the human major histocompatibility complex 21 sensitive genes were involved in regulation of transcription, 9 .62 % (MHC) has required the using of various molecular typing methods to in apoptosis and regulation of programmed cell death, while the rest identify specific alleles. Sequence specific primers (SSP), sequence were involved in a range of other biological processes . Amongst these, specific oligonucleotide probes (SSOP) and sequence-based typing some genes were linked to apoptosis by insulin signalling, cell cycle (SBT) are a few of the methods that have been utilized in the HLA regulation by TGF-BETA and MAPK signalling pathways suggesting a community at present . We have designed Multiplex ligation-dependent potential involvement of mir-21 in regulatory control of these cancer- probe amplification (MLPA) method based system for HLA-DQA1 and related pathways. Further studies are underway for verification candi- -DQB1 loci typing . Such MLPA advantages by comparison against oth- date targets identified. These studies will facilitate the identification of ers molecular method as cheapness and simplicity of the technique new cancer biomarkers regulated by microRNAs that could be used for and a possibility to determine chromosome haplotype are governing better diagnostic and therapeutics for breast cancer . for HLA typing method . Our MLPA based system reveals 8 DQA1 al- leles in one tube and 19 DQB1 alleles in one tube . A working pro- P08.53 cedure is consisting of three steps; the site-specific oligonucleotide A Pipeline for Designing custom taqman® Assays for small probes ligation, multiplex amplification with common primers pair and RNA Genes PCR fragments assessment . For comparison, our earlier SSP based L. Wong, Y. Wang, Y. Liang, D. Ridzon, C. Chen; system reveals the same alleles; the working procedure includes 2-4 Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster City, CA, United States. PCR/Multiplex PCR during HLA-DQA1 typing and 5-8 PCR/Multiplex MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a new class of non-coding RNAs that me- PCR during HLA-DQB1 typing per person . In our option MLPA method diate post-transcriptional gene silencing . A growing number of novel is excellent additional molecular HLA typing method . miRNAs and other small RNA genes are being discovered and there is a significant need for custom assays to determine the level of their P08.51 expression . An automated bioinformatics pipeline has been developed NAsBA product labeling for following microarray experiments to design TaqMan® MicroRNA Assays to allow quantitation of miRNA O. Scheler1, B. Glynn2, S. Parkel1,3, M. Maher2, A. Kurg1,3; expression by real-time PCR . To date, over 2,000 assays have been 1University of Tartu, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of designed using the pipeline for miRNAs listed in miRBase (release Biotechnology, Tartu, Estonia, 2National University of Ireland, The National 10 .0) . The pipeline has been wet-lab validated for mammalian miRNAs Diagnostics Centre, DNA Diagnostics Laboratory, Galway, Ireland, 3Estonian showing assay performance success of greater than 90% based on as- Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. say linearity and no template control (NTC) background signal . As re- DNA microarrays that enable quick and simultaneous investigation of search interest in small non-coding RNAs is rapidly expanding beyond many different biological targets are steadily becoming everyday tools miRNAs, the capability of the pipeline to design assays for other small in genetics and molecular diagnostics . Environmental and medical RNAs including small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), short hairpin RNAs samples can easily be identified and investigated by specific probe (shRNAs), and PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) is extremely valuable . microarrays that are complementary to the suitable marker sequences Assays for over 100 endogenous siRNAs have been designed us- in analyzed solution . Biological markers of interest are usually am- ing the same design pipeline as for miRNAs . Preliminary data shows plified and labeled prior to the microarray hybridization experiment. similar performance as miRNA assays with minimal background in the RNA targets can efficiently and exclusively be amplified using nucleic presence of tissues and cell lines for these siRNA quantitation assays . acid sequence based amplification (NASBA), even in the presence of In conclusion, we have developed a robust pipeline to successfully genomic DNA . NASBA is an isothermal method that has previously design TaqMan miRNA assays . Recent data demonstrates the abilityGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 of the pipeline to design TaqMan assays for quantitation of siRNAs as P08.56 well as the potential for designing assays for other small RNA genes . Denaturing electrophoresis on Lab-on-chip Agilent BioAnalyzer platform: A novel approach for rapid screening of DNA P08.54 mutations Human mitochondrial DNA data integration with the semantic M. Minarik1, R. Chudoba2, B. Belsanova1, B. Gas2, L. Benesova1; web 1Genomac International, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles University, Prague, J. S. Moilanen1,2; Czech Republic. 1Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, Recent expansion in genome research brought a number of new 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. analytical technologies for detection of DNA mutations and polymor- Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a 16 .5 kb circular genome in phisms. Although many exciting approaches are presented in scientific which numerous polymorphisms have been detected in thousands environment, only a relatively small fraction subsequently finds its way of sequenced genomes from various populations and patient groups to practical application in routine diagnostic testing . Among the most worldwide . Evolutionary data and the lack of introns in mtDNA suggest widely used methods are either enzymatic methods such as RFLP, that many of these polymorphisms have functional significance, and OLA, TaqMAN, etc . or methods based on separation due to second- there are many reports suggesting that some polymorphisms or con- ary DNA structure effects such as DGGE, TGGE, SSCP, dHPLC and tinent-specific mtDNA lineages (haplogroups) are associated with an others . increased risk of certain complex diseases or traits . Association data, Over the past several years, many of the electrophoresis-based tech- haplogroup definitions, sequences, polymorphisms and structural and niques have been adapted to capillary electrophoresis DNA sequenc- functional features of mtDNA-encoded genes form an immense body ers utilizing separation under partial denaturing conditions at either of knowledge which is currently scattered around different databases constant-temperature or in temperature gradients settings . and resources . Current mtDNA databases have been designed princi- In the current work we introduce a DNA melting separation on an elec- pally to be viewed by human researchers and do not provide uniform trophoresis chip platform . We adapt Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer for de- access to all data and are therefore not optimal for data mining or tection of common point mutations in Factor V Leiden and Factor II other purposes where hypotheses are tested against huge amounts of Prothrombin genes . The technique employs denaturing temperature heterogeneous data . gradients on the chip to reliably separate homo- and hetero-duplex The semantic web is an emerging technology which allows integration forms . of almost any kind of data in a framework which also makes it possible This work was supported by the Czech Ministry of Industry grant FI- for computers to perform inference tasks in an unified and standard- IM3/215 . ized manner . Mitochondrial Information Integration Initiative (MitoI3) aims at developing an open resource that will collect data on available P08.57 human mtDNA sequences, polymorphisms, haplogroup definitions and Web-based collection of gene-specific sequence variants and other aspects of mitochondrial genomics . The data are stored as RDF their phenotypic consequences (Resource Description Framework) statements in a RDF triple store I. F. A. C. Fokkema, G. B. van Ommen, J. T. den Dunnen, P. E. M. Taschner; which can be accessed with semantic web browsers and which also Human and Clinical Gentics, Leiden, The Netherlands. provides a SPARQL interface for performing complex queries over the Soon it will be possible to sequence a human genome for a reason- data . able price, making medical and clinical application of human genome sequencing a realistic option . However, as highlighted by the Human P08.55 Variome Project meeting in Melbourne (2006), when we want to un- the effects of the MTHFR gene variations for drug response in derstand the consequences of all the variation we will see, we need rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis patients treated with to improve significantly in reporting and cataloguing the variants and methotrexate their consequences we identify at the moment . To facilitate the col- N. Horelli-Kuitunen1, M. Kaistamaa2, P. Onkamo2, A. Nenonen3, L. Ahola1, J. lection of sequence variants and their phenotypic consequences we Ihalainen1, K. Laiho3, M. Kauppi3, M. Nyström2; have developed the Leiden Open-source Variation Database (LOVD) 1Medix Laboratories Ltd, Espoo, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Fin- software (www .LOVD .nl) . LOVD provides a free, open-source, plat- land, 3Rheumatism Foundation Hospital Heinola, Heinola, Finland. form-independent and fully web-based tool to build, curate and share Methotrexate (MTX) is a folic acid antagonist widely used to treat im- Locus-Specific mutation DataBases (LSDBs). In addition, to facilitate munosuppressive disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) . The en- error-free reporting of variants we have developed the Mutalyzer no- zyme 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is involved menclature checker (www .LOVD .nl/mutalyzer) and coupled it to LOVD . in maintaining folate and homocysteine homeostasis and common Mutalyzer names sequence variants following the HGVS mutation no- genetic variations, c .677C>T and c .1298A>C, in the MTHFR gene are menclature recommendations, using a GenBank accession number, associated with decreased enzyme activity and altered folate levels, a HGCN gene symbol and the variant as input . Currently, our Leiden which may predispose to increased susceptibility to the anti-folate ef- server hosts over 70 gene variation databases, with data collected for fects of MTX therapy . Here, we studied the effects of these variations more then 20,000 patients contributed by 150 submitters world-wide, for MTX response in a total of 298 Finnish patients who had either the largest series covering gene variants in relation to neuromuscular rheumatoid (218) or psoriatic arthritis (80) . Together with genotyping disorders . we also analyzed folate, homocysteine, ALAT, and B12 vitamin levels as well as clinical patient data concerning toxicity and efficiency of the P08.58 MTX treatments . Finally, statistical analyses were done to evaluate Next Generation sequencing possible associations between the MTHFR gene variations and MTX K. A. Stangier; toxicity and efficiency. Our results show that the patients with two nor- GATC Biotech AG, Konstanz, Germany. mal alleles (677TT/1298AA) are less likely to experience side effects The next generation sequencing technologies, embodied by the Roche during MTX therapy although, no statistically significant association Diagnostics/454, Illumina/Solexa and Applied Biosystems sequencing between variations and methotrexate toxicity was found . Remarkably, machines, provide the opportunity to generate huge amounts of se- MTHFR 677TT was recognised to be a risk genotype for elevated quence information for de novo and resequencing of genomes . GATC ALAT as well as a serious risk factor for low folate and accordingly uses all three leading high throughput sequencing machines in house: elevated homocysteine levels both during and after MTX treatment . In the GS FLX from Roche Diagnostics, the Illumina Genome Analyzer addition, the state of the disease stayed remarkably more often active and the SOLiD system of Applied Biosystems, providing the flexibil- in patients having 677TT genotype and low folate levels suggesting ity to tailor sequencing projects to meet customer requirements . The that MTHFR c .677C>T is critical genotype and should be taken into bioinformatic analysis of the huge amount of data is still a challenge, account in patient treatment strategy . especially for the human genome (3 GB) . In addition, many questions regarding cancer research or disease related topics, can be addressed by sequencing just the area of interest of the human genome . Often these areas are too big to be amplified out of the whole genome. GATCGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 will present data from enrichment studies of the human genome of P08.61 sequence areas related to different diseases . The paired-end method the mouse Genome informatics (mGi) resource: translating for the technologies provides additional information about large scale mouse phenogenomics into models of human disease variations in the genome allowing an accuracy approaching classical A. V. Anagnostopoulos, H. Dene, S. M. Bello, H. Onda, T. F. Meehan, M. N. Sanger sequencing . Comparison of the next-gen sequencing data to Knowlton, D. L. Burkart, I. Lu, L. L. Washburn, M. Tomczuk, R. P. Babiuk, B. A. a reference genome provides a mapping that takes advantage of the Richards-Smith, C. L. Smith, J. T. Eppig; high coverage to identify SNPs and other structural differences and The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States. variations . The results can be imported into other assembly programs The mouse is universally considered a premier model system for study- (e .g . SeqMan™ of the Lasergene™ suite from DNASTAR Inc ., USA) . ing human development and disease . The MGI resource (http://www . informatics .jax .org) provides free access to integrated data on the P08.59 genetics, genomics and biology of the laboratory mouse, facilitating A novel approach for miRNA profiling and discovery using navigation through sequence, polymorphism, spatiotemporal expres- massively parallel ligation-based dibase sequencing technology sion, mapping, biochemical function and process, sub-cellular topol- R. R. Samaha, C. Barbacioru, J. Gu, S. Kuersten, R. Setterquist, M. Barker, R. ogy, mammalian homology, phenotype and disease model data . MGI Wicki; curates aberrant mouse phenotypes in the context of mutations (spon- Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. taneous, induced or genetically engineered), strain variations, QTLs, Next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms produce 10-100’s of mil- and complex traits that serve as credible models of human genetic lions of short reads (25-50bp) in a single run which makes them par- disorders, incorporating phenotype-related images as available . Ro- ticularly suited for tag counting application including gene expression bust querying parameters include standardized terms from the Mam- profiling. With Applied Biosystem’s new platform, sequencing is carried malian Phenotype Ontology, a hierarchically-structured vocabulary out via dibase sequential rounds of ligation with high fidelity and high that supports morphophysiological annotations to background-speci- read quality . Using a newly developed library protocol which requires fied allelic genotypes at varying degrees of granularity. Parallel use low sample input and results in sequence ready samples in less than of key bio-ontologies, including the Anatomical Dictionary, GO, and a day, we explored the expression profiles of small non-coding RNAs OMIM, fosters innovative approaches to peruse expression profiles, in two normal tissues, using the SOLiD™ system . The frequency and map functional features of gene products to complex pathophysiologi- distribution of miRNAs, isomiRNAs and miRNA* were evaluated and cal states, and establish associations between observed mouse phe- the fold changes generated from these tissues were compared to notypes and orthologous human gene mutations or distinct nosological those of 380 TaqMan® miRNA assays. Significant correlation levels entities for which defined mouse genotypes phenomimic the human were observed confirming the applicability of this approach for small condition . MGI advances translational research through an integrated RNAs expression profiling. Moreover, more than 3000 potentially novel data platform which optimizes retrieval and semantic interpretation of miRNAs or non-coding RNAs were discovered . These potential novel multi-parametric, genome-scale datasets, and permits disease model small RNAs are currently being further validated . mining from a genotype, phenotype or computational perspective . This new library approach coupled with the SOLiD™ System provides Recent enhancements include a redesigned homepage and site-wide a high throughput method for digital gene expression that enables the navigation paradigm, and an image-rich “Phenotype, Alleles & Disease discovery of novel small ncRNAs and miRNAs as well as profiling their Models” portal, as one of several mini-homepages, each encapsulat- expression levels, without the probe bias of microarrays . Because of ing a different MGI biodomain along with content-specific access in- the SOLiD™ System’s throughput which is greater than 100M reads structions, statistics, FAQs, and news announcements . Supported by per slide, it is particularly suited for the analysis of gene expression NIH grants HG000330, HG002273, HD033745 . being able to deliver the dynamic range required to detect genes ex- pressed at very low levels and to accurately measure fold changes at P08.62 the same low expression levels . characterization of post-transcriptional regulation of the human chromosome 21 transcriptome P08.60 S. I. Nikolaev1,2, S. Deutsch1,2, R. Genolet3, C. Ucla1, L. Parand1, B. Conne1, J. cloning and construction of mouse PEP cDNA chimera with Vassalli1, J. Curran3, S. E. Antonarakis1; EGFP under regulation of cmV promoter 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva University, M. Ostadsharif1,2, K. Ghaedi2,3, S. Tanhaei2, K. Karbalaei2, M. Nasr-e-Esfah- Geneva, Switzerland, 2Authors contributed equally to the work, Switzerland, ani2; 3Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, 1Islamic Azad University, Research& science campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic Geneva, Switzerland. of Iran, 2Royan,Isfahan Research Campus, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, To characterize the post-transcriptional regulation of transcriptional 3Biology Dept., School of Sciences, The University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic units in human chromosome 21 (HSA21), we performed a sucrose Republic of Iran. gradient separation of RNA in 3 cell lines (GM06990, HelaS3 and Peroxisomes are tiny organelles in almost all eukaryotic cells . They SKNAS) . We generated fractions according to ribosome content to exhibit various functions including β-oxidation of very long chain fatty separate (i) RNA undergoing active translation (associated with at least acids and metabolite peroxidation which is essential for the cell func- 2 ribosomes) and (ii) a pool of all fractions representing total RNA . tion and differentiation . We have cloned (Peroxisomal Protein) PEP Each pool was hybridized to a 22bp resolution tiling array comprising cDNA in a mammalian expression vector in a chimeric cDNA type, the entire non-repetitive sequence of HSA21 (18 Mb) . encompassing PEP with EGFP cDNA . Amino acid alignment analysis We observed that approximately 5% of HSA21 is transcribed in each revealed two hydrophobic domains . The First Comprises twenty amino cell line, and a total of 8 .5% is transcribed in at least 1 line . On aver- acid residues between 12-31 residues and the second one, is located age 51 .6% of signals correspond to annotated regions, whereas the at 152-169 residues . There is a tripeptide (SKI) at carboxy terminus re- remaining have been previously referred to as Txfrags . sponsible for sorting of this protein to the matrix of peroxisome . There We performed RT-PCR (with RT-minus control) and/or 5 and 3’ RACE is a fibronectin type III domain between residues 31-114 in pep. In or- for 100 random Txfrags, and sequenced positive bands . In all cases der to see the importance of above sorting signal, we performed a site- the sequences correspond to known exons elsewhere in the genome directed mutagenesis to delete SKI tripeptide. Amplified Pep cDNAs but also with high homology to HSA21 . This strongly suggests that either containing SKI or deleted ones were constructed downstream these signals result from cross-hybridisation . of EGFP cDNA under regulation of CMV promoter in pEGFP-C1 vec- To identify genes with significant levels of post-transcriptional regula- tor and were send for sequence . Transfection of plasmids containing tion, we performed a paired-rank analysis of all detected exons . We chimera of EGFP-PEP cDNAs in to the CHO-K1 showed several punc- observed that 86 out of 247 HSA21 genes demonstrate a significant tuate structures presumably peroxisomes while, SKI deletion showed shift in their rank distribution, suggesting post-transcriptional control . a cytosolic pattern like EGFP-C1 . Taken together, these data strongly Our data suggest that 1) there is a considerable posttranscriptional suggest that SKI, which is located at the C- terminus of protein is re- control of gene expression and 2) a substantial fraction of Txfrags quired for sorting of this protein . result from cross-hybridization with exons mapping elsewhere in the genome .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 P08.63 enables OpenArray plates to hold solutions in the open through-holes Prader-Willi syndrome: multiplex Ligation Dependent Probe via capillary action . The OpenArray plate consists of 3072 through- Amplification Diagnosis (MLPA) and Microsatellites holes that can be loaded with reagents to perform individual 33 nL re- A. Rodriguez, M. Miramar, M. Calvo, F. Lorente, E. Barrio, S. Izquierdo, N. actions for use in both real time PCR applications as well as endpoint Martinez; genotyping applications. The unique configuration of the through-holes Molecular Genetics, H.U.Miguel Servet. University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, enables the researcher to interrogate a large number of nucleic acid Spain. samples against a large number of assays in a flexible, configurable Introduction: PWS is a neuroendocrine genetic disease, with a global format . By altering the number of assays or the number of samples the frequency estimated between 1/10 .000 - 1/25 .000 livebirths . Clinical researcher can easily customize the OpenArray to meet their changing symptoms are characterized by hipotonia, hyporreflexia, lack of move- needs. Researchers using this technology benefit from the parallelism ments and deglutory alterations . Typical dismorphologic and behav- of microarrays and the data quality of solution phase reactions . ioural phenotype include hyperphagia-obesity, hypogonadism, hypo- genitalism, mental retardation and bone maturation retardation . P08.66 Lack of paternal contribution results in PWS either by paternal dele- External cell control quantitative Rt-PcR (eccPcR): A new tion in 15q11-q13 region (70%) or from maternal disomy (25%) . A few technique for reliable detection of subtle changes in mRNA cases (2-5%) are due to imprinting center mutations . expression Aims: We have performed a mutational screening of large deletions A. Bors1, P. Ribiczey1, G. Köblös2, A. Brózik1, Z. Ujfaludi3, M. Magócsi1, A. in 15q11-q13 region and the metilation analysis of SNRPN gene in 37 Váradi2, A. Tordai1, T. Kovács1, T. Arányi2; patients with PWS clinical features. The aim of this study is to confirm 1Hungarian National Blood Transfusion Service, Budapest, Hungary, 2Institute clinical diagnosis, to evaluate the main genetic alterations in our popu- of Enzymology, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary, 3Univer- lation and provide supportive genetic counselling to the families . sity of Szeged, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Szeged, Material and Methods: Patients DNA was obtained by robotic extraction Hungary. (EZ1, Qiagen) . The MLPA technique was performed by the commer- Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) is a widely used method to determine cially available PWS Kit from MRC Holland . This kit allows large dele- relative gene expression levels. Quantification of the observed expres- tions screening in 15q11-q13 region genes in two PCR reactions and sion levels becomes reliable after normalization to the expression of the methylation study of SNRPN by HhaI enzyme digestion . Analysis an internal standard gene . If the mRNA level of the standard gene is was performed with an ABI PRISM 310 sequencing analyzer (Applied altered during the experiment, small changes of target mRNA levels Biosystems) and further data Excel normalization . In abnormal meth- can be especially difficult to detect. However, the expression of com- ylation cases microsatellites D15S10, D15S11, D15S113, D15S128, monly used internal standard genes is often unstable, which consider- GABRA3, GABRB5 were studied . ably bias quantification. Results and Conclusion: The MLPA genetic analysis has allowed PWS To overcome the drawback of unstable internal standards, we devel- diagnostic confirmation in 16.2% patients with clinical criteria. Two de- oped a new method, called external cell control PCR (eccPCR) . This letions in 15q11-q13 region and 4 maternal uniparental disomy were method is based on the addition of control cells to the studied cells found . We conclude that PWS is well characterized by the MLPA tech- before RNA extraction and qRT-PCR . Only the control cells express nique . the reference gene, while only the studied cells express the gene of in- terest . This techique controls all steps of sample preparation and over- P08.64 comes the incertitude of normalization to internal standard genes . ProSeeK: A web server for MLPA probe design We present the validation of the new method by detection the changes L. Pantano, L. Armengol, S. Villatoro, X. Estivill; of hSERCA3 mRNA expression in response to Na+-butyrate treatment Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain. of KATO-III gastric cancer cells using F4-6 mouse erythroleukemia The technological evolution of platforms for assessing genome-wide cells as control and mPu .1 mRNA as the reference gene . In addition, copy number imbalances has allowed the discovery of an unexpected we demonstrate the instability of the expression of a commonly used amount of human sequence involved in duplications and deletions internal standard gene GAPDH by the eccPCR technique . The sensi- (termed copy number variants or CNVs) . In terms of sequence cover- tivity analysis of the new method showed that a 1 .5-fold gene expres- age, this is the most important type of human variation identified so sion level difference can be systematically detected with the eccPCR far and can make an important contribution to human diversity and assay . disease susceptibility . While different methods exist to asses genome- We conclude that eccPCR allows accurate quantification of small ex- wide changes in gene dosage at high-throughput, methods for validat- pression level differences of a gene of interest . ing these findings are tedious and expensive. Multiplex Ligation-de- pendent Probe Amplification (MLPA) is one of the available technolo- P08.67 gies, used even in diagnostic settings, to asses copy number variation An integrated custom design tool for PcR resequencing in the human genome . One of the dull and time-consuming steps of B. Turner, A. Sartori, S. Jankowski, L. Xu; MLPA is probe design step . Because of the multiplexing capacity and Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. the required specificity, the oligonucleotides targeting specific regions Increasing attention has been devoted to SNP discovery and genotyp- have to meet a large number of requirements for an efficient design of ing in an effort to associate disease/phenotypes with gene variations the experiment . ProSeeK is designed to perform all steps automati- and mutations and to determine evolutionary relationships, but reliable cally and to provide the best candidate probes for each individual as- primer design and data analysis remain two of the major challenges to say . ProSeeK is integrated as a user-friendly web server to ensure overcome. Development of a flexible design tool that allows research- portability . ers to select PCR-sequencing primers for different genomic targets with user-defined parameters would greatly facilitate resequencing. In order to help the scientific community to better use PCR and CE- sequencing for SNP discovery, we released the VariantSEQr™ primer P08.65 designs of 15K+ human genes to the public via NCBI’s ProbeDB . the OpenArraytm platform: enabling high-throughput sNP To improve upon this one-size-fits-all approach, we have developed genotyping and real-time PcR applications in nanoliter volumes an integrated web-based tool which incorporates target sequence se- S. Liu-Cordero, D. G. W. Roberts, E. Ortenberg, J. Cho, J. Hurley, M. Kopc- lection/submission, primer design, and data analysis into a connected zynski, K. D. Munnelly; workflow. Users can choose genes, transcripts and other identifiers, BioTrove, Inc., Woburn, MA, United States. select any region in the genome, or upload their own sequence as BioTrove has developed the OpenArray platform based on through- well as specify design parameters, e .g . amplicon length, primer Tm hole technology, a broadly applicable nanoliter fluidics technology for etc . The web interface then submits the job to a backend pipeline, parallel and low-volume solution phase reactions . OpenArray plates which takes advantage of proprietary primer picking and predictive are coated with hydrophilic coatings on the interior of each through hole quality assurance processes that generated Applied Biosystem’s Vari- and hydrophobic coatings on the exterior of the through-holes . This antSEQr™ primers . All currently known SNP/MNP sites in the genomicGenomics, technology, bioinformatics 0 sequence are avoided during primer design . The resulting primers are P08.70 then checked for genomic redundancy and the probability of success AutosNP: an integrated graphical user platform of high- in PCR . An exhaustive search is performed to produce the optimal til- throughput sNP data analysis for disease gene mapping ing of the amplicons covering the target region . Utilization of this primer C. C. Huang1, Y. F. Liu2, D. D. Lee3, C. T. Hsu4, Y. T. Chang3, T. T. Liu2, S. F. design tool can substantially reduce the effort required to design and Tsai5, M. W. Lin1,6; optimize robust resequencing primers . 1Institute of BioMedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Tai- wan, 2VYM Genome Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, P08.68 Taiwan, 3Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Prescreen for RB mutation identification using high-resolution Taiwan, 4Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Tai- melting analysis wan, 5Division of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research E. K. Zhang1, D. Rushlow1, N. L. Prigoda1, B. Piovesan1, K. Vandezande1, B. Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, Taiwan, 6Department of Medical Re- L. Gallie1,2; search & Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 1Retinoblastoma Solutions, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Hospital for Sick Chil- Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have become most common dren, The Vision Science Research Program, University Health Network and used marker in current human genetic studies . Researchers normally Departments of Ophthalmology, Molecular and Medical Genetics and Medical need to select a set of SNPs from an enormous amount of SNP of can- Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. didate genes or regions . Moreover, current platforms of high-through- Germ-line mutations in the RB1 gene cause hereditary predisposition put SNP genotyping will produce huge amounts of genotyping data to retinoblastoma, a childhood eye cancer, but 90% of the tumors are with different output format . It is a trivial and time-consuming work to caused by novel mutations . Since the RB1 gene spans 180 kb and pick up SNPs and process different kinds of data format for specific contains 27 exons, and RB1 mutations have been observed in all 27 linkage or association analysis program . exons and promoter with few recurrent mutations, multiple modalities To ease the task of managing high-throughput SNPs data from two are required in addition to sequencing to attain high sensitivity for mu- main platforms-Illumina and Affymetrix assays, we generated a graphi- tation detection . Amplicon melting with a saturating DNA intercalating cal user platform named “AutoSNP” by using Perl language . In this dye was introduced as an attractive technique to genotype small se- platform, user can select SNP data source and then convert SNP ge- quence alterations. In order to investigate the efficiency of high-resolu- notyping data into appropriate format for specific genetic analysis pro- tion melting analysis (HRM) in RB1 mutation screening, we tested its gram . We integrated both linkage analysis programs (Allegro, Gene- sensitivity to detect known variants . Hunter, Linkage, Merlin, SuperLink and SimWalk2) and association PCR products were prepared for routine sequencing . Resolight dye analysis programs (FBAT, PLINK, HaploView, PHASE, and WHAP) master mix was added post-PCR . Fluorescence melting curves were in this platform . Moreover, this platform also allows users to connect recorded using the LightCycler 480 . All (10/10) heterozygous and 2/2 to Ensembl variation database, NCBI SNP database, and the TAMAL homozygous variants were readily discriminated from wild-type . A (Technology And Money Are Limiting) database to query information wide range of mutation types including heterozygous one base pair from their SNPs list . Finally, we use a skin disease “primary cutaneous transitions and transversions and small deletions and insertions could amyloidosis (PCA)” genotyping data as an example to demonstrate be detected when compared with wild-type DNA . Our experiments our platform . showed that we were able to obtain different melting curves from wild- type DNA even for very low level mosaic variants which are detectable P08.71 only by allele-specific PCR (AS-PCR) and not by sequencing. A good New methods for sizing Large DNA Fragments on capillary sensitivity can be expected when the assay is used to detect otherwise Electrophoresis instruments missed mosaic mutants . HRM analysis is a simple and rapid technique C. Davidson, S. Hung, S. Chen, S. M. Koepf, K. D. Jacobson, M. C. White, S. in prescreening of small sequence alterations in DNA diagnostics . Lim, N. Patel, S. Berosik, S. Pistacchi, A. B. Shah, L. K. Joe, R. Santhanam, R. A. Padilla; P08.69 Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. The first serotonin receptor allelic variant database Applied Biosystems is continually developing new fragment analysis B. Niesler, R. Röth, S. Wilke, C. Fischer, G. Rapppold; size standards to better support existing and new applications . Re- Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany. cent developments have focused on improving sizing precision and Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) controls a variety of physiologi- accuracy and expansion of the sizing range, using Applied Biosystems’ cal functions . 5-HT receptors mediating serotonin action are divided 5th dye technology . We present details about developing methods to into seven main classes (5-HTR to 5-HTR) . A multitude of candidate take advantage of a new high performance, 68 peak size standard and 1 7 gene screenings has been published during the last years . We have illustrate its versatility, accuracy, flexibility, and precision when used started to structure this information in the first serotonin receptor al- on various capillary electrophoresis instrument platforms, different lelic variant database using LOVD (Leiden Open Source Variation Da- polymers and capillary array lengths . Methods described include DNA tabase) . Up to now, the database comprises data of 5-HT receptor fragment sizing up to 1200bp in applications such as AFLP, T-RFLP, 3 subunits. To date, five different human subunits are known (5-HT ), VNTR, mutation screening, MLST, and BAC fingerprinting. 3A-E which are encoded by the serotonin receptor genes HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR3C, HTR3D and HTR3E . Different receptor subtypes seem to be P08.72 involved in chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting (CINV), irri- A statistical approach for predicting the clinical type of smA table bowel syndrome (IBS) and psychiatric disorders . During the last using mLPA years HTR3 case-control and pharmacogenetic studies indicated that A. Kastrin, M. Zadel, M. Volk, B. Peterlin; HTR3A and HTR3B polymorphisms may contribute to the etiology of Division Of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. psychiatric disorders and may predict CINV and medical treatment of Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive dis- psychiatric patients. Currently, the database is subdivided into five sub- order in humans, characterized by degeneration of the anterior horn databases, referring to the serotonin receptor genes . Within each sub- cells of the spinal cord, causing symmetric proximal muscle weakness . database we are collecting mutations, polymorphisms, demographic SMA is classified in three clinical types, SMA I, SMA II, and SMA III, information as well as pharmacogenetic data . Every sub-database based on the severity of the symptoms and the age of onset . The pur- includes general information about the respective gene and is linked pose of this study was to build the prediction model evaluating the to other resources . The remote user is able to search the data and to probability of a SMA type based on multiplex ligation-dependent probe submit new data . This central information pool should help clinicians amplification analysis with commercial probe mix (SALSA Probe Mix as well as scientists to evaluate their findings and to use the informa- 021; MRC Holland). This mix contains 16 probes specific for the SMA tion for subsequent studies . Data about functional consequences of critical region (5q12 .2-5q13 .3) . Dosage ratio was chosen to form the variants will be integrated in future to enable specific drug design in the basis of the analysis . We developed a multinomial logistic regression therapy of respective conditions . model based on the data of 65 SMA cases . Prediction model was con- structed using all probes, and using stepwise probe selection algorithm by Akaike information criterion to remove irrelevant and redundantGenomics, technology, bioinformatics  probes while retaining or improving the predictive power . Validation P08.75 of the model was performed using 10-fold cross-validation regime to Transplantation of amniotic fluid-derived stem cells in a rodent avoid overfitting and assure statistical validity of results. The predictive model of stroke model was evaluated on the basis of three performance measures: I. Antonucci1,2, M. Maki3,4, S. Yu3,4, T. Masuda3,4, M. M. Ali3,4, D. C. Hess3,4, G. sensitivity, specificity, and the area under the receiver operating char- Palka1, L. Stuppia1,2, C. V. Borlongan3,4; acteristics curve (Table 1). Proposed model confirm the known and 1G. D’Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti, Italy, 2Aging Research Center, indicate some novel patterns which may contribute to a better under- CESI, Chieti, Italy, 3Department of Neurology, Medical College of Georgia, standing of SMA . Augusta, GA, United States, 4Research and Affiliations Service Line, Augusta Table 1 . Performance measures . Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Augusta, GA, United States. The discovery of amniotic fluid (AF) -derived stem cells initiated a new Model and very promising field in stem cell research. These cells possess Full Stepwise immune-privileged characteristics suitable for a successful transplan- SMA I SMA II SMA III SMA I SMA II SMA III tation . The purpose of this study was to reveal stemness of rat AF-de- Sensitivity 0 .471 0 .679 0 .700 0 .571 0 .719 0 .737 rived cells and to test the effectiveness of transplantation of fresh as Specificity 0 .896 0 .676 0 .844 0 .902 0 .758 0 .848 compared to cultured AF cells in a rodent model of stroke . Cells were AUC 0 .772 0 .676 0 .707 0 .748 0 .746 0 .771 characterized at day 25 of culture by immunohistochemical analysis to P08.73 highlight the presence of embryonic stem cell markers . This analysis smRt arrays as a high resolution technique for detection of DNA showed that cultured, i .e ., adherent AFcells resembled a mesenchy- microvariations mal-like morphology and were positive for OCT4 and SSEA, typical P. Armero, C. Maqueda, A. Hernández, S. Esteban, P. Madero; embryonic stem cell markers . A parallel in vivo study subjected rats Centro de Análisis Genéticos, Zaragoza, Spain. to middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion for 60 minutes and subse- Introduction: Nowadays, array CGH is one of the highest resolution quently assigned to one of the following intravenous transplantation: techniques for genome-wide detection of chromosomal alterations . i) freshly isolated AF cells; ii) cultured rat AF mesenchymal-like stem Genome screening using array CGH has great potential in the char- cells; iii) vehicle . Behavioral tests were performed prior to stroke sur- acterization of numerous unexplained chromosomal aberrations . The gery and repeated at day 2 post-stroke/post-transplantation to evalu- whole genome Sub-Megabase Resolution Tiling Array (SMRT array) ate the functional consequences of the MCA occlusion and to quantify is capable of identifying microamplifications and microdeletions at a improvements in motor and cognitive function after transplantation . resolution of 100 Kb . Transplantation of cultured, but not freshly isolated AF mesenchymal- The aim of this study was to show the utility of this SMRT arrays to like stem cells promoted significant recovery from stroke-induced mo- provide precise information about the size and breakpoints of DNA tor and neurologic deficits compared to vehicle-infused stroke animals. copy number gains and losses . The present study shows that cultured rat AF-derived cells are more Methods: We present a patient with microcephaly, epilepsy and men- therapeutically active than freshly isolated cells . The observed behav- tal retardation, with a female normal karyotipe 46, XX . A SMRT array, ioral benefits demonstrate that AF stand as a highly potent alternative (from Wan Lam Laboratory at the BC Cancer Research Centre) analy- source of stem cells for therapeutic strategies in stroke and related sis was performed . Moreover, two MLPA kits (SALSA P096 and SAL- neurological disorders . SA, from MRC-Holland) and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) technique were carried out . P08.76 Results: The SMRT array analysis showed a 4p subtelomeric deletion e-infrastructure for thalassaemia research network (ithanet) of 1.25 Mb. MLPA study of the specific 4p16.3 subtelomeric region M. Kleanthous; confirmed this microdeletion. Five of the sixteen specific probes of The Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. MLPA kit, located in the new defined WHSCR-2, were deleted. FISH The main objective of Ithanet (http://www.ithanet.eu) is to enhance the assays showed a deleted pattern with the 4p subtelomeric probe but scientific potential of the haemoglobinopathies’ research community normal results were obtained when hybridization was performed with using infrastructures and tools of European research networks . Ithanet specific WHS probe. aims to harmonise and develop these resources for the coordination of Conclusions: The SMRT array study confirms the small deletion WH- existing research activities as a base for future collaborative projects . SCR-2 previously detected by MLPA and not detected by WHS FISH . The consortium comprises of all major European research institutions SMRT array arises as an effective technique to detect DNA microvari- active in the field and a number of collaborating partner institutions ations and provides more information about their size and precise from non-EU Mediterranean and Black-Sea countries . In total Ithanet breakpoints . associates 26 partners from 16 countries . In order to set-up and main- tain interaction between the partners involved as well as to coordinate P08.74 training and project management activities, Ithanet utilizes teleconfer- Flexible and 640-multiplex array detection of nucleic acid encing technology . Additionally Ithanet introduced media broadcasting variations and streaming technologies for conferences and teaching courses on K. Krjutskov1, R. Andreson1, R. Mägi1, A. Khrunin2, A. Metspalu1; haemoglobinopathies, contributing to the exchange and dissemination 1IMCB, Tartu, Estonia, 2IMG RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. of good practices in the field of e-learning.Aiming to encourage a high DNA sequence variation detection is important in various biomedical level of interaction among members of the haemoglobinopathy com- applications such as gene identification of common diseases, disease munity, a dedicated portal has been created (http://portal/ithanet.eu) . diagnosis and -treatment, drug discovery and forensic analysis . Here, Visitors to the Ithanet portal can quickly exchange information, share we describe an arrayed primer extension-based genotyping method ideas, enhance the global awareness of pertinent issues, and help de- (APEX-2) that allows multiplex DNA amplification (640-plex) and fine critical areas of haemoglobinopathy treatment and research. The detection of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) or mutations on portal offers the latest news, techniques and information on haemoglo- microarray through four-color single-base extension . The principle of binopathies and also serves as a platform for the easy exchange of in- multiplex PCR needs two oligonucleotides per SNP/mutation generat- formation and dialogues between interested groups, both patients and ing amplicons that contain the unknown base pair (studied position) . researchers . The portal is also used as a database of standard scien- The same oligonucleotides are used in the following step as attached tific protocols, methodologies, and repositories. It contains information single-base extension primers on a microarray . The call rate of 640- on almost all Thalassaemia-related institutions and medical centres as plex APEX-2 was 99 .87%, the reproducibility was 99 .92% and the co- well as patient and scientific societies. incidence between Illumina HumanCNV370-Duo v1.0 BeadChips and APEX-2 genotyping was 98 .6% . The method described here may be very useful for a custom number of SNP- or mutation detection analy- sis, molecular diagnostics and in forensic analysis . APEX-2 has also the potential to fill the gap (up to 1500 positions) between expensive high-density platforms and low-multiplex level detection systems .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  P08.77 P08.79 Genomic regulation of gene-expression levels in the brain Ultra-High-throughput sequencing in heterogeneous during human evolution inherited heart disorders: a first experience in Hypertrophic M. Cáceres1,2, L. Armengol1, J. W. Thomas2, T. M. Preuss3, X. Estivill1; cardiomyopathy 1Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF) and S. Fokstuen1, C. Iseli2,3, D. Robyr4, A. Munoz4, S. E. Antonarakis4,1, J. L. Bl- CIBERESP, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Human Genetics, Emory Univer- ouin1; sity School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 3Division of Neuroscience 1Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Lud- and Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, Yerkes National Primate Research wig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Center, Atlanta, GA, United States. Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Genetic Medicine, University of Ge- For the last few years, several groups have used microarrays to com- neva School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland. pare transcript levels in humans and non-human primates and have During last decade, molecular genetics has provided new insights into identified hundreds of candidate genes with expression changes in the the pathogenesis of inherited heart disorders and Hypertrophic Cardio- human brain . Here, a multidisciplinary approach, including experimen- myopathy (HCM) represents the most common one (1/500) . Genetic tal techniques and bioinformatic analysis of genome sequence and testing has a growing impact on the management of patients and their gene-expression data, is proposed to obtain a more profound under- families . However, the extensive genetic heterogeneity of these disor- standing of the potential causes and effects of these gene expression ders requires the use of high-throughput mutation detection strategies changes . Preliminary sequence comparisons have yielded examples for clinical screening . We had developed a 30-Kb HCM-Custom-DNA- of diverse types of mechanisms that could account for the observed resequencing-array (HCM-RA) comprising all exons (n=160), splice- differences in mRNA levels, such as multiple gene duplications, inser- sites and 5’-UTR of 12 HCM genes. Although very efficient in detecting tion of transposable elements in 3’ UTR or upstream regions, and a single nucleotide variants, this approach did not identify small indels, single nucleotide mutation in the polyA signal . In addition, as an ex- accounting for 14% of HCM mutations . Moreover, resequencing-ar- ample of the proposed strategy, a global analysis of the regulatory se- rays lack flexibility since gene additions requires a new design. quences of the thrombospondin 4 (THBS4) gene has been carried out . In order to overcome the shortcomings of microarray-resequencing This gene is involved in synapse formation and shows a six-fold up- we assessed the performance of the recently developed Ultra-High- regulation in humans that is specific of the forebrain. Interestingly, an Throughput-Sequencing (UHTS) . We reanalysed these 12 genes in excess of nucleotide changes and an Alu insertion were found in the a total of 19 patients, hybridized previously on HCM-RA (8 positive- THBS4 promoter region in the human lineage . However, in vitro gene controls as a composite-pool and 11 DNA without mutation), in a single reporter assays indicated that the human and chimpanzee promoter channel of a SOLEXA . Every single base of the sequence (570 fold fragments have similar transcriptional activity, and computational pre- coverage accounting for 24 alleles) was analyzed using a newly devel- diction of transcription factor binding sites suggests that THBS4 up- oped data analysis pipeline . regulation could be due to changes in trans-acting regulators . Overall, All the 8 control mutations and 18 SNPs previously identified by these results provide insights into the regulatory mechanisms acting at HCM-RA were also observed in UHTS . Furthermore sequence al- various levels and the evolutionary role of gene-expression regulation, terations and particularly indels were detected such as c .1028delC/ and could help us to determine the molecular basis of human-specific p .Thr343fsX349, [c .2146-9C>A+c .2146-2delA], c .506-12delC in gene traits . MYBPC3, c .53-15_-11delTTCTC in TNNT2 . Although evolution and improvement in DNA target enrichment, specificity and data analysis P08.78 are needed, UHTS holds considerable promises in mutation/variant Using genome-wide pathway analysis to unravel the etiology of analysis underlying highly heterogeneous or multigenic pathologic a complex disease like type 2 diabetes conditions in clinical practice as well . C. C. Elbers1,2, K. R. van Eijk1, L. Franke1,3, F. Mulder1, Y. T. van der Schouw2, C. Wijmenga1,3, N. C. Onland-Moret1,2; P08.80 1Complex Genetics Section, Dept. of Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Advantages of universal primers use in biochip analysis of Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Julius Center for Health Sciences trombosis genes polymorphism and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Nether- A. S. Glotov1,2, E. S. Vashukova1,2, L. B. Polushkina1, O. N. Mityaeva3, T. V. lands, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen and Nasedkina3, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova4, T. E. Ivaschenko1, M. S. Zainulina1, V. University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. S. Baranov1; Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have recently 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, been published on a variety of complex diseases . However, 99 .9% of 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3En- GWAS data is currently discarded and not analyzed to its full poten- gelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Vavilov tial . In this study, we took a different approach and aimed to evaluate Institute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. alternative methods of obtaining valuable information on disease etiol- Genetic testing of inherited predisposition to frequent multifactor dis- ogy from GWAS data . We assessed whether we could detect over- eases needs new screening methods of DNA-polymorphism analysis . represented biological pathways in the GWAS datasets, by combining The most advanced approaches in genetic testing of multifactorial a network-based tool, ‘Prioritizer’, with a pathway-classification tool, diseases usually include multi-locus DNA amplification. The multiplex ‘PANTHER’ . PCR method could be significantly improved by means of the universal As an example, we used publicly available data from two type 2 diabe- sequences incorporated into locus-specific primers. We have selected tes (T2D) GWAS; the Diabetes Genetics Initiative (DGI) and the Well- such DNA sequences and used them for two-step PCR genotyping of come Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) . Of the 1,179 SNPs F2, MTHFR, F5, PAI1, GPIIIa, FGB polymorphism with the subsequent in the DGI dataset and the 1,712 SNPs in the WTCCC dataset that hybridization on oligonucleotide biochips . Use of this technique opens showed association with T2D with a p-value lower than 0 .003, we were an ample opportunity for the fast and reliable detection of inherited able to map 559 and 797 SNPs, respectively, to genomic loci that con- thrombosis . The method could be easily adopted in any molecular di- tained one or more genes . Prioritizer then selected the most promising agnostic laboratory . gene(s) from each locus based on their functional interactions with The work was partly supported by BRHE Fellowship competition 2006 genes on the other loci . We used PANTHER to assign each of the (Y4-B-12-02), Saint-Petersburg Personal grant for PhD (PD 07-1 .4- selected genes to a specific pathway and to test whether we saw more 129), and grant of Russian Foundation for Basic Research (N 07-04- genes in each pathway than expected . 12271-ofi) Our results showed that the ‘inflammation mediated by chemokine and e-mail: anglotov@mail.ru cytokine signaling’ and ‘Wnt signaling’ pathways were consistently the most strongly overrepresented in the T2D data . By taking an alterna- tive approach, we have shown it is possible to detect biological mecha- nisms in GWAS data .Genomics, technology, bioinformatics  P08.81 P08.83 the Human Variome Project - plans and progress eSensor® genotyping test for CYP2C9, CYP4F2 and VKORC1 R. G. H. Cotton1,2; polymorphisms associated with warfarin sensitivity 1Genomic Disorders Research Centre, Carlton South VIC, Australia, 2Convenor, W. A. Coty, M. R. Reed, A. R. Jacobs, P. Naranatt, R. Hubert, S. Panuganti, Z. The Human Variome Project, Australia. Wang, V. Headley, Y. Liu, M. Abedi, G. R. Gust, K. Olszewski, D. Canfield; The Human Variome Project (HVP; www .humanvariomeproject .org) Osmetech Molecular Diagnostics, Pasadena, CA, United States. was created to coordinate and curate the collection of all genetic varia- We have developed an eSensor® test to genotype 8 CYP450 2C9 tion, its phenotype and associated disease(s) . This is because lack polymorphisms known to affect enzyme activity (2C9 *2, *3, *5, *6, *11, of up-to-date, complete and correctly curated information can lead to *14, *15 and *16), as well as the VKORC1 -1639G>A promoter poly- excessive web searching, misdiagnosis and wastes valuable health- morphism associated with warfarin sensitivity and the CYP450 4F2 care funds . rs2108622 (V433M) polymorphism recently found to correlate with Work to obviate this problem began more than a decade ago with the warfarin dose . After multiplex PCR and exonuclease digestion, geno- Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS; www .hgvs .org) promoting typing is performed using the eSensor® cartridge and XT-8 instrument collection and display of variants, producing recommendations and within 35 minutes for up to 24 samples . In a reproducibility study per- software . formed with 20 genomic DNA samples and 3 plasmid controls (n = 345 At the launch of the HVP, 96 recommendations (www .nature .com/ng/ tests), 100% first-pass call rate and agreement with DNA sequencing journal/v39/n4/pdf/ng2024 .pdf) were drawn up by over 50 world ex- were obtained . A method comparison study with 105 genomic DNA perts from over 20 countries to be implemented in the future . The task samples extracted from blood gave 100% call rate and agreement with is large so countless people will need to be involved in a coordinated DNA sequencing after re-testing of no-call samples, as did an addi- manner with specially developed tools and protocols . tional cohort of 145 genomic DNA samples from saliva and cell lines . What is needed is an automated, seamless system transferring clini- The assay gave 100% first-pass call rate and agreement with DNA cal data (phenotype), genotype and pathological data to hospital re- sequencing using input genomic DNA amounts between 10 and 1,000 cords, as well as to databases curated by experts, in a de-identified ng per PCR . Testing of ethnic panels from the Coriell Cell Repository and ethically acceptable way, initially to LSDBs and finally to central revealed elevated allele frequencies for 2C9 *5 (3%) and *11 (7 .6%) databases/browsers . in the African-American panel (n=33), and 2C9 *14 (2 .2%) in the Gu- The International Society for Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumours (In- jarathi Indian panel (n=90) . Initial feasibility has been demonstrated SiGHT; www .insight-group .org) has volunteered to be a pilot for (a) for PCR amplification directly from whole blood samples, with no in- collection of all mutations and phenotype for their four genes of interest terference observed from serum albumin, IgG, bilirubin, hemoglobin, and (b) from all countries . triglycerides or excess EDTA . Many components for this flow have already been developed, often multiple times around the world in an un-coordinated disconnect- P08.84 ed way . A planning meeting was held in May 25-29 2008 to review A multiplex detection assay for Warfarin dosing using single these and rationalise future planning (www .humanvariomeproject .org/ Base Extension HVP2008/) . A. J. Rai1, N. Udar2, C. T. Yu1, M. Fleischer1; 1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States, 2Beck- P08.82 man Coulter, Fullerton, CA, United States. teststrip-based genotyping to assist in the prediction of Thromboembolic events in “at risk’ individuals can be prevented by anti anticoagulant dose requirement coagulation drug therapy . Warfarin is a commonly used anticoagulant H. Puehringer1, Q. Berisha2, G. Klose3, B. Schreyer3, W. Krugluger2, R. Lor- prescribed to over one million patients in the US (2006) . Individuals eth3, C. Oberkanins1; vary greatly in their response to warfarin therapy . This difference has a 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Clinical Chem- genetic basis . Two genes: cytochrome P450 2C9 (2C9) and vitamin K istry, Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 3Clinical Haemostaseology, West- epoxide reductase subunit protein 1 (VKORC1) have been reported to pfalz-Klinikum GmbH, Kaiserslautern, Germany. account for 60% of these differences . There are two clinically important Coumarin derivatives, such as warfarin and phenprocoumon, are alleles of 2C9(*2 and *3) and one of VKORC1 (-1639 G->A) . We de- the most widespread oral anticoagulant drugs for the prevention and signed a multiplex assay for the simultaneous detection of these three treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolic disorders . However, alleles in a single reaction. Our assay entails a multiplex PCR amplifica- these vitamin K antagonists have a narrow therapeutic range and a tion of the target gene fragments followed by a multiplex single base wide interindividual variability in dose requirement . Despite adjustment extension reaction . The single base extension reaction incorporates the for clinical variables, adverse events are frequently encountered dur- target nucleotide which has a fluorescent tag attached to it. This tag ing the initial phase of therapy . Genetic polymorphisms in the drug- is detected by separation on a capillary electrophoresis platform . The targeted vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) and in the entire assay can be performed with in an eight hour day by a single tech- drug metabolizing enzyme CYP2C9 have been reported to account for nologist with minimal hands-on effort . We observe 100%concordance the majority of variations in the therapeutic response to warfarin . on twenty samples when our assay is compared to traditional DNA se- We have developed a genetic test (StripAssay) for the simultaneous quencing . We have optimized this assay for high-throughput screening detection of two VKORC1 polymorphisms (-1639G>A, 3730G>A) and of patient samples, allowing for analysis of two 96well plates on a single the functionally defective CYP2C9 variants *2 and *3 determined by overnight run . Our multiplex SNP panel can be used as a stand-alone 430C>T and 1075A>C . Preliminary data from our ongoing clinical test for patients starting warfarin therapy, or its results can be combined study, to date including 130 patients treated with phenprocoumon in an algorithm with additional parameters (e .g . weight, age, sex, etc .) to (Marcumar™), allowed a classification of high, intermediate and low provide dosing recommendations for initial warfarin administration . dose responders according to VKORC1 and CYP2C9 genotypes . The stable dosage required for therapeutic anticoagulation was consider- P08.85 ably lower in carriers of a combined VKORC1 -1639A and CYP2C9 *2 Whole Genome Amplification (WGA) in forensic SNP profiling or *3 genotype compared to carriers of a single variation or wildtype I. Pietrangeli1, C. Martone1, E. Giardina1, I. m. Predazzi1, P. Marsala2, l. gabri- alleles . The VKORC1 3730G>A polymorphism seemed to have no ad- ele3, c. pipolo3, o. ricci3, G. Solla3, A. Spinella3, G. Novelli1,4; ditional predictive power for phenprocoumon dose variability . 1Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment in Multifactorial and Com- The new diagnostic assay and the results obtained during our study plex Diseases, School of Medicine, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, will assist clinicians to achieve a safer and more individualized antico- Italy, 2Direzione Centrale Anticrimine, Servizio di Polizia Scientifica, Rome, Italy, agulant therapy . 3Direzione Centrale Anticrimine, Servizio di Polizia Scientifica, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy, 4Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States. Whole genome amplification (WGA) is a technique developed for ge- netic analysis to obtain sufficient amount of DNA from small pools of cells or even single cells .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  Presently, the usefulness of WGA in STR-based forensic analysis is ing and whole genome projects on a desktop computer . The software limited because of allelic dropout (ADO) and bias in peak area ratios is fully compatible with Sanger, Roche 454, Illumina and ABI SOLiD observed in low copy number (LCN) templates . Sequence polymor- sequence platforms. We will provide workflow examples of assembly phisms (SNPs) are more sensible than length-polymorphisms (STRs) within SeqMan Genome Assembler for rapid resequencing assembly and less prone to ADO (allelic dropout) when WGA is applied . Thus, projects along with the use of its companion, SeqMan Pro for finish- we recently validated a panel of TaqMan SNP assays selected to show ing, analyzing and annotating whole genome assemblies . We will also an high sensibility in LCN templates . Here we evaluated the perfor- present a workflow for using the software in digital gene expression mance of multiple displacement amplification (MDA) applied to our applications comparing data from microarrays to data generated by optimized SNP assays starting from small amounts of genomic DNA next generation sequencing instruments . (gDNA) . A set of 100 samples were analyzed for 21 SNPs and a total of 1 ng, 100 pg and 10 pg of genomic DNA of each sample was used as P09. Genetic counselling, education, template for the MDA. Concordance and amplification failure (AF) be- tween gDNA and wgaDNA were extremely robust (100%) when WGA genetic services, and public policy was performed on 1 ng and 100 pg of gDNA, whilst the concordance decreased to 99.2% for samples amplified from 10 pg of gDNA. The P09.01 absence of a full concordance for 10 pg samples is referred as ADO Diagnostic and clinical validations in DNA-diagnostic occurring when a gDNA heterozygote genotype is scored as homo- laboratories: a BRcA example zygote but it should not lead to mis-typing if only heterozygous geno- D. Bodmer, M. R. Arjen, S. Hans, H. Nicoline, L. J. L. Marjolijn; types are considered. The robustness of WGA applied to specifically Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. selected SNP assays should suggest a reconsideration of WGA for Clinical validations are used to assess the clinical sensitivity and speci- forensic SNP profiling. ficity of genetic testing within DNA diagnostic laboratories and are an important instrument to monitor and further improve reliability and ef- P08.86 ficiency of molecular testing. However, for most indications the clini- comparison of genotyping consistency between genomic and cal information available to DNA diagnostic laboratories is too scarce whole-genome amplified DNA using the Illumina GoldenGate to determine the a priori chance of a positive test result . In order to and Infinium-II assays assess the sensitivity and specificity of genetic testing, we started S. Cichon1,2, M. Alblas1, K. Kämmerling1, T. W. Mühleisen1, M. M. Nöthen1,2, P. with a so called diagnostic validation, in which the robustness of the Hoffmann1,2; method(s) to analyze a single gene or a set of genes for a genetic dis- 1Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human ease was determined . The parameter used is the mutation detection Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. ratio (MDR) which is defined as the proportion of mutation-positive re- High-throughput SNP genotyping has become an important research sults . By comparing the MDR of a genetic test at different time intervals strategy in human genetics . Although most genotyping assays require (e .g . years), the robustness of this test can be judged . This robustness minimal amounts of DNA, repeated use often leads to depletion of depends on changes and variations that occur within a method (with the samples. To address this problem whole-genome-amplification or without preceding analytical validation) as well as method perfor- (wga) technologies have been developed and are meanwhile com- mance by different operators . Decrease of the MDR of a genetic test mercially available. Albeit the amplification seems to be mostly suc- over time, should lead to critical evaluation of the different laboratory cessful, it is controversially discussed whether the wgaDNA represents processes and assessment of putative alterations in the a priori risk of an exact copy of the genomic DNA (gDNA) . In the present study, we the diagnostic requests . aimed to assess the genotyping consistency between 45 wgaDNAs An example: The efficiency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation analysis (generated using the REPLI-g DNA Amplification Kit, Qiagen, Hilden) has decreased within years . To determine the cause of this decrease, and their corresponding gDNA samples . The gDNAs were of differ- e .g . whether this is due to technical issues or solely to an altered re- ent age and quality . To compare genotype consistency 20 high-qual- ferral policy, we performed both a diagnostic validation as well as a ity sample pairs were genotyped using Illumina’s HumanHap550V3 clinical validation . BeadChips .(565 .000 SNPs) . 25 sample pairs of different DNA quality were genotyped for 384 SNPs using Illumina’s GoldenGate assay . All P09.02 samples genotyped on the HumanHap550V3 performed well, with call Expanded newborn screening: challenges for the provision of rates >99% . The average consistency between gDNA and wgaDNA pre-newborn screening care was 99 .99% when comparing SNPs successfully genotyped in the cor- J. Allanson1, F. A. Miller2, R. Hayeems2, J. Carroll3, P. Chakraborty1, R. Chris- responding samples . Of the 25 sample pairs genotyped with the Gold- tensen2, J. Little4, B. Wilson4; enGate assay, 22 performed well with call rates >99% (gDNA) and 1Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of >98% (wgaDNA) . Genotype consistency was 100% for corresponding Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, samples . The remaining 3 sample pairs showed noticeably worse re- 4University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. sults with an average genotype call frequency of 99 .8% (gDNA) versus Historically, newborn screening (NBS) aimed to identify serious child- 60 .1% (wgaDNA) and a genotype consistency of only 89% . Possible hood disorders for which treatment was available to reduce morbidity explanations for the observed discrepancies include the age of gDNA, and mortality . Limited attention to pre-screening information provision the extraction method as well as the presence of unknown inhibitors was justified by the severity and treatability of the conditions screened. interfering with the amplification process. Yet technological advances allow NBS programs to identify disorders for which the promise of clinical benefit is uncertain as well as an array P08.87 of “incidental” findings (benign variants, carrier status results). Given comprehensive Desktop software for Next Generation the contested value of such results, commentators argue that limited sequencing Applications attention to pre-screening care is no longer justifiable. This paper re- S. Baldwin, D. Nash, K. Dullea, R. Nelson, T. Durfee, J. Engelking, F. Blattner; ports survey data on attitudes and practices of a cross-sectional strati- DNASTAR Inc., Madison, WI, United States. fied random sample of five health care professional (HCP) groups in Next Generation sequencing technologies provide the data genera- Ontario that are involved in prenatal care and/or care of newborns in tion tools for many large scale molecular biology applications including the first days of life (obstetricians, midwives, nurses, family physicians, whole genome sequencing/resequencing, polymorphism detection, pediatricians) . The majority of HCPs surveyed (68%) believe it is their as well as gene expression and regulation . The cost effectiveness of responsibility to provide information about NBS to parents prior to the these technologies makes them accessible to virtually any researcher . heel prick test . However, as many as 48% of these providers report One of the lagging issues, however, has to do with the handling of that they do not consistently or usually do so . This paper explores the the large quantities of data generated and gaining access to the tools role of provider type, practice barriers (e.g. insufficient time, training, required to analyze the data . To provide users with the ability to take compensation) as well as knowledge and confidence of NBS in ex- advantage of the next-gen revolution, DNASTAR has developed fully plaining the discrepancy between perceived professional responsibil- scalable software capable of processing a wide range of resequenc- ity and actual professional practice . Thus, while most HCPs perceiveGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  a responsibility to provide information about NBS to parents prior to psychosocial, ethical and legal issues . the heelprick, many challenges face the provision of this increasingly The core activity is a monthly newsletter with a list of references to important pre-screening care . recent scientific papers of members and a continuously updated list of upcoming meetings . This allows a rapid spread of information among P09.03 members, which is advantageous to the authors of papers or organiz- increasing research through collaboration ers of meetings, but also to readers who want to stay tuned on what J. D. Cody, C. D. Sebold, D. E. Hale; others are doing . In addition members may present information on Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. new activities in the newsletter, and publish calls for information (e .g . One goal of lay advocacy groups is to encourage research into the about validated research questionnaires or participants for a particular condition of interest . However, advocacy groups face some unique study) . challenges in the achievement of this goal . (1) The pool of potential The Network was launched at the ESHG annual meeting in Nice last research participants and funding opportunities are limited by the rela- year . Nine months later (mid February 2008) the Network has 245 tive rarity of the condition . (2) Many conditions have multisystem in- members in 45 countries worldwide, growing at a pace of 25-30 new volvement, meaning that specialists from multiple disciplines must be members each month . Just over 50% of the membership comes from involved in the research . (3) For many conditions, the natural history is Europe (20 countries) . The country with the largest number of mem- still unknown . However, studies delineating the phenotype of a condi- bers is the USA . Updated numbers will be presented at the ESHG tion are particularly challenging, as such studies require a methodical annual meeting in Barcelona . clinical assessments of every system, ideally performed by the same Those who want to have more information or want to become a mem- group of investigators . ber and obtain the newsletter, should send an E-mail to commgen- The relationship between the Chromosome 18 Registry and Research net@gmail .com . Society and the Chromosome 18 Clinical Research Center is unique in that the Registry is affiliated with only one research center. This dif- P09.06 fers from the more traditional paradigm in which an advocacy group mainstreaming community genomics: the EcOGENE-21 initiative grants smaller amounts of funding to multiple investigators at different D. Gaudet, M. Santure, F. Paradis, C. Belanger, D. Brisson; institutions . Montreal University Community Genomic Medicine Center, Chicoutimi, QC, In our experience, this relationship has been critical in addressing the Canada. above challenges . (1) The collaborative effort provides the Research ECOGENE-21 is a transdisciplinary initiative, driven by the specific Center both funding and a large pool of potential research participants . needs of communities. ECOGENE-21 specifically refers to human (2) The establishment of the Research Center in one institution allows communities, a cohesive social entity of individuals or families shar- for recruitment of multiple disciplines within the institution to aid in ing the same environment and ecosystem within the context of the study design and execution . This paradigm also eliminates barriers to larger society . ECOGENE-21 aims to understand the role of genetic the sharing of data and samples between investigators . (3) The same health determinants and new genetic technologies in global health is- investigators perform evaluations on patients using the same methods sues, and integrate this knowledge into a comprehensive framework and tools, ensuring that the clinical data is reliable . to improve health at the level of human communities . The aims are to: (1) develop, validate, apply and replicate cost-effective genome-based P09.04 technologies and screening strategies to prevent Mendelian diseases geneticsmadeeasy.com at the community level; (2) generate, validate, apply and evaluate tech- M. T. Solé-Pujol1, J. M. Carrera Macia2, J. M. Cantu Garza3, F. T. Solé Ristol4, nologies and strategies in different communities of the world for the J. Antich Femenias1; prevention and treatment of common diseases, based on the model of 1Centro Genética Médica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut Universitari Dexeus, Bar- lipid disorders, the metabolic syndrome and associated risk of type 2 celona, Spain, 3died in Buenos Aires 12 of november 2007. Mexican Institute diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors; (3) develop the expertise and of Social Security, Guadalajara, Mexico, 4Hospital del Mar, Institut Municipal d´ platforms needed to generate, apply, validate and replicate new knowl- Assistencia Sanitaria (IMAS), Barcelona, Spain. edge issued from community genomics, population genomics, phar- genetics made easy .com is a free informative web site about human macogenomics, nutrigenomics, epigenomics and environmental ge- genetics, with an average at this moment of 490 .868 visits for year . It nomics research . Over a 5-year timeframe, ECOGENE-21 will deliver, works as an excellent resource for clinician an other healthcare pro- apply and disseminate new applicable, cost-effective and exportable fessionals in order to complement the genetic counseling as well as vanguard technologies, strategies and concepts for disease preven- for general population and couple wanting to have a baby as the web tion in human ecosystems, as well as innovative knowledge transfer site presents important information that they should know . Them terms and training strategies, tools, platforms and expertise . The ECOGENE- used in the web site are clear, easy to understand, and are supported 21 framework and results obtained to date in the French-Canadian by static illustrations as well as by flash animations. founder population based on analytic, clinical and public health validity Index web is: Introduction - The origin of life - Cell specialization - Chro- and utility criteria will be presented . ECOGENE-21 is supported by the mosomes - How do we acquire our inheritance? - What is heredity? Canadian Institutes of Health Research (#CTP-82941) . - Types of inheritance - Why do disorders develop? - What happens when our recipes combine with our partner’s recipes? - And, how can we use this vast knowledge and benefit from it? (assisted reproduction techniques) - Origin of hereditary disorders - Prenatal Diagnosis tech- P09.07 niques - Gene therapy - Cloning and stem cells - Questions - Links of it‘s not just about competence: Why identifying organisational interest - Further reading - Foreword practice is an important step in developing a high quality genetic service P09.05 M. Bishop1,2, Y. Bylstra1, F. Cullinane3, C. Gaff4, S. Metcalfe1,2; the international multidisciplinary community Genetics Network 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2The University L. P. ten Kate1, L. Henneman2; of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3The Royal Women’s Hospital, Melbourne, 1Dept Clinical Genetics, EMGO-Institute, VU University Medical Center, Amster- Australia, 4Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia. dam, The Netherlands, 2Dept Public and Occupational Health, EMGO-Institute, While there have been numerous efforts to develop competences in VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. genetics for non-genetic health professionals to support their practice, The International Multidisciplinary Community Genetics Network is there has been minimal research to identify other factors that influ- an E-mail network aiming to facilitate communication among those ence this role . As part of our study to examine how midwives provide working in the field of community genetics. This includes researchers, a genetic service in Victoria, Australia, we identified the barriers and health professionals and others interested in genetic screening, genet- facilitators of this practice, using a mixed methods approach . Qualita- ic education, access and quality of genetic services or preconception tive data were collected from nine focus groups with midwives (n=50) care, genetics in primary care, genetic registries, genetics of disadvan- and two focus groups with experts in genetics (n=10), as well as 12 taged populations, public consultation or epidemiological, economic, interviews with managers of hospital maternity services . TranscriptsGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  were analysed, major themes identified and data triangulated. These work is not to be prescriptive, but to provide frameworks that can be findings were validated with quantitative data collected from midwives adapted to national and professional need . Curricula for a range of responding to a state-wide survey (n=317, response rate 45 .4%) . Our health professionals, both pre-registration and post-registration, can findings indicate that there is variation in the genetic practice of mid- be built or modified using the competences. wives . While each midwife’s practice is contingent on their individual In this paper, the process of development, the competences and sug- competence, the scope of their practice is heavily influenced by the gested learning outcomes will be discussed . The competences and organisation in which they work . For example, each hospital provides a background document can be viewed on the website of the Euro- specific guidelines on what information needs to be collected to de- Gentest project [http://www .eurogentest .org/] . The project team invites termine genetic risk, and what genetic tests should be discussed with feedback . each pregnant woman. These findings suggest that programs that only target midwifery competence will not be enough to effect practice P09.10 change . Instead, for midwives to provide an effective and high quality Genetic counsellor : News from France genetic service, a two pronged approach targeting midwifery compe- C. Cordier1,2, N. Pasz2, M. Voelckel3,2; tence and addressing organisational policy is required . 1Department of Cytogenetics, Mulhouse, France, 2French Association of Genet- ic Counsellors, Marseille, France, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Marseille, P09.08 France. Genetic counseling for newborn hearing screening in Nagano, The Professional Master « Genetic Counselling and Predictive Medi- Japan cine » made possible the education of the first French Genetic Coun- S. Maruyama1, A. Sakurai1, S. Usami1, Y. Takumi1, H. Moteki1, K. Hayashi1, S. sellors, since 2005 . Two years later, there are 34 graduated, 23 of Nishio1, M. Maeda2, A. Mizuuchi1, M. Arakawa1, R. Kawamura1, Y. Yamanou- them have a job and 4 of them have a job offer . chi1, H. Yamashita1, M. Tamai1, T. Kosho1, K. Wakui1, T. Wada1, Y. Sekijima1, Y. Thanks to the data from the French Association of the Genetic Coun- Fukushima1; sellors; the AFCG (Association Française des Conseillers en Géné- 1Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 2Support Center for tique), we suggest to present the interdisciplinary recruitment, the job Children with Hearing Loss, Matsumoto, Japan. progression in France, and the way managed to its valorisation . Congenital deafness is a disorder with high prevalence (1/1,000 birth) We will specify the annual number of new graduated, and the Genetic and that requires early diagnosis and medical intervention to minimize Counsellors location in France and in a couple of countries . Then, we the morbidity of the affected infant . Since 50% of congenital deafness will insist on the processing action for a national, European, and inter- is caused by genetic defect and clinical phenotype and prognosis in national integration of these new French professionals . part depend on genetic background, genetic testing for affected infants can provide useful information . In Japan, a newborn hearing screening P09.11 has started as a government project in 2000 . In Nagano prefecture Genetics counseling:misdirection and misuse in some of Japan (population 2 .2 million), a screening program has started in developing countries 2002 . In 2007, under the collaboration and coordination among medi- M. Shariaty; cal-, educational- and administrative staffs, the Support Center for Cancer Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Children with Hearing Loss has opened to support both affected chil- Practically genetics counselling began with Eugenic movement around dren and their parents . Division of Clinical and Molecular Genetics in 1910 in England,USA and some western countries with very negative Shinshu University Hospital also collaborates with this center as a pro- and destructive effects on health and integrity of humankind . Fortu- vider of genetic counseling . Since 70% of genetic congenital deafness nately ,the misuse of genetics was officially abandoned in 1944 though is an autosomal recessive disorder, most parents of affected children practically persisted up to 1960s . have normal hearing, thus do not consider the possibility of genetic Medical Genetics counselling based on dignity and equality was intro- causes on their affected children . This also suggests that the burden duced by Sheldon Reed in 1944 and became an obligate branch of of patients could be more intense when they know the diagnosis of modern clinical and medical genetics settings . their children . In Islamic countries Genetics counselling was introduced by the author We performed a questionnaire-based survey to clarify psychological in 1968 based on the same principles thought by my mentor profes- impact of parents and what they needed during hearing screening, be- sors Reed,Vogel and Fuhrmann,and considering all of the humanitaria fore and during genetic testing, and after being informed a diagnosis . n,ethical,moral ,and religion issues concerning the clients .Since 1968 Results of this survey clearly indicated the importance of genetic coun- i have counsulted more than 17000 couples,majority seeking consan- seling during screening program and intense collaboration between the guineous marriage . Only less than 2% of these young healthy couples Center and community medical staffs such as public health nurses . seeking marriage actually needed karyotyping . Unfortunately,in the last several years in some developing P09.09 countries,genetics counselling has been misunderstood and misused Development of a set of core competences in genetics for health due to financial interests of private centers.It is quite wrong but popular professionals in Europe practice to order karyotyping for every marriage or every disease that H. Skirton1, C. Lewis2,1, A. Kent2, D. Coviello3; carries the label of being due to genetics .s disease .I have seen many 1University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 2Genetic Interest Group, examples of ordering karyotyping for Duchene muscular dystrophy,tha London, United Kingdom, 3Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, lassemia,hemophilia,phenylketonuria and cystic fibrosis . Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy. Based on these facts I am proposing a universal medical guideline The increasing use of genomics within a wide range of health care for every Genetics counselling center and every genetics counsellor settings requires health professionals to develop relevant expertise in based on medical,ethical,humanitarian ,and religion principles so that genetics to practise appropriately . There is a need for common mini- the needy clients could not be misused and financially and morally mum standards of competence in genetics for health professionals in exploited . Europe. However, there are significant differences in professional edu- cation and practice across Europe and setting common curricula is not P09.12 practical . It was agreed by the Expert group of the EuroGentest project Cystic fibrosis cascade carrier testing in Victoria, Australia: an Unit 6 that a pragmatic solution would be to describe and agree, by audit of clinical service consensus, a set of core competences that could apply to health pro- B. J. McClaren1,2,3, M. A. Aitken1, R. J. Massie1,4,2, S. A. Metcalfe1,2, D. J. fessionals in Europe, whatever their national setting . Amor3,2,1; The core competences were based upon existing frameworks, modi- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 2The fied for the European context. They relate to i) professionals whose University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, specialisation is in genetics and ii) professionals who are generalists Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 4Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, or specialise in an area of health care other than genetics . Recommen- Australia. dations have been based on work that was developed in consultation In Victoria, Australia, carrier testing for cystic fibrosis (CF) is performed with the particular group of professionals involved . The goal of this by a single state-wide laboratory and counselling service . CF carrierGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  testing is offered free of charge to the relatives of babies diagnosed of their carrier status . More than 95% of babies born with CF have no with CF through the newborn screening program . Although cascade family history of CF . Most parents who have a child with CF elect to testing is known to detect carriers of CF, its effectiveness has been utilise reproductive technology for subsequent pregnancies by either questioned, in our clinical service and elsewhere, because most ba- prenatal diagnosis (PND) or pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) . bies with CF are born to couples who do not have a family history; The US National Institutes of Health and American College of Obstetri- the uptake of cascade testing following a child’s diagnosis of CF by cians and Gynecologists recommend offering CF carrier testing to all newborn screening has not been previously reported . couples . We investigated CF cascade testing in the families of Victorian children We have introduced a fee paying prenatal screening program, initial- with CF . We studied the uptake of cascade carrier testing by examin- ly offered through obstetricians in the private sector . Sampling is by ing 53 pedigrees of newborns diagnosed with CF between 2001 and cheek brush, testing for the twelve most common severe mutations in 2004, and performing data linkage to the laboratory database records . CFTR. In the first two years of the program 2975 people were screened The uptake of carrier testing amongst adult first and second degree of whom 64 were carriers (1:46) and 6 carrier couples (~1:500) were relatives was 16% (190/1160) . Parents were the most likely relatives to identified all of whom chose either PND if pregnant or PGD if non-preg- have been tested, followed by aunts/uncles, then grandparents . nant at the time of testing . We conclude that cascade testing, as currently offered, is not an ef- The challenges and difficulties faced include difficulties of educating fective strategy for detecting carriers for CF . An alternative is to offer health care professionals and the public about CF, the requirement for population-based screening and this occurs in some countries but with sample recollection in 2 .2% of patients screened, the correct collection quite variable uptake reported. Factors influencing uptake of CF carrier procedure, patient anxiety regarding not being offered screening until testing need to be explored . We are now conducting an evaluation of pregnant, reluctance of health professional to offer screening primarily the barriers and facilitators to cascade testing to inform both clinical due to time constraints and equity of care when screening is currently service delivery and population-based CF screening programs . only offered in the private health sector . P09.13 P09.15 Facing choices about genetic testing and assisted reproduction: EuroGentest medical Genetics Quality Assurance Database developing an integrated care pathway to help health L. Desmet1,2, A. Corveleyn1,2, N. Nagels1,2, V. Lanneau3, I. Caron3, B. Urbero3, professionals meet the needs of infertile men with cystic S. Aymé3,2, E. Dequeker1,2, M. A. Morris4,2; Fibrosis (cF) and congenital bilateral absence of the vas 1Department for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, deferens (cBAVD) Belgium, 3Orphanet, Paris, France, 4Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva, A. Edwards1, C. Phelps2, A. Procter1, I. Ketchell3; Switzerland. 1All Wales Medical Genetics Service; Institute of Medical Genetics, University The outcome of genetic testing has a great impact on the life of pa- Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, tients and their entourage . The quality of genetic testing is thus of Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Adult Cystic utmost importance . In July 2007, EuroGentest released a European Fibrosis Unit, Cardiff and Vale NHS Trust, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Quality Assurance (QAu) database in collaboration with Orphanet, with Background The choices offered by assisted reproductive technolo- reliable public information about the quality systems of laboratories gies (ART) and preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) mean that offering medical genetic testing (http://www .eurogentest .org/web/qa/ genetics services need to be better integrated into the care pathway basic .xhtml) . The database contains at present data from about 230 of infertile men with CF/CBAVD . This study explored how multidisci- laboratories of 32 countries . plinary healthcare professionals in one UK NHS Trust believe genetics These data comprise besides laboratory contact details and a link to services can be integrated into a common care pathway . the Orphanet laboratory page, information about the quality manager, Methods Three focus groups were convened with health professionals the accreditation status with a link to the accreditation scope if appli- involved in the care of men with CF/CBAVD (representing genetics, cable, and about participation in genetic EQA schemes . adult respiratory medicine, paediatrics, assisted reproduction and urol- During 2004 and 2005, 152 of the 230 laboratories (66%) participated ogy). The first two groups (5 & 7 participants respectively) explored together in 87 different EQA schemes; mainly for CF testing (51% awareness of genetics, ART and PGD . Concerns and training needs of the EQA participating laboratories), DNA sequencing (34%) and were identified. Following patient interviews, a final focus group was FRAXA (31%) . Of the laboratories participating in EQA, 28% are also convened to identify a common care pathway . accredited according to standards ISO 17025 or ISO 15189 . Another Results . Much uncertainty existed amongst non-genetics specialisms 23% of laboratories are preparing for accreditation in the near future . regarding the role of genetics services in the CF/CBAVD care path- The EuroGentest QAu database allows consumers (laboratories, doc- way. A lack of confidence was evident when talking about the genetics tors, etc) to identify a laboratory with a quality system for a particular of CF/CBAVD, ART and PGD . Common concerns related to when to diagnostic test. It benefits laboratories by encouraging and providing raise these issues and how to deal with parental pressure . Participants recognition of their investment in QAu as well as by giving them a bet- felt that although the in-depth discussion of these issues should be the ter informed choice for referral of tests . main responsibility of the genetics service, their own basic knowledge The database will be continually updated and participation in the data- could be enhanced . base is freely open to all European laboratories offering human medi- Conclusions . There is a need for improved information exchange about cal genetic testing . For more information, please contact QAusurvey@ the genetics of CF/CBAVD and assisted reproductive options between eurogentest .org . specialisms . Genetics services can improve awareness and become better integrated into the existing care pathway by facilitating profes- P09.16 sional workshops and training sessions, and producing leaflets and Definitions of genetic testing in European and other national referral guidelines . An integrated care pathway is being developed . legislation (EuroGentest WP3.4) O. Varga1,2, J. Sequeiros1,3; P09.14 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2School of Public Health, Faculty of Public Health, UD challenges in establishing a population carrier screening MHSC, Debrecen, Hungary, 3ICBAS, Porto, Portugal. program for cystic fibrosis We are comparing definitions of genetic testing among legislation from A. Bankier1, M. Delatycki2, J. Massie3, R. Forbes2, B. Chong1, D. DuSart1, V. European institutions and individual Member States, as well that pro- Petrou2; duced in the USA, Canada, Japan and Australia . 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Australia, 2Genetic Health Investigation is based on documents collected from websites and da- Services Victoria, Parkville, Australia, 3Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, tabases, including governmental sources, as well as that gathered Australia. within WP3 .1 and the series European Ethical-Legal Papers, being Cystic fibrosis is the commonest life shortening autosomal recessive published by EuroGentest Unit 6 . condition among Caucasians due to mutations in the CFTR gene . The We checked the present status and validity of all legislation used: only carrier frequency in this population is 4% with a disease incidence of those still in force will be analyzed and compared; when validity check 1:2,500 . Carriers are healthy and the majority of people are unaware is currently not possible, due to unavailability or language incompat-Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  ibility, they will be noted as “unknown” . North Africa, because of social advantages . The increased risk for au- Preliminary results (16 laws) come from 7 countries (Belgium, Hun- tosomal recessive diseases in their offspring is mostly not known in gary, Portugal; Australia, USA, Canada and Japan): 6 are compulsory the future parents . and 10 soft laws .  In association studies results can often not be reproduced by addi- Definitions of genetic testing in these documents vary significantly in tional studies . Ethnicity is an important cause . length and comprehensiveness, depending on their general purpose  Finally, ethnicity is an issue in pharmacogenetics, for instance in pre- and aims; jurisdiction source is also variable: general discrimination scribing beta-blockers for heart failure in African-Americans .It is dif- (Belgium and Canada), genetic information and discrimination in em- ficult to handle the issue of ethnicity in genetics correctly and little is ployment (USA), health care (Hungary), general privacy and confiden- done to change that attitude . Meanwhile, this attitude may be harmful tiality (Australia), health and genetic information (Portugal) . for the patient and science in general . The expected results are an up-to-date and easy-to-search definitions database, focusing on legislation of European and other countries, P09.19 with annotations regarding relevancy and reach of that legislation A comparison of criteria for clinical validity and utility in various (compulsory or only soft law; source, and to which jurisdiction(s) does national and international frameworks it apply; etc .) . P. Javaher1, U. Kristoffersson2, A. Kent3, A. Christianson4, R. Raouf5, C. Bar- Then, definitions of genetic testing in European and other legislation reiro6, I. Nippert7, J. Schmidtke1; may be compared among countries and jurisdictions . This might be 1Medical School of Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 2Lunds University, Lund, helpful for legislators and policy makers, the various professionals in- Sweden, 3Genetic Interest Group, London, United Kingdom, 4University of the volved in genetic testing and the general public . Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 5Ministry of Health, Cairo, Egypt, 6Hospital de Pediatría SAMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7Universitaetsklinikum P09.17 Muenster, Muenster, Germany. What du judges need to know about human gentics? Judicial CAPABILITY is a 3-year model project developed jointly by Unit 3 science education in the Us (Clinical Genetics, Community Genetics and Public Health) and Unit 6 C. Skrzynia1, F. M. Zweig2, J. P. Evans1; (Education) of the Network of Excellence (EuroGentest) and by leading 1University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 2Advanced Sci- experts from Argentina, Egypt and South Africa . CAPABILITY’s overall ence and Technology Adjuducation Resource Center, Washington, DC, United objectives are to contribute to the efforts to establish and sustain a States. worldwide harmonisation process for quality standards for the integra- The importance of genetics has grown in the past decades not only tion of genetic test/genomic knowledge applications into practice and among other biological sciences but also throughout society in gen- prevention and to serve as a model project for successful, sustainable eral . However knowledge about the subject lags . Efforts have been collaboration between EU research centres and centres from develop- devised to fill this gap in high schools, in medical education and in ing countries . the general public . We’d report here on judicial education programs In recent years a great deal of attention has been paid at national as conceived and produced by the Advanced Science and Technol- and international levels, to develop policies in the field of provision of ogy Adjudication Resource Center (ASTAR) in collaboration with the clinical genetic testing services . The topic has been tackled by sev- University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill . eral different national and international organisations, each taking dif- ASTAR is a congressionally mandated educational effort with the mis- ferent approaches, depending on their primary objective . In various sion of training the US judiciary in scientific matters in order to enhance frameworks different groups addressed the determination of criteria scientific knowledge in US courts. Through the use of lectures and for clinical validity and utility of genetic testing . As a preliminary outline hands-on instruction a cadre of resource judges has been trained to in the context of CAPABILITY, this review aims to present the various serve at their home jurisdictions as resource persons who can offer frameworks and to draw a comparison of the different approaches . consultation and expertise when cases involving scientific and techni- cal matters arise . P09.20 We present aspects of the curriculum, which range from intense “basic The cystic fibrosis external quality assessment scheme, science boot camps” to mock “adjudication clinics” and plenary discus- monitoring the quality of laboratory performance sions moderated by judges and scientists. We focus specifically on hu- S. Berwouts1, E. Girodon2, M. Stuhrmann3, M. Schwarz4, M. A. Morris5, A. man genetics as this subject plays an increasing role in diverse court Corveleyn1, L. Desmet1, E. Dequeker1; cases . The examples include genetics of addiction, cancer genetics, 1Centre of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Service genetically engineered crops, inborn errors of metabolism and genetic de Biochimie et Génétique, Groupe hospitalier Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, discrimination . Out educational objective is to promote case manage- Créteil, France, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule, Han- ment and settlement in controversies in which novel scientific evidence nover, Germany, 4Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital, Man- is likely to be introduced . chester, United Kingdom, 5Laboratoire de Diagnostic moléculaire, Service de Médecine Génétique, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland. P09.18 Given the potential serious health consequences of genetic test re- Etnicity and Genetics: a sensitive issue sults, mechanisms should be in place to assure the quality of the tests N. J. Leschot1, N. V. A. M. Knoers2; and the interpretation of the data . 1Dept Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dept Human Genetics In this regard, the International Organization for Standardization ISO RadboudUniversity Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 15189 (5 .6 .4) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and In our multicultural society registration of ethnicity is not allowed by Development (OECD) Guidelines for quality assurance in molecular law . We here present six “ethnicity issues”:in genetic counselling and genetic testing (2 .C), contain requirements and recommendations for diagnostic testing, population screening programs, association studies laboratories to participate in external quality assessment schemes and pharmacogenetics, respectively . (EQA) . Participation in EQA schemes is useful not only to the labora-  Testing for new mutations in the BRCA-1 gene is time-consuming . tory, as a key element of its quality assurance processes, but also Patients with an Ashkenazi background have different mutations than as a quality indicator to monitor the improvement of laboratory per- other ethnic groups and therefore, it would be advantageous to know formance . the ethnic background of patients to improve efficiency of mutation The Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Network has been providing EQA since 1996 analysis . and has performance data from more than 10 years . This study focus-  In prenatal screening for Down syndrome, background values for es on a group of about 100 molecular genetics laboratories that partici- Beta-hCG and PAPP-A differ between Afro-Caribbean and West-Eu- pated in the CF EQA scheme for each of the previous three years . ropean women . Reporting the correct genotype, provision of appropriate interpreta-  In neonatal screening 16 diseases are tested in all 180 .000 newborns tion and additional elements required by ISO 15189 such as unique in the Netherlands each year, including sickle cell anaemia, while only identification of the patient and sample type, are compared over these 40 .000 have an increased risk for that disorder . three years . In addition, comparable cases and samples with identical  Consanguineous marriages are common in people originating from genotypes were included during the three-year period, which enabledGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  us to analyse performance of a laboratory more specifically and to ground could especially benefit from further genetic counselling. survey if individual comments, provided by the assessors, were taken into account by the laboratory . P09.23 Regular participation contributes to continuous improvement and mon- molecular testing for rare genetic disorders in Europe: hype or itoring of internal quality in laboratory performance . Moreover, it is a hope? relevant tool for assessors to educate laboratories . P. J. Willems; GENDIA (GENetic DIAgnostic network), Antwerp, Belgium. P09.21 Currently, there are huge differences between various countries in ac- Fetal alcohol syndrome among grade-one children in the cessibility, price and quality of molecular diagnostic testing . The bottle- Northern cape Province of south Africa: prevalence and risk necks include the vast number of genetic diseases (> 1000), the low factors number of samples per disease, the nature of the disease mutation M. F. Urban1, M. F. Chersich2, L. Fourie3, C. Chetty3, L. Olivier4, J. Rosenthal5, often being a private mutation, the high cost of testing and lack of reim- D. L. Viljoen4; bursement by governments and insurance companies, and the lack of 1University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2International Centre for an international organised network of diagnostic labs combining their Reproductive Health, Kenya and University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 3Founda- portfolio of tests . All these bottlenecks impair a cost-effective and re- tion for Alcohol Related Research, Johannesburg, South Africa, 4Foundation liable diagnostic service, thereby holding molecular testing in many for Alcohol Related Research, Cape Town, South Africa, 5Centers for Disease countries in a preclinical era . However, the quality, accessibility and Control, Atlanta, GA, United States. cost-effectiveness of diagnostic tests for rare genetic disorders could Objective: To describe prevalence, characteristics and risk factors for be substantially improved by the creation of an international network fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) and partial FAS among children attend- of diagnostic labs combining their portfolio of tests and exchanging ing grade one in the Northern Cape Province of South Africa . samples for rare genetic disorders. The first network of diagnostic labs Design: Cross-sectional study using a two-tiered method for active as- offering genetic tests internationally was incorporated four years ago, certainment of FAS/partial FAS cases . This comprised screening of and is called GENDIA (for GENetic DIAgnostic Network) . It consists of growth parameters, and then diagnostic assessment for screen-posi- “referral labs” sending samples to GENDIA, “test labs” testing samples tive children using clinical and neuro-cognitive assessments, and ma- they receive from GENDIA, and a central GENDIA lab coordinating the ternal history of drinking during pregnancy . Mothers or care-givers of network . Currently more than 2 .000 different genetic tests are avail- children with FAS were interviewed, as well as matched controls . able through GENDIA . Such international network of genetic diagnos- Setting: Primary schools in De Aar (8) and Upington (15) . tic labs results in greater access to a large spectrum of genetic tests Subjects: Grade one pupils in 2001 (De Aar, n=536) and 2002 (Uping- performed with higher quality at lower cost . ton, n=1299) . Outcome measures: FAS or partial FAS . P09.24 Results: Prevalence of FAS/partial FAS was high: 64/536 (119 .4/1000, What is the impact of genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis 95% CI=93 .2-149 .9) in De Aar, and 97/1299 (74 .7/1000, 95% CI=61 .0- in genetic diseases prevention in an Arab muslim population? 90 .3) in Upington . Overall, 67 .2 per 1000 children (95% CI=56 .2-79 .7) H. Chaabouni-Bouhamed1, L. Kraoua1, M. Chaabouni1, M. Kharrat2, L. Ben had full FAS features . Growth retardation was also common in this Jemaa1, R. Mrad1, F. Maazoul1; population: 66 .6% (1181/1774) were underweight, 48 .3% (858/1776) 1Department of Hereditary Disorders, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of Human stunted and 15 .1% had a head circumference <2S .D . for age . Inter- Genetics, Tunis, Tunisia. views with cases and controls showed that mothers of children with Tunisians are mostly of Arab and Berber origin, and nearly all are Mus- FAS were less likely to have fulltime employment or have attended lim . Consanguineous marriages are prevalent . Tunisia is different from secondary school . These women also had lower body mass index and its neighbouring countries in its accomplishments towards women’s about 80% currently smoked . Over two-thirds of all pregnancies were rights . The nuptial evolution toward a belated marriage model reduced unplanned . the progeny . Contraception is encouraged and abortion is legal in case Conclusions: Nearly one in ten pupils has FAS/partial FAS, with the of medical or acute social problem . Genetic disorders are common in rate in De Aar the highest yet described in South Africa . The epide- Tunisia; more than 70% of the population are educated and most are miological features described are important for designing essential receptive to health guidelines . Genetic counselling (GC) and prenatal preventive interventions . diagnosis (PND) are performed as medical facilities in a limited num- ber of genetic centres . To evaluate the real impact of GC and PND P09.22 on genetic diseases prevention, we surveyed during three years 2862 A study into the knowledge of inherited metabolic disorders couples /families who were referred to our center . We evaluated the among patients and parents in the irish population impact of GC on parents’ attitude by analyzing the occurrence of preg- R. O’Shea1, E. Treacy2, A. Murphy2, S. Lynch3, D. Lambert3; nancies and the acceptance of prenatal screening and PND . Param- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2National Centre for eters were correlated to parents’ age, socioeconomic situation, and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, education level; and to the disease . Our results showed that people in 3National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. Tunisia ask for GC and follow it in most cases . The response quality Galactosaemia and Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD) are reces- is variable depending on the patients’ education and their socio-eco- sively inherited conditions detected by newborn screening in Ireland . nomic class . This is in some ways different from other Arab countries Patients are treated at one centre and genetic information is provided with similar cultural and religious backgrounds, probably due to social by the specialist team . We assessed knowledge among parents and and legislative differences . At present, GC and PND seems to be the patients to see whether referral for formal genetic counselling would method of choice for prevention of genetic diseases in Tunisia and be beneficial, using a questionnaire including 4 demographic, 8 knowl- such services should be developed as a priority despite the financial edge, 2 information and 5 disease impact questions . 27 families with costs of such a programme . . galactosemia and 10 with MSUD were interviewed in clinic . All parents of children with galactosemia and MSUD answered >75% of questions P09.25 correctly, but there were misunderstandings about the risk or implica- Exploring the views of European clinical genetic professionals tions of carrier status. There was a significant difference in knowledge on new international recommendations for genetic counselling between ethnicities . Adult patients with galactosemia had more mis- related to genetic testing understandings in relation to inheritance, recurrence risks and carrier R. A. Pestoff1, H. Kääriäinen2, E. Rantanen3, M. Hietala3, L. Kerzin-Storrar1; status than their parents . 83% of study participants requested more 1Medical Genetics Research Group and Regional Genetics Service, CMMC and information about their condition and its transmission . 40% of affect- University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Biomedi- ed adults with galactosemia identified a need to meet others with the cine - Department of Medical Genetics, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Medical same condition . While parents of children with MSUD or galactosemia Genetics, Turku, Finland. are well informed, the majority expressed a wish for more information . EuroGentest: The main goal of the EuroGentest Network of Excellence Adult patients themselves and parents from an Irish Travelling back- is to improve and harmonise the quality of genetic testing in Europe .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 0 Formulation of quality standards includes those for genetic counselling differential diagnosis and proper medical care for this patients . Mo- associated with genetic testing, and is the focus of this study . lecular genetic examinations on the following severe genetic disorders Genetic Counselling Guidelines related to Genetic Testing: The recom- have been performed in our laboratory during the last 13 years: Spinal mendations for genetic counselling in connection with different testing Muscular Atrophy - in 78 families with 98 prenatal diagnosis; FRAXA situations aim to establish minimal criteria for genetic counselling and - in 38 families with 2 prenatal diagnosis;Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseas to improve patient’s understanding of the results and consequences of type 1A - in 14 families; Duchenne/Becker Muscular Dystrophy - in 12 genetic testing . These guidelines were formulated through analysis of families; Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome - in 1 family; Facioscapulo- published guidelines and synthesis during two workshops with experts humeral Muscular Dystrophy - in 2 families; Limb Girdle Muscular Dys- from genetic practice and research . Comments from ESHG members trophy - in 2 families; Angelman syndrome in 5 families . The detailed and national societies have been received, and endorsement by ESHG results will be reported in our presentation . Board will now be sought . By performing the molecular genetic analysis effective diagnosis and Study description: This study aims to investigate how colleagues in the correct genetic counselling was established in our genetic unit . clinical genetics community view these new professional guidelines, and to identify any attitudinal, cultural, or practical barriers (profes- P09.28 sional/societal, economic etc) which may inhibit them following these Inventory and classification of genetic diseases: a new service guidelines in practice . Furthermore, the best ways for dissemination of of Orphanet guidelines will be discussed, and potential barriers to this identified. A. Rath, M. Georget, V. Lanneau, S. Aymé; Study method: Guidelines and questionnaire surveys will be distrib- Inserm, SC11 / Orphanet, Paris, France. uted to self-selected delegates at the ESHG conference and selected Several nomenclatures and classifications of genetic diseases have genetics centres in countries across Europe . Approximately 100 indi- been developed since 1990, which overlap at the level of cellular mod- viduals involved in providing genetic counselling will be recruited . els, molecular assays and genomic testing, as biological and medical Open invitation to obtain copy of guidelines and participate in study: researchers rarely communicate among each others . Genomics rep- ESHG delegates are invited to visit our poster to receive a copy of resent one end of the scale of granularity . Electronic Health Record the recommendations and to register an interest in participating in the Systems reside in medicine and form the other end of the scale . Both study . have to be able to exchange information, for instance to make genetic diseases visible in the health care system, but also to allow commu- P09.26 nication within the community and permit the interfacing of different importance of database reviewing before prenatal diagnosis databases . Nomenclature of genetic diseases has evolved a lot during M. Alonso1,2, J. J. Tellería1,2, I. Fernandez1,2, A. Blanco1,2; the past years, but no one knows how to establish the catalogue of 1IBGM (Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular), Valladolid, Spain, 2Univer- human genetic diseases as a definition of what is a disease is lacking. sity of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. To overcome this difficulty, Orphanet (www.orpha.net) has established Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder having a fre- a database of phenotypes and of genes with the possibility to query by quency of 1:4000 in our population . So far, we had study more than disease name, by gene name or symbol or by sign . Every phenotype 2000 samples, including about 1500 from neonatal CF screening since is also classified in the multiple possible classification systems to al- 1999 . low an understanding of its physiopathology of or its range of expres- Several families with affected members or carriers asked us for ge- sion. Every phenotype has a unique identifier which will remain stable. netic counselling . Currently over 4,500 phenotypes are classified and indexed. This new In 2000, four brothers and sisters of a CF patient´s mother were anal- service, available since March 2008, is expected to provide a bridge ysed for the F508del mutation . One of them was found to be a carrier between clinicians and biologists for a mutual benefit. of this mutation (heterozygote) while the others were non CF carriers . Then, the carrier ´s partner was screened for 95% of the CF caus- P09.29 ing mutations in our population using the DGGE-GC Clamp method . collaboration is key in the preliminary efforts of genetic We observed an anomalous DGGE pattern in exon 11, and by direct education for health professionals in chile for the welfare of sequencing we confirmed that it was the change I539T, previously de- patients with genetic diseases scribed as a CF mutation . We informed the couple that the risk for S. A. Castillo Taucher1,2, R. Pardo1,3, T. Aravena1,3, M. Aracena4,5, C. Vil- having affected children was ¼ . laseca6,7, C. Mellado5, P. Sanz1,8, F. Cortés9,10, N. Unanue11, M. Lagos5, M. del Eight years later, in 2008, the obstetrician called us for a prenatal Campo12; diagnosis of this couple . We reviewed the database and there were 1Genetic Unit Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2Ge- some changes: in 2002 this “mutation“ had been subjected to func- netic Unit Clínica Alemana, Santiago, Chile, 3Genetic Unit Hospital Sótero tional studies in mammalian cells showing that I539T not only does not del Río, Santiago, Chile, 4Genetic Unit Hospital Calvo Mackenna, Santiago, decrease the CFTR activity, but in fact increased its activity . Therefore, Chile, 5Genetic Unit Hospital Clínico P. Universidad Católica, Santiago, Chile, the obstetrician and the couple were informed that prenatal diagnosis 6Genetic Unit Hospital Roberto del Río, Santiago, Chile, 7Genetic Unit Clínica in not necessary . Dávila, Santiago, Chile, 8Genetic Unit Hospital San Juan de Dios, Santiago, Preconcepcional carrier screening allows couples at risk to arrive at Chile, 9Genetic Unit Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología de Alimentos, Santiago, informed reproductive decisions . Still, the information given to them Chile, 10Genetic Unit Clínica Las Condes, Santiago, Chile, 11Genetic Unit Hos- may have to be updated at the moment of choice between diferent pital Clínico San Borja Arriarán, Santiago, Chile, 12Genetic Unit Hospital Val reproductive options . d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain. With all clinical geneticists in Chile(25), in 2003 we implemented a P09.27 website for clinical consultations that serve urban and rural hospitals; Results of Genetic counselling and molecular genetic testing of Telegenética in Spain began simultaneously . Interchange of technical severe monogenic disorders in Hungary between 1993 and 2006. support financed by Agencia de Cooperación Iberoamericana allowed L. Tímár1, Á. Herczegfalvi2, H. Pikó3, K. Hajdu4, A. Tóth4, V. Karcagi3; the Chilean website (www .teledismorfologia .cl) . We have made pre- 1National Institute of Child Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 2Bethesda Children’s liminary efforts to use this site as a learning tool for postgraduate stu- Hospital, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 3Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Natl. Institute of dents in Clinical Genetics from Latin America . Environmental Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 4National Center of Health, BU- During 2005 we developed a pilot course “Online Education in Clini- DAPEST, Hungary. cal Genetics for Health Professionals” for those working in the only During the genetic counselling of the severe monogeneic genetic dis- population-based registry of congenital birth defects in Chile . In 2006 orders it is very important to establish the exact etiological diagno- and 2007 (57 and 71% MDs, 0 and 13% foreigners, respectively) we sis . The molecular genetic examinations play outstanding role in this offered the program through www .medichi .cl, a net of digital learning diagnostic procedure . Molecular genetic diagnosis provides effective from Faculty of Medicine Universidad de Chile, and are planning the possibility for prevention of serious genetic disorders by prenatal di- third version 2008 . agnosis and possible termination of pregnancy vhenever treatment of The website and the course should improve care for patients and their diseases is unavailable . Moreover, genetic results provide accurate families by helping primary health care professionals understand ge-Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  netic influences on illness, and recognize and manage more effectively P09.32 the most common genetic problems, with improving identification and the lay people attitude towards predictive genetic testing in description of children affected by birth defects . Russia Another challenge is facilitating the creation of support groups of rare V. V. Pogrebenkova, O. A. Makeeva, V. P. Puzyrev; diseases at a national level, demonstrating the needs of patients and Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. groups; implementing access to the media, policymakers and the health 1400 Russian adults aged from 20 to 65 (73% women) were investi- systems . We struggle for the connection and interchange through an gated through a specially developed questionnaire about their base Ibero-American network of these alliances in each country . knowledge and attitude towards predictive genetic testing . 66% of Chilean population is 15 million, infant mortality 8 per 1,000 live births, respondents indicated they would prefer to know about their future congenital malformations the second leading cause (33 .6%) . Abortion diseases; the share of respondents expressing the positive attitude to- is prohibited by law . wards predictive testing increased (up to 85%)when people were told that the necessary prophylaxis will be in principal available . 89% of P09.30 respondents mentioned they are likely change their life style (give up Estimation of patient’s understanding of genetic information with pernicious habits, keep to a diet or take medication) if they would received at genetic counselling. Results of pilot study. be diagnosed as being at a high risk of a disease; the proportion of I. O. Sadelov1, L. Y. Ivanova2, I. V. Zhuravleva2, V. L. Izhevskaya1, E. K. Ginter1; women was higher if compared to men(91%vs 81) . 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute Among the main reasons which can force people to undergo predictive of sociology, Moscow, Russian Federation. genetic testing for common diseases the people’s concerns about their The pilot study of the 71 families with hereditary disease in a child health status (39%)and practitioner’s recommendation (23%)have or in one of spouses was carried out . It has been shown, that about been denoted; at the same time the more detailed information about 72% of respondents (51/71) have completely understood the genetic genetic testing and curiosity have been accounting for 18 and 16% re- information . In group of respondents with low (to 5%) repeated ge- spectively, while 4% of respondents would follow the family member’s netic risk correctly named value and category of risk 83% and 63% or friend’s advice . accordingly . The appreciable part of respondents in this group (36%) When people were asked to range the particular common traits to has overestimated the genetic risk . About 70% of respondents with which genetic testing could be mainly useful, they indicated onco- high repeated risk could correctly specify the value, and about 75% of logical (17%),cardiovascular diseases (16%)and diabetes mellitus them - a category of risk; 24% of them underestimated the risk . The (11%)as the most advisable . full satisfaction with the results of consultation was expressed by 76 In general, the overestimation of expectations related to genetic test- % (54/71) of respondents . A rate of coincidence of expectations of a ing for disease predisposition is obvious in lay people in Russia . The family before consultation and the results of consultation was estimat- positive attitude for predictive genetic testing did not depend from the ed . The respondent’s satisfaction with the results of consultation was level of education, while the awareness about emerging genetic tech- higher if their expectations were justified at least partially. This factor nologies did . didn’t influence the understanding of the information P09.33 P09.31 Risky genes, risky trust? Framing risk through trust and Capacity building for the transfer of genetic/genomic knowledge credibility markers in direct-to-consumer online genetic tests into practice and prevention: the cAPABiLitY international E. F. Einsiedel, R. M. Geransar; collaborative network University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. I. Nippert1, U. Kristoffersson2, J. Schmidtke3, A. Kent4, A. Christianson5, R. This study looks at internet direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising for Raouf6, C. Barreiro7; genetic testing to assess the ways in which genetic risk information is 1Universitaetsklinikum Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 2Lunds University, Lund, framed to consumers, and examine the strategies employed to estab- Sweden, 3Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 4Genetic lish trust and credibility in this context. Representations of benefits and Interest Group, London, United Kingdom, 5University of the Witwatersrand, risks on 22 company websites were coded and themes were devel- Johannesburg, South Africa, 6Ministry of Health, Cairo, Egypt, 7Hospital de oped across advertisements for tests across a cross-section of health Pediatría SAMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina. conditions . Two strategies were most frequently used by companies The number of genetic tests is growing each year and increasing to frame risk: underlining the basis of the condition, often with genetic knowledge about gene-disease associations will lead to new opportu- determinist and essentialist undertones, and stressing the common- nities to apply genetic/genomic knowledge in practice and prevention . ality of the conditions . Major credibility and trust markers employed Before genetic tests are introduced into general practice the benefits of included indications of organizational professional accreditation and their use must be evaluated . Worldwide, health care systems are fac- expertise (often through credentials of company executives and staff) . ing the same challenges: 1) The need to develop an evidence-based The DTC ads examined provided limited, vague or inaccurate infor- evaluation process for genetic tests or other applications of genomic mation about disease etiology and promoted tests for use in broader knowledge in transition from research into practice . 2) The need for at-risk populations than is normally indicated in clinical practice . Impli- capacity building to enable health care systems to make effective use cations of these trends for Canadian consumers and clinicians and for of genetic/genomic applications with proven clinical utility . public policy are discussed . CAPABILITY is a 3-year model project developed by the Network of Excellence: Genetic Testing in Europe - Network for test development, P09.34 harmonization, validation and standardization of services (EuroGen- information on genetic testing in Europe: new services from test) and by leading experts from: Argentina, Egypt and South Africa, Orphanet the latter being currently engaged in major development projects to V. Lanneau1, I. Caron1, A. Rath1, M. Georget1, B. Urbero1, L. Desmet2,3, A. integrate genetic services in primary care and prevention in their coun- Corveleyn2,3, N. Nagels2,3, M. A. Morris2,4, E. Dequeker2,3, S. Aymé1,2; tries . 1Orphanet, Paris, France, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department for CAPABILITY will: Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Service of Genetic - develop an analytic framework for evidence-based genetic test evalu- Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland. ation, Genetic tests are offered internationally, through both public and pri- - identify priorities for capacity building by a systematic needs assess- vate sectors . Doctors and biologists need to know which tests are ment survey and available, where they are offered and whether the identified laborato- - validate the project’s approach by means of demonstration projects in ries meet quality standards . Argentina, Egypt, Germany and South Africa . To fulfil this need, ten years ago, www.orpha.net started to set up a CAPABILITY’s overall objectives are to contribute to the efforts to database of medical laboratories in the field of rare diseases. The data establish and sustain a worldwide harmonisation process for quality collection covered one country in 1997, 15 in 2003, 26 in 2006 and standards for the integration of genetic test applications into practice reaches 36 countries in 2008 . This effort was possible thanks to col- and prevention . laboration with EuroGentest NoE and resources from the EC DG forGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  public health . Orphanet is accessed daily by over 20,000 users, 20% We report our first year of data from ironXS, a screening program for of whom are looking for information on genetic testing . Currently, the the C282Y HFE mutation in high schools . A DVD-based information database includes data from 1,233 laboratories offering 16,336 tests session was presented to 3638 year 10 and year 11 students at 19 for 1,504 diseases . Data collection is done at country level through schools . 1533 students had parental consent to participate (42% of partnerships with key leaders in the field. Information is updated yearly eligible students; males:females = 45:55; mean age=15 .7yr) of whom through an online questionnaire prefilled with existing information. 1359 chose testing (37 .4% overall uptake; 89% of attenders) . This re- In March 2008, Orphanet launched a new website version to improve vealed 7 C282Y homozygotes (1 in 194), who were invited to clinic its user-friendliness and to provide expanded information . The new for genetic counselling, and 148 C282Y heterozygotes (1 in 9), who services include a possibility to query by gene in addition to the tradi- received their result in the mail . Students completed a baseline ques- tional query by disease name . It also includes the possibility to query tionnaire (Q1) . More than 90% of students answered all the knowledge by broad category of diseases, as all published classifications of rare questions correctly . A second questionnaire (Q2) was sent one month diseases have been introduced in the database . Information on labora- after results were received to all homozygotes and heterozygotes and tories was enriched with quality management data, collected and vali- a sample of wild-types (74% response rate) . Knowledge retention was dated by the QAu database team of EuroGentest . The new Orphanet generally very high. There were no significant differences in general website also includes information on networks in which laboratories health perception scores, risk perception and anxiety levels between participate . the three groups . Follow-up will include Q3 at 12 months and inter- views with students, parents and teachers . We aim to screen 9000 P09.35 students in total . Genetic testing: can a consensus definition be achieved? A 1 Allen et al NEJM 2008, 2Delatycki et al Lancet 2005 survey of EuroGentest participants and website registered users (WP3.4) P09.37 J. Pinto-Basto1, B. Guimarães1, E. Rantanen2, P. Javaher3, I. Nippert4, H. Genetic counselling challenges with a family with HDL2: From Kääriäinen5, J. Schmidtke3, U. Kristoffersson6, J. Sequeiros1,7; the bedside to the bench and back to the bedside 1UnIGENe and CGPP, IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2Dept Medical Genetics, Univ L. J. Greenberg; Turku, Turku, Finland, 3Dept Medical Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Han- University of Cape Town, Observatory, South Africa. nover, Germany, 4Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany, 5Dept Medi- Huntington disease (HD) is a late-onset genetic disease characterised cal Genetics, Univ Turku and National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, by involuntary movements and progressive mental deterioration . The 6Dept Clinical Genetics, Univ Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 7ICBAS, Univ Porto, condition was thought to be caused only by a CAG-repeat sequence in Porto, Portugal. the huntingtin gene on chromosome 4 . In 2001 however it was found EuroGentest Unit 3 sent a questionnaire to all participants, experts, that an African American family, presenting with similar symptoms to HD advisory board and users of its website, to assess the need and the and no expansion in the HD gene, had a mutation in the junctophilin-3 feasibility of achieving a consensus definition of genetic testing or gene on chromosome 16 . This condition has been named Huntington whether this should be context-dependant . disease like-2 (HDL2) and until recently, had only ever been reported A total of 126 questionnaires were received, from 32 countries: 58 Eu- to be associated with individuals of Black African ethnicity . roGentest participants, experts and advisory board members, and 68 In 2007 one family of mixed ancestry from the Western Cape in SA registered users of its website . Among all, 44 were physicians (24 clini- was identified with HDL2. This finding came about as a result of a pilot cal geneticists, 20 other), 82 non-physicians (58 geneticists, 24 other study of 63 persons with clinical symptoms of HD who do not carry the professionals - lawyers, ethicists, etc .) . HD-causing expansion . Two individuals tested positive for HDL2 ; one The need for a consensus definition was acknowledged by all groups, that was referred for diagnostic testing in 1995 and the other in 2005 . though all were also less enthusiastic about the possibility of attaining It was then found that in 2006, a research project had been initiated one (non-physician, non-geneticist professionals felt less that need, in another research laboratory, to study this family in-depth and blood and were more pessimistic about reaching it) . Clinical geneticists samples had been collected from a number of additional family mem- were the most supportive for context-dependent definitions. Human bers . In addition, the mother of an eleven year old child of one of the geneticists uphold that it should be best reserved for DNA/cytogenetic HDL2 patients, described as a “difficult child”, had recently requested testing, whereas other groups supported a wider definition. Medical genetic testing . applications (and scientific research for many) should always be cov- A clear distinction between clinical practice and research is not always ered, but most believed non-medical applications (paternity testing, possible and geneticists often find themselves with discordant respon- criminal identification) should not. Monogenic and susceptibility testing sibilities to different members of the same family . gathered consensus, but about 50% thought non-disease linked poly- morphisms should be excluded . For 3/4, somatic mutations belonged P09.38 within the definition. DNA, chromosomes and gene products were al- the Human Genetics Historical Library most unanimously seen within its scope; clinical pathology, imaging/ P. S. Harper1, P. Keelan2; physiologic tests, physical exams and family history were perceived by 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University of Cardiff, ~50% of clinical geneticists also as covered, but less so by the other Cardiff, United Kingdom. groups . Although digitisation of historical sources represents a satisfactory so- At issue, may be more the distinction between the definition of genetic- lution to the accessing of many historic scientific journals and related material testing and of genetic information . works, for books, apart from a few classics, it is no substitute for avail- ability of the printed works; yet many institutional and personal collec- P09.36 tions across the world are being dispersed or even destroyed . IronXS: an Australian high school screening program for The Human Genetics Historical Library represents an international re- haemochromatosis source, curated by Cardiff University Library Special Collections, that S. A. Metcalfe1, M. Wolthuizen2, E. Varley2, V. Collins2, I. Macciocca3, M. Ait- aims to create a definitive physical collection of books on or related to ken2, L. Bond1, K. Allen1,4, M. B. Delatycki1,3; human genetics, covering the 20th century . Initiated in 2004, it now 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University of contains over 2000 volumes, almost all donated by individual workers Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, or institutions . Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Aus- The detailed catalogue records are becoming available online via Car- tralia, 4Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. diff University Library catalogue (Voyager), http://library .cardiff .ac .uk/ , New research suggests that population genetic screening for heredi- while an interim listing is available on the project website (www .gen- tary haemochromatosis (HH), an easily preventable iron overload con- medhist .info/HumanHistLib), supported by Wellcome Trust . The books dition, should be reconsidered .1 In the HaemScreen workplace-based themselves are available for consultation . Donations are welcome . study2 we found high uptake of screening (>90%) for people attend- The Library, as it grows further, will become a valuable historical re- ing the information session, but only 6% of those eligible actually at- source in documenting the progress of human and medical genetics tended . This led us to consider other strategies for offering screening . during the course of the past century .Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  P09.39 P09.41 Establishing a cardiogenetic service in southern sweden Analysis of machado-Joseph Disease Pedigrees: Risk C. Lundin1, P. Platonov2, E. Hertervig2, B. Ekmehag2, O. Kongstad2, U. Kristof- Assessment and Patterns of segregation in Azorean Families fersson1; C. Bettencourt1, C. Santos2, T. Kay3, J. Vasconcelos4, M. Lima1; 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Cardiology, Lund, Sweden. 1University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Autonomous Uni- The genetic causes of several familial cardiac arrhythmias have been versity of Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 3Hospital of D. Estefania, established in recent years, and thus the request for molecular ge- Lisbon, Portugal, 4Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada - Azores, netic analyses as well as genetic counselling for these families has Portugal. emerged . Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is an autosomal dominant neurode- The multidisciplinary cardiogenetic service in the South Swedish generative disorder of late onset (mean 40 .5 yrs), whose causative Health Care region was initiated in 2005, and the network now com- mutation is a CAG expansion in the ATXN3 gene, at 14q32 .1 . MJD prises cardiologists, pediatric cardiologists, clinical geneticists, and presents clinical heterogeneity, with differences in onset between se- specialists in pathology and forensic medicine, respectively . Much ries of patients being reported . Since in MJD risk assessment is com- effort is concentrated towards education of the stakeholders and on plicated by age dependent penetrance, these differences will have an drawing up guidelines, whereby more uniform information and clinical impact in risk calculation for at-risk individuals who choose not to take management of at-risk family members is possible . So far, two guide- the genetic test . In the Azores 32 extended MJD families were identi- lines have been completed, i . e ., regarding families with an increased fied; in Flores Island the disease reaches the highest worldwide value risk of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and long QT syndrome of prevalence (1:103) . Segregation ratio distortion (SRD) could be one (LQTS), respectively . of the factors behind high values of prevalence . The availability of an We have adopted the model developed for our cancer genetic service, extended genealogical database for the affected Azorean families, as- i .e ., most families are seen by a clinical geneticist together with a cardi- sociated to the thorough follow-up of patients provided the background ologist . This gives the possibility of discussing most aspects of the dis- to conduct a study aiming: a) to provide age dependent risk data, with ease, although no clinical examination or investigation is performed . impact on Genetic Counselling (GC); b) to analyse segregation pat- Until December 2007, 28 families have been counselled in the cardio- terns of normal and expanded ATXN3 alleles . For risk assessment, the genetic clinic, the majority having familial HCM (15 families) . 3 families probability of gene expression, using onset data from 176 Azorean pa- had LQTS, and the rest had various diagnoses . All HCM-patients with tients, was calculated; a Bayesian method to compute the probability a positive DNA analysis have had various mutations in MYBPC3 . In of heterozygosity if asymptomatic at different ages was applied . Sixty- LQTS, only families with a known mutation have, so far, been referred two sibships were selected for segregation analysis (330 meioses) . to the cardiogenetic clinic . This analysis produced mendelian ratios, not supporting the presence The request for genetic counselling in hereditary cardiovascular dis- of SRD for expanded alleles . Globally, results obtained will allow a eases is increasing, and establishing multidisciplinary networks in this higher accuracy of risk assessment, an essential component of GC, field in our health care region is essential for high quality care and which is critical for the decision making of at risk individuals, namely cost-effectiveness . for reproductive choices . P09.40 P09.42 should preconception genetic testing of infertile couples be science and technology in the muslim World: the challenges any less rigorous than for gamete and embryo donors? A case A. I. Al-Aqeel; report Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. C. Bancroft1,2, T. El-Menabawey1, M. Menabawey1, A. H. Handyside1,2, A. R. Muslim nations must take a big leap forward in developing science Thornhill1,2; and technology to catch up with the rest of the world. But to flourish, 1London Bridge Fertility, Gynaecology and Genetics Centre, London, United science and technology need a cultural base that can only be acquired Kingdom, 2Bridge Genoma, London, United Kingdom. by science education, with an ethical background, and by undertaking A 36 year-old man presenting with primary male infertility (oligozoo- research programmes . This effort requires that the mentality of political spermia) underwent in-vitro fertilisation treatment with intracytoplas- leaders must change to show more of a commitment to science be- mic sperm injection and transfer of two embryos resulting in healthy tween the 57 Islamic countries . twins . The couple had surplus embryos cryopreserved, which they Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait spend about 0 .2% of their gross do- subsequently elected to donate to our embryo donation programme . mestic product (GDP) on science - less than one-tenth of the devel- To comply with Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) oped country average of 2 .3% . The Emir of Qatar has created an en- Code of Practice for UK gamete and embryo donors, both partners dowment that generates millions of dollars in research funding every underwent appropriate genetic screening tests, including karyotyping, year . Saudi Arabia is making a slow start, having approved a new na- which wasn’t considered necessary when the couple were first evalu- tional science and technology development plan in 2002 . Both Saudi ated at their local hospital . The man carried a 13;14 balanced Robert- Arabia and Kuwait are each investing around $2 billion in higher edu- sonian translocation and was referred for genetic counselling . cation institutes that include research centers . Structural chromosome abnormalities cause infertility in both men and Inherited Genetic diseases are prevalent in the Muslim World . We will women, and many fertility centres have experienced similar cases . address the preventive health aspects of genetic problems in the Mus- Owing to the increased incidence of balanced translocations among lim world and provide guidelines to prioritize preventive strategies . Ap- infertile people compared with the general population it is prudent to plications of various novel genetic techniques such as comprehensive routinely offer preconception genetic counselling and karyotype analy- neonatal screening, high throughput heterozygote detection, and pre sis to couples with infertility . Such measures may improve (i) infertility implantation genetic diagnosis are discussed. diagnosis, (ii) follow-up treatment, (iii) risk assessment for future chil- in conclusion; from the various genetic techniques available, each dren and (iv) pregnancy management . Furthermore, appropriate ge- country should adopt strategies most suitable to its genetic needs and netic testing and evaluation may reduce numbers of failed IVF cycles, should prioritize the programs to be used in prevention, in the presence saving patients financial, physical and emotional costs. Current UK of the challenges of having resources and expertise, among others . regulations require rigorous screening (including karyotyping) for gam- ete and embryo donors . However, routine karyotyping of couples with P09.43 infertility is not UK standard practice and, this represents an inequality Bases for genetic counselling in melanoma: benefits of specific in patient care . Routine karyotyping should be offered to all couples surveillance programme presenting with infertility allowing them to make informed choices be- S. Puig1,2, J. Puig Butille1,2, F. Cuellar1, S. Kroemer1, C. Badenas1,2, C. Carrera1, fore undertaking the large investment required for assisted reproduc- P. Aguilera1, M. González1, P. Iglesias1, D. Gabriel1, M. Mila1,2, J. Malvehy1,2; tion . 1IDIBAPS/HOSPITAL CLINIC, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro Investigación Bio- médica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII., Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: CDKN2A and CDK4 are two major susceptibility genes for melanoma (MM) . Other genes involved in melanoma susceptibilityGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  are MC1R and c9orf14 . outpatient care, dietary management and genetic counseling . Objectives: To describe the prevalence of germ line mutations in CD- KN2A and CDK4 in familial melanoma; to evaluate the modifying effect P09.46 of MC1R polymorphism and c9orf14 variants; to describe a specific Effectiveness of a program aimed to prevent Nonketotic surveillance programme . Hyperglycinemia in a highly inbred community in Northern israel Subjects: 70 families with at least 2 cases of melanoma (1 of 8; 17 of 3 Y. M. Hujeirat1, H. Mandel2, M. Nasar1, V. Sabenco1, A. Tsbai1, S. A. Shalev1; and 49 of 2) were included . 1Genetic, Afula, Israel, 2Metabolic Unit, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. Methods: Exon 1alfa, 1beta, 2, 3 and IVS2-105, -34G>T at the CD- Introduction: Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia (NKH) is an autosomal re- KN2A promoter region and EXON 2 from CDK4 were studied by PCR- cessive metabolic disease characterized by the accumulation of large SSCP analysis and sequencing; MC1R was studied by sequencing amounts of glycine in body fluids. Patients with NKH have severe neu- and c9orf14 variants by SSCP analyses . rological symptoms such as seizures . Most patients die within a few Results: CDKN2A mutations were detected in 24% of families being weeks, whereas survivors show severe psychomotor retardation and more frequent in families with multiple cases (p<0 .05) . The polymor- do not achieve any developmental milestone . NKH is caused by a mu- phism A148T was present in 18% of families, while this polymorphism tation in the genes encoding the components of the glycine cleavage is only present in 7 .2% of sporadic MM (p=0 .02) . MC1R variants are multi-enzyme system . More than 80% of the patients have defects in associated with melanoma risk, increased number of primaries and the gene encoding P-protein, whereas the rest of the patients have younger age of onset . 268 individuals from 133 families were included defects in the gene encoding T-protein . In recent years, prevention in a specific dermatological surveillance programme including total programs for the detection of heterozygotes of relatively prevalent body photography with digital dermoscopy, total body exploration with autosomal recessive diseases (with a frequency of about 1:1000), is digital dermoscopy or total body exploration with dermoscopy accord- available in Israel . Aim: to study the carrier frequency of NKH in a vil- ing to the phenotype of the patient. This specific programme allows the lage in Northern Israel where 20 patients, homozygous for the H42R early diagnosis of 92 new melanomas from 407 excised lesions in a mutation in the T-protein gene, were diagnosed over the last decade . mean follow-up of 44 months . Methods: 405 healthy individuals in their reproductive period, residing Aknowledgements: FIS 03-019, CIBER ER, GenoMEL . in this village, were screened for the H42R mutation using PCR-RFLP method . Results and conclusions: A high carrier frequency of 1/16 P09.44 (25 out of 405) was found . Since no effective treatment is available for the European molecular Genetics Quality Network (EmQN) NKH, prenatal diagnosis was requested in four pregnancies, which led O. Kämäräinen, S. Patton, R. Elles; to the diagnosis of three unaffected fetuses . One couple decided not to European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN), NGRL and Regional perform prenatal diagnosis . An affected baby was born and died at age Molecular Genetics Service, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. 3 months . The availability of DNA testing enabled genetic screening Molecular Genetics testing forms an increasingly important part of the and counseling in this small village . diagnostic process in all branches of medicine . Studies of the reliability of such testing have indicated a significant level of inaccuracy in labo- P09.47 ratory reports, arising from errors in sample identification, genotyping Genetic care of families affected by albinism in an African or interpretation . The European Molecular Genetics Quality Network cultural context (EMQN) aims to raise and maintain the quality of Diagnostic Clinical P. M. Lund; Molecular Genetics Testing by providing external quality assessment Coventry University, Coventry, United Kingdom. (EQA) schemes. In 2007 EMQN provided 18 disease specific and 2 The birth of a baby with the autosomal recessive condition oculocuta- technique specific EQA schemes. The EMQN’s schemes are organ- neous albinism (OCA) in a black African population is often traumatic ised by a panel of experts and DNA samples are send to participat- for the mother as the phenotype, with hypopigmentation of the hair, ing laboratories once a year . Participating laboratories are asked to skin and eyes, differs so visibly from the normal level of pigmenta- perform their routine analysis and interpret the results . The reports are tion in this group . The incidence of OCA among the Venda of northern marked by a group of experts . The participants receive a report on South Africa is relatively high, with 1 in 1970 affected, giving a carrier their performance . rate of 1 in 23 . Myth and superstition surround OCA, with affected fam- 400 laboratories from 42 countries around the world participated in ilies believing they have been bewitched . The experiences of genetic the EQA schemes in 2007 and over 900 reports were evaluated from nurses at the large regional hospitals in Venda and of families who laboratories . The standards of genotyping accuracy were high but sig- have benefited from their genetic counselling services are explored via nificant error rates were found and methods of reporting and interpret- semi structured interviews . The genetic nurses, based in the midwifery ing data were varied . The error rate indicates a clear need for EQA to section, identify affected babies as part of the National Birth Surveil- measure current standards of proficiency and encourage laboratories lance Programme and intervene immediately to inform the mother of to raise their technical and reporting performance . the special health care needs of her baby . They explain the genetic causes of OCA and aim to empower her to counter negative attitudes P09.45 she is likely to encounter from her family, who may accuse her of in- Outcome of neonatal screening in Leningrad province in 2007 fidelity, and the wider community when returning to her rural home. I. A. Ivanov1, M. O. Mkheidze2, O. P. Romanenko3; Barriers to the provision of genetic care in this remote, rural region and 11District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Acad- strategies adopted by health care professionals to overcome these dif- emy for postgraduate study, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Municipal ficulties are explored. This genetic practice is a model for providing Centre of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. care to those affected by genetic conditions in rural, low resources Medical genetics service of Leningrad province is stationed at District regions of the world . Children Hospital being carried out in cooperation with the Department of Medical Genetics at MAPS and St . Petersburg Centre of Medical P09.48 Genetics . Last year the genetic service was expanded with a neonatal Orphanet: What’s in it for you? UK case studies screening for phenylketonuria, congenital hypothyroidism, congenital E. E. Gillaspy1, S. Aymé2, D. Donnai1; adrenal hyperplasia, galactosemia and cystic fibrosis. One infant with 1Nowgen, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2OR- a high level of Phe and three infants with an increase in TSH were PHANET-INSERM SC11, Paris, France. found among 10226 newborn babies . Three cases of congenital adre- Orphanet (www .orpha .net) is the largest international online resource nal hyperplasia and none of cystic fibrosis risk were revealed among for genetic and rare diseases . The recently improved website features 4736 infants . Two babies (a girl and a boy) with galactosemia were a rare diseases listing and a directory of services alongside other spe- found among 4942 infants screened. The girl had a GALT deficiency cialised products which have been developed to better serve the rare and presented a compound heterozygote Q188R/K285N; a molecular disease community . This presentation uses case studies from the UK diagnostics was performed in Moscow Centre of Medical Genetics . to highlight the information and services available to patients, health Medical genetics service of Leningrad province comprises a confirma- professionals and researchers . tion of a hereditary diagnosis, medical care, long term inpatient and Case study 1: Jane had a baby Jason who, at the age of 6 weeks, pre-Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  sented with nystagmus and photodysphoria . A few months later, Jason P09.51 also suffered congestive heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathy . Policy harmonization and population biobanks Following visits to her local hospital, and a referral to Birmingham Chil- S. Wallace, S. Lazor, B. Knoppers; dren’s Hospital, Jason was diagnosed with Alström syndrome . Jane Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. had never heard of this condition before and uses Orphanet to find out Policymaking in an international context is often delegated to recog- more about it, and how to meet other parents with affected children . nized international organizations (e .g . WHO, UNESCO, OECD) . Simi- Case study 2: Paul is a consultant clinical geneticist specialising in larly, international societies of concerned individuals and experts con- skeletal malformations . Paul has a patient with Schinzel Phocomelia tribute to the elaboration of guidance, within the context of their cultural and has learned, through the OrphaNews Europe newsletter, that a UK and national setting . Many of these groups have contributed policy rec- study is ongoing to discover genotype-phenotype correlations for this ommendations that relate to the field of population genomics. But are condition. He also uses Orphanet to find out that a laboratory in Berlin the ethical, economic, environmental, legal and societal issues simply offers mutation analysis for the WNT7A gene, which causes Schinzel being multiplied and blurred by the sheer number of participants? At Phocomelia . the Centre de recherche en droit public (CRDP) of the Université de Case study 3: Samantha is a researcher who recently gained her PhD Montréal, in Montréal, Canada, a Policymaking Core has been es- and then took a postdoctoral position working on Batten disease . Sa- tablished to work with and inform the international community of the mantha uses Orphanet to discover what other research is ongoing for possibility and importance of prospective approaches to traditional is- Batten disease and also to find contact details of potential collabora- sues such as consent, access, governance and commercialization, as tors . they relate to population biobanks . If these issues are not discussed and some level of harmonization and clarity achieved, the population P09.49 health goal of these ambitious projects will be hindered, due to the ab- Protecting patient’s confidentiality: opinions of russian medical sence of policy interoperability . To this end, the Core collaborates with geneticists the Public Population Project in Genomics (P3G) member biobanks V. L. Izhevskaya, V. I. Ivanov; to create tools that will aid the harmonization of various aspects of Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. biobank policy . Generic consent materials have been created and are The views of medical geneticists, working in Russian genetic consulta- publically available from the P3G Observatory; future work will focus on tions, on protecting the confidentiality of a patient and the availability of governance and access issues . genetic information to his/her relatives, spouses and third parties were estimated . From 9 to 26 % of geneticists (depending on disease in P09.52 question) considered it permitted to inform the relatives on the results Burden of Genetic Disease in colombia, 1996-2025 of genetic testing without the consent of the patient. The significant J. Bernal, F. Suarez; part of geneticist (61,8%) considered, that samples of stored DNA, Instituto de Genetica Humana, Bogota. D.C., Colombia. should be available to blood relatives of a patient without his consent . Objective . To establish the load of genetic diseases in Colombia, ac- About a half of doctors considered, that the employer and the insur- cording to population growth parameters until the year 2025 . Meth- ance companies could have access to the results of genetic testing ods . The frequency of new cases of genetic diseases and congenital with the consent of the patient, from 30 to 50 % - that such information malformations was calculated, establishing the potentially lost years can be given to schools with the consent of parents of the child . From of life, cause of incapacity and cause of death by these pathologies, 10 to 25 % of geneticists considered, that such information should be weighing the data according to the growth and life expectancy of the accessible to third parties without the consent of a patient . Thus, we Colombian population from 1996 until 2025 . Results . Genetic diseases could show, that Russian medical geneticists began to concern more have a frequency that oscillates between 37 .3 and 52 .8 by each 1,000 respect to the right of a patient for confidentiality of genetic information inhabitants . Congenital malformation and birth defect frequencies are then ten years ago . included, with a proportion of ≈ 50% of the studied genetic pathologies. Conclusions . There is a potential load of genetic disease that raises P09.50 the need to implement more centers for the training of geneticians and the role of Patient’s Organizations in establishing some auxiliary personnel who can in the future, provide suitable services, of strategies in the healthcare system concerning rare diseases diagnosis and genetic assessment . M. Puiu1, A. Tarniceru1, D. Dan2; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Romanian Prader P09.53 Willi Association, RONARD, Zalau, Romania. A restropective analysis of clinical prenatal counselling activity In Romania rare diseases are really orpheline . The project started by performed by two clinical medical genetics centers in Emilia Romanian Prader Willi Association in 2007 (a project realized with the Romagna region, italy (2000-2006) financial support of Trust for Civil Society in Central and Eastern Eu- F. Rivieri1, S. Rosato1, G. Astolfi1, A. Baroncini2, S. Bigoni1, G. Sani2, A. Sensi1, rope) induced multiple changes and it has a real chance that it’s main F. Soli2, E. Calzolari1, O. Calabrese1; objective to be accomplished . This objective is to develop the aware- 1U. O. di Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy, 2U. O. di Genetica Medica, Imola, ness of the community regarding patients affected by rare diseases Italy. by involving the social actors from this domain: patients, families and A restropective analysis of clinical counselling records in two clini- specialists . In the same project it was founded Romanian National Alli- cal genetics services in Emilia Romagna Region (Ferrara and Imola) ance for Rare Diseases (RONARD) whose objectives are: to organize is presented. A shared specific software (GCS) allows a systematic informational campaigns concerning rare diseases, to adopt a national and homogenous collection of data . Diagnostic data were checked strategy in approaching rare diseases, lobby and advocacy activities for correctness by medical geneticists . The study is focused on pre- to transform these strategies in a National Plan for Rare Diseases ap- natal counselling in the period 2000-2006 (more than 9100 consulta- proved by the Ministry of Health . Today Romania is much closer to tions) which represents >70% of the activity for both Medical Genetics the European system in approaching patients with rare diseases with Centres . The National Health System offers prenatal counselling for the support and guidance of EURORDIS (European Organization for increased chromosomal anomalies linked to advanced maternal age Rare Diseases), Orphanet (a database with information about rare dis- (=>35 years) . These referals represent 45% of prenatal counselling . eases and orphan drugs) and the involvement of the Ministry of Health, In 2 .9% of these prenatal settings, unexpected additional relevant re- Labor Ministry and Ministry of Education . The activities sustained by productive risks have been discovered (1 .7% mental retardation and RONARD (courses, conferences, media messages) in the relationship 1 .2% mendelian diseases) requiring an urgent and appropriate activa- with authorities, specialists, patients and their families, but also the tion of clinical and laboratory diagnostic pathways . The referrals for the civil society in general, will guarantee the necessary environment to other prenatal consultations were heterogeneous mendelian diseases create a social and medical system in which Romanian patients with (29 .2%) followed by chromosomal conditions (16 .6%) . Different pro- rare diseases will benefit from diagnosis, treatment and care condi- portions were seen in the two medical genetics services, reflecting the tions similarly as patients from other European countries . specialised activities as regional hub centres: hemoglobinopathies in Ferrara and cytogenetics in Imola . These specialised centres attractGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  women from other health districts for prenatal referrals, (40 .7% from courses have been developed and run with good outcomes, including outside the provinces and 19 .5% from outside the Emilia Romagna a course tailored to the training needs of genetic counsellors and nurs- Region) . es . New courses have been launched in 2008, covering bioinformatics, Data of the primary care and specialists access to genetic services, quantitative & real-time PCR and biobanking . accuracy of prenatal diagnosis and time to diagnosis were analized to All courses have been developed following initial consultation with the provide information for the analysis of the committence, appropriate- relevant professional groups’ senior representatives . Following this, to ness of referrals and to improve the organization of clinical genetics determine specific training needs, questionnaires are sent to heads of services of in the Emilia Romagna region . individual units, asking about the optimum length of courses and which key laboratory techniques should be included . P09.54 Knowledge and understanding of prenatal screening and testing P09.56 before and after the introduction of information booklet Genetic counselling in pulmonary arterial hypertension: V. Stefansdottir1, H. Skirton2, J. J. Jonsson1, H. Hardardottir1; experience from the French Reference centre 1Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2School of Nursing and B. Girerd, A. Yaici; Community Studies, University of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom. hopital Antoine Béclére, Clamart, France. Pregnant women considering prenatal screening need to have access Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a rare condition (prevalence to accurate information, facilitating informed choice . Uniform informa- from 15 to 50 cases per million) characterized by an increase in pul- tion about prenatal screening and testing was not available in Iceland monary vascular resistance leading to right-heart failure and death . prior to this study . This condition has a poor prognosis, although novel treatment options The study aim was to assess general knowledge about prenatal allow better quality of life and survival . Recent data indicate that early screening and diagnosis among pregnant women attending their first diagnosis and treatment should translate into better outcome and sur- antenatal visit . An information booklet was produced as a part of this vival . PAH can be sporadic, associated with other conditions such as study . We compared the difference in knowledge and understanding systemic sclerosis, or clustered in families . between pregnant women in the intervention group (having access to Familial PAH currently represents at least 10% of so-called idiopathic the information booklet and normal care) (n=142) and women in the cases . It segregates as an autosomal dominant trait with reduced pen- control group (normal care) (n= 237) . etrance (10-20%) . Mutations of the gene encoding bone morphogenet- Women were recruited from five antenatal clinics in Iceland. The age ic protein receptor type II (BMPR2) which belongs to the TGF ß super distribution, experience and education of participants were in accor- family have been first described in 2000. 20% of so-called sporadic dance with the general population . Overall 63% wanted information idiopathic cases and more than 70% of familial cases are character- from their midwives and 31 .7% from a doctor . Most had however, re- ised by germline BMPR2 mutations, emphasising the relevance of ge- ceived information from their gynaecologist (53%) and friends (40%) . netic counselling in these families, in order to promote early diagnosis The majority (60%) wanted both verbal and written information . The and treatment in at-risk subjects . We thus set up a genetic counselling intervention group showed better knowledge when asked to explain clinic in our department . In the last 5 years, we screened 375 PAH pa- the tests in their own words (p<.001), but no significant difference was tients (310 sporadic, 65 familial), and 125 first-degree relatives of pa- detected between groups in description of methods used in prenatal tients harbouring a BMPR2 germline mutation . 45 sporadic, 37 familial screening in multiple choice questions. When asked about specific dis- and 45 first-degree relatives have been showed to harbour a BMPR2 orders (Trisomies 13 and 18) women in the intervention group were mutation . First-degree relatives carriers received detailed information more knowledgeable (p= .001) . We conclude that Icelandic women on the characteristic symptoms of the disease (mostly dyspnea, chest have a good basic knowledge of prenatal screening but want more pain and syncope) and screening tools such as Doppler echocardiog- information. There is a need for a better education on specific aspects raphy (which should be repeated every year) . of prenatal screening and diagnosis for women attending their first an- tenatal visit . P09.57 Quality management and accreditation of genetic testing P09.55 services Development of molecular biology laboratory training courses E. Dequeker1,2, D. E. Barton3,2, S. Berwouts1,2, C. Brady3,2, J. Camajova4,2, P. for health care professionals at Nowgen, a centre for genetics in Corbisier5,2, A. Corveleyn1,2, L. Desmet1,2, R. Elles6,2, B. Fowler7,2, D. Ganc- healthcare berg5,2, O. Kamarainen6,2, M. Macek Jr.4,2, G. Matthijs1,2, M. A. Morris8,2, C. R. M. J. Leech1,2, F. Salway3, F. Jury3, P. Day3, D. Carthy3, L. Gaunt4, S. Hamilton4, Müller9,2, N. Nagels1,2, B. Quellhorst-Pawley10,2, A. Stambergova4,2, E. Swin- A. Wallace5, R. Elles5, A. Devereau5, M. Bottomley2, K. Mathieson1,2, P. Fine- nen1,2, R. Hastings10,2; gold1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2; 1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2EuroGentest Network of Excellence, 1Nowgen - A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, Leuven, Belgium, 3Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 4Charles 2Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, CMMC University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute for Reference Materials and NHS Trust &University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Measurements, Geel, Belgium, 6St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United King- Integrated Genomic Medical Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, dom, 7University Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 8University Hospital United Kingdom, 4Regional Cytogenetics Unit, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 9University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, United Kingdom, 5National Genetics Reference Laboratory and Regional Ge- 10Oxford Radcliffe Hospital NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom. netics Service, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. Governments, regulators and professional bodies have a responsibility Techniques for analysing genetic variants related to disease and treat- to ensure that all genetic testing services are offered within a quality as- ment are constantly advancing, and allow ever more sophisticated and surance framework that retains the confidence of the public. The recently rapid analysis of patient samples . The consequence of greater access published OECD guidelines for Quality Assurance in Molecular Genetic to these techniques is that many clinical and laboratory disciplines Testing are equally applicable to Cytogenetics & Biochemical Genetics . have to embrace the new technology . Agreement on appropriate standards in genetics, and how to measure Nowgen, a Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, in collaboration with them, will assist in harmonizing the quality of service across the Europe- research and clinical scientists in Central Manchester and Manches- an Union . External Quality Assessment (EQA) is an important instrument ter Children’s University Hospitals NHS Trust and the University of to reach the harmonization and quality improvement aimed for by the Manchester, has developed a portfolio of training courses for health EuroGentest Network . The introduction of reference materials into the professionals in response to expressed needs for training in practical diagnostic service and the validation of new technology, as it moves from molecular genetics laboratory techniques . research to the diagnostic arena, are essential and agreement on best The first of these training courses - a national, two-day course for clini- practice for standards and strategies can be achieved by consensus . cal cytogeneticists, accredited by The Royal College of Pathologists In addition, Best Practice Guidelines for Cytogenetics (ECA), Molecular - was delivered in January 2007, with good training outcomes . Owing Genetics and Biochemical Genetics have been supported through the to high demand, the course was run a further three times in 2007 and EuroGentest Network and published . 2008, reaching over 80 clinical cytogeneticists to date . Further training EQA and accreditation are recognized by international standards (ISO)Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  bodies as a tangible measure of the quality of a laboratory’s performance P09.60 as it provides a consistent standard to which services should aspire . Ac- Genetic counseling in familial autosomal reciprocal creditation of laboratories will be valuable in the harmonization of stan- translocations dards and strategies, in the assessment of emerging technologies, as F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, T. Cok2, O. Ozer1, H. B. Zeyneloglu2; well as in the provision of training and education . 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An- The Quality Management Unit of the EuroGentest Network is involved kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics improving the quality of diagnostic services in all these areas, through and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey. training, education, reference materials, new EQAs, best practice guide- Reciprocal translocations are common chromosomal rearrangements lines, SOPs and validation documents . resulting in an increased risk of a segmental aneusomy in children of a carrier . The reciprocal translocation carrier families are interested in P09.58 their risks of having an unbalanced offspring . Segregation analyses of Quality and risk management for molecular genetic testing in the pedigrees are important in such families before genetic counselling is laboratory and clinical settings: A perspective from the United given . In the current study, we examined the three generation pedigree states analyses of 17 cases with autosomal reciprocal translocations with dif- I. M. Lubin1, A. E. Pollock1, M. E. Romano2, S. Snyder1; ferent indications for chromosome analyses . Karyotype analyses of 1Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States, 2Bos- Giemsa-trypsin banded chromosomes were made after the first ge- ton University, Boston, MA, United States. netic counselling session during which a three generation pedigree A Quality / Risk Management Model is proposed for the provision of was drawn . Of all the patients, 7 cases were consulted because of molecular genetic testing services . This Model emphasizes critical recurrent abortuses, 3 cases of infertility . 1 case had a previous child junctures in the testing process where the assembly and communi- with congenital abnormalities and 1 case had a known familial recipro- cation of clinically relevant information is necessary for appropriate cal translocation . 5 cases were detected prenatally . Of these, 2 had patient management . The evidence-base for this model is derived increased Down syndrome risk in an ongoing pregnancy . Amniocen- from earlier studies and particularly those addressing the provision of tesis was performed in 2 cases because of advanced maternal age DNA-based testing for cystic fibrosis in the United States. The Model and in 1 case because of a known reciprocal translocation in mother . emphasizes the pre- and post- analytic components of the testing We detected reciprocal translocation in all cases . During the second process . Critical components include, among others, initial decision genetic counselling session, the patients were informed about their to order the test, efforts taken to collect and communicate patient/fam- magnitude of calculated risks of having an abnormal child, about the ily information prior to testing (i .e ., relevant clinical information, family possible abnormalities of the offspring and risks of pregnancy losses . history, race/ethnicity), specimen type, handling, and transport, labora- As for the infertile couples, the possibility of preimplantation genetic tory evaluation of the test request, specimen adequacy, selection of diagnosis was also discussed as well as the impact of the translocation methodology, development of the test report, communication of the on gametogenesis . result to the clinical setting, and evaluation of the report toward inform- ing appropriate clinical decision making . The role of personnel compe- P09.61 tency, integration of professional guidelines into practice, costs, and Certified Reference Materials for genetic testing variation in practice settings are commented upon . It is envisioned that D. M. Gancberg, P. Corbisier, H. Schimmel, H. Emons; such a Model may be useful as a tool for identifying and developing European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Reference Materi- interventions to reduce risk and improve performance to promote high als and Measurements (IRMM), Geel, Belgium. quality testing services in the United States and may have elements The lack of tailored reference materials (RMs) and reference mea- applicable elsewhere . surement procedures for genetic testing slow down the validation and development of new assays and question the reliability of results as P09.59 tests might potentially be performed in absence of adequate quality the role of volunteers in activities supporting Rare Diseases controls . The IRMM, as accredited reference material producer (ISO Alliance Guide 34), has released in 2006 a set of three certified RMs to be used M. Gafencu1, G. Doros1, M. Puiu1, D. Dan2, A. Balint3; for the detection of the G20210A mutation in the human prothrombin 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2APWR, Zalau, gene . The materials consist of a 609 bp fragment of the gene (wildtype Romania, 3Save of Children, Timisoara, Romania. or mutant sequence) inserted into a pUC18 plasmid. The certification The problematic of Rare Diseases in Romania was a true Cinderella procedure, including the methods used, is described in detail in the until 2000 . In the latest years due to the initiative of NGO is this pathol- certification report and discussed in a recent publication (Clin Chem ogy caught the attention of medical people by the means of the model Lab Med, in press) . These activities support the efforts of the genetic that was offered in Europe, where the role of volunteers derived from community to improve the quality assurance and the harmonisation of families, universities and NGO is become essential . genetic testing in Europe and beyond . In addition, IRMM has issued, in In the activity of NGO Save the Children, Timis branch in partnership the frame of the European Network of Excellence EuroGentest, a guid- with pediatricians and the University of Medicine and Pharmacy Ti- ance document on the use of RMs in genetic testing . This document misoara was initially penciled with two Associations of Patients suffer- tackles, with internationally recognised definitions, the state-of-the-art ing of genetic diseases (Down syndrome and Prader Willi Syndrome) . in the field, the selection criteria for RMs according to their use and Using the young group of volunteers that have worked with patients provides examples for better understanding of the requirements in the suffering of Down syndrome and using the expertise of Genetic Chair, field. This presentation will provide an overview on both developments was initiated collaboration by many specialists and NGOs resulting the and an outlook to further needs . National Alliance of Rare Diseases in Romania . Now we have more than 15 Associations I the Alliance . P09.62 The Volunteers of Save the Children, Timis branch participated at the the Genetic testing Reference materials coordination Program first National Conference of Rare Diseases (2007 Zalau, Romania). In (Get-Rm)- A sustainable community process to improve collaboration with specialists we have trained a number of 20 young availability of appropriate reference materials for genetic testing volunteers from Save the Children Timis . Now they are preparing the L. V. Kalman, S. Barker; activities for a week dedicated for Rare Diseases in each February Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States. (mass media campaign, street campaign about this theme, round table BACKGROUND: The expansion of clinical molecular genetic testing with specialists, patients, volunteers and family patients) . has increased the need for appropriate and characterized cell line/ Conclusions genomic DNA reference materials for quality control, test validation, The role of young volunteers within this Association was essential . The proficiency testing, and development of new genetic tests. However, volunteers of Prader Willi Romanian Association and Save the Chil- despite the growing test volume and the rapidly increasing number dren Timis have coordinated the first activities for those pathologies of tests offered, the necessary reference materials are not available patients . for the vast majority of tests . METHOD: The U .S . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in collaboration with the genetic testingGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  community, has established the Genetic Testing Reference Materials was designed for routine mutation detection . Geographically delimited Coordination Program (GeT-RM) to improve public availability of refer- occurrence of the disease confirmed community structure of Romany ence materials and facilitate information exchange and communica- population with existence of small, endogamic founder settlements . tion on reference materials development, contribution, characteriza- Growing of such small communities, characterized by high consan- tion, distribution, and needs assessment . RESULTS: The GeT-RM has guinity rate, results in markedly increased incidence of this autosomal characterized reference materials for Huntington disease, Fragile X, recessive disorder in some regions leading to significant genetic bur- cystic fibrosis, Bloom syndrome, familial dysautonomia, Canavan dis- den to the population . While no effective therapy exists for the disor- ease, Niemann-Pick disease, Tay-Sachs disease, Gaucher disease, der at the moment, cascade carrier screening and genetic counseling glycogen storage disease type 1a, Fanconi anemia, and mucolipido- proffered to the families is currently the only possible approach to the sis type IV . The GeT-RM program also collects information from other management of the disease . sources about publicly available cell lines/DNA with clinically important mutations that may be useful as reference materials . This information P09.65 is posted on the program website . To date, the GeT-RM has focused its Governing the balance between ‘duty to protect’ and ‘right to efforts on DNA based testing for inherited genetic disorders . However, test’ ii: New forms of protection in genetic screening we hope to expand our efforts into other areas of genetics, including M. C. Cornel, T. Pieters, C. G. van El; molecular oncology and biochemical genetic testing . CONCLUSIONS: VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The increased availability of characterized reference materials for qual- While in the previous century the availability of genetic testing and ity assurance, proficiency testing, test development and research, will screening was governed by public health authorities and medical pro- help to improve the quality and accuracy of genetic testing . GeT-RM fessionals, increasingly direct-to-consumer tests become available . website: http://wwwn .cdc .gov/dls/genetics/rmmaterials/default .aspx While on the one hand people have become more free to decide for themselves whether they want to order their genetic risk test, on the P09.63 other hand, lack of counselling, personalized advice resembling gen- The role of AZFc region microdeletion in repeated pregnancy eral lifestyle advice or incorrect results may lead to disappointment or loss may prove harmful . Quality of genetic services is no longer guaranteed S. M. Kalantar1, M. H. Sheikhha1, H. Fazli1, M. Solimani1, F. Pakravesh2; by existing regulations . 1Research & Clinical Centre for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Aban In the United Kingdom the Human Genetics Commission has updated Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. its recommendations concerning direct-to-consumer testing, calling for Objective: To evaluate the role of Y chromosome microdeletion in the stricter control, without precluding commercial testing, for instance by case of couples had problem with repeated pregnancy loss (RPL) in- recommending that the test be offered by a qualified health profes- group of unknown cause compared with couples with male factor in- sional .To guarantee informed decision making, the public needs to fertility . have access to high quality information (trusted websites) . Education Materials & Methods: A controlled clinical study was desgined in our and communication are needed to inform the public at large on pros centre . In total, 100 men from male factor infertility and 25 men with and cons of genetic screening . Policy makers should engage with pa- RPL were recruited in the study . tient and consumer organisations . Especially for complex diseases DNA was extracted from Peripheral blood sample . In each sample, translational research is needed . Possibilities to regulate marketing of six sequence-tagged-sites (STS) according to the europian protocol commercial test offers after adequate pre-market evaluation need to and four other STSs in the proximal AZFc region namely; DYS262, be debated and implemented. The European certificate CE marking DYS220, DYF8551, and DYF8651 were studied by polymerase chain should guarantee analytical validity and clinical validity . Assessment reaction (PCR) . of clinical utility, relating to the availability of effective interventions, Results: Eight men tested evaluated had Y microdelation in at least should be performed for new forms of testing and screening for low- one of the six segments from Europian protocol (8%) VS non in RPL risk populations and high as well as low-risk gene variants . group . Five men with history of at least 3 PL in their wife tested for 4 STS in AZFc region had microdelation (20%) but non of those other P09.66 STS . In the inferile group had not any microdeletion related to the 4 Governing the balance between ‘duty to protect’ and ‘right STS from AZFc region . to test’ i: challenges to the focus on protection in genetic Conclusion: From our results it could concluded that in case of couples screening with un explained PRL it may help to test these four STSs on Y chro- C. G. van El, T. Pieters, M. C. Cornel; mosome to recognize the cause of PL . VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. For genetic screening, criteria have been developed based on the P09.64 WHO Wilson and Jungner criteria (1968), in which the notion of pro- mutational homogeneity of severe autosomal recessive retinal tection of citizens against unwarranted screening was important . In degeneration in endogamous Romany (Gypsy) communities in some countries, such as the Netherlands, ‘protection’ even became slovakia cornerstone of legislation concerning population screening . Protection A. Ficek1,2, E. Feráková1, L. Kádaši1,2, G. Minárik1, H. Poláková2, V. Ferák1; relates to notions of having a suitable test with good sensitivity and few 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Slo- false positives, the availability of treatment and follow-up after diagno- vak Academy of Sciences, Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, sis, so that benefits of screening outweigh potential harm, for instance Bratislava, Slovakia. of stress caused by uncertainty, the knowledge of having a fatal disor- Hereditary retinal degenerations comprise clinically and genetically der or unnecessary interventions . wide group of mostly progressive ocular disorders and are one of the In screening policy safeguards are needed because of the shared re- most frequent causes of vision impairment in developed countries . So sponsibilities of government and health care taking the initiative to of- far uncovered tremendous genetic heterogeneity underlying major- fer screening to - in principle - healthy people . ity of these disorders however markedly impedes ongoing attempts We argue that recent developments challenge this protective stance . on DNA diagnostics and therapy in most of populations . Contrary to Firstly, on the basis of developments in genomics, among other as- panmictic populations, genetic heterogeneity in isolated populations sociation studies, labs and companies increasingly offer direct-to-con- is often reduced to high degree due to founder effect and inbreeding . sumer tests on the internet . Secondly, there is increasing awareness Severe childhood autosomal recessive rod-cone progressive retinal about and demand for testing and screening, sometimes stimulated degeneration with feature of retinitis pigmentosa (nyctalopia, dark pig- by patient organisations . For instance, in the Netherlands, parents of ment formations, attenuated retinal vessels) and nystagmus charac- children with Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy argue that people might teristic for LCA phenotype occurs in higher frequency in to the high want a newborn screening test for DMD to be able to prepare or make degree isolated Romany communities in Slovakia . Whole genome au- reproductive decisions . tozygosity mapping and linkage analysis accomplished on analysis of The emphasis on protection ignores increasing demands for testing . two large pedigrees facilitated localization and identification of underly- Citizens want to be more autonomous . “Informed decision making” is ing mutation to which bidirectional allele specific amplification method not taken seriously when many genetic screening tests are simply notGenetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  made available . New ways to involve the public in policy decisions on nostic laboratories that are working in compliance with the ISO15189 screening and testing are necessary . guidelines (www .iso .org) . Moreover, OECD has issued “Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Molecular Genetic Testing (www .oecd .org\sti\bio- P09.67 technology)” which stipulate that laboratories providing clinical servic- the importance of genetic counselling for parents with normal es should be working within a “Quality Assurance System” . Via method constitutional karyotypes having multiple spontaneous validation laboratories assess assay performance and demonstrate abortions with aneuploidy their suitability for the intended purpose . It is up to individual laborato- V. Culic1, J. Pavelic2; ries to establish an acceptable validation protocol in order to comply 1Pediatrics Clinic, Department for Medical Genetics, Split, Croatia, 2Institute with general ISO principles . Here we report practical examples of vali- Rudjer Boskovic, Molecular Genetics, Zagreb, Croatia. dation procedures utilized for an ,,in-house“ test that we developed for The purpose of this research is to establish the hypothesis that two hits the detection of thrombophilic mutation PAI-1, versus approaches ap- are responsible for aneuploidy which results in spontaneous abortion . plied to a commercially produced RHA Kit Thrombo (Labo Bio:Medical The first hit could have been triggered by patient’s former diseases Products; CE/IVD marked) . For examination of the thrombophilic mu- of urinary and/or genital system . The number of spontaneous abor- tation PAI-1 our laboratory uses an “in-house” method based on frag- tions recorded in their siblings of second generations creates predis- ment analysis of restriction endonuclease- digested amplicons, while position that may end with termination of pregnancy . The second hit the commercial assay is based on reverse slot hybridization (RHA) is usually triggered by chronic presence of EBV virus in male or/and for simultaneous detection and identification of mutations in the genes female partner. It has been demonstrated that there is no significant coding for FII G20210A, FV-Leiden, including the MTHFR 677C/T vari- relation between the age of male or female partners and the number ant . In both instances we assessed basic validation parameters includ- of spontaneous abortions . Both males and females had former uri- ing specificity, sensitivity, repeatability, reproducibility and robustness. nary or/and genital infections and the number of spontaneus abortions Differences between both validation protocols are within the scope of among the siblings of second generation is twice as high in relation validation parameters being tested . These procedures enabled us to to average population . Variations in constitutional karyotypes (per inv confirm diagnostic reliability of both techniques and provide practical 9, 9qh+) are also evident as well as presence of antibodies for EBV, examples for other laboratories validating their genetic tests . Support- CMV, or HSV2 viruses . Reactivation of latent EBV infection provides ed by VZFNM00064203(6112) and EuroGentest . possibility for second hit . Aneuploidy or tetraploidy is found at 23% of samlpes . Therefore we think that the presumed hypothesis of two hits P09.70 is clearly established . Partners with spontaneous abortion with and Genotyping of mtHFR 677c>t and 1298A>c variants by high without chromosomal abnormalities must undergone genetic counsel- resolution melting of small amplicons: an example of method ling process for preventing trigger/s or to repeat the proces, because validation. spontaneous abrotion is an multifactorial disease . P. Norambuena, J. Copeland, P. Krenkova, M. Macek Jr., A. Stambergova; Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 5, Czech Republic. P09.68 High Resolution Melting (HRM) is a simple, cost-effective and rapid milestone in teaching genetics mutation scanning method . By reducing the respective amplicon size, R. Dragotoiu; it is possible to increase the resolution for reliable discrimination be- Medical and Pharmacy University “Carol Davila”, Bucuresti, Romania. tween homozygous wild-type and homozygous mutant samples . We On the verge of a new legislation in the educational system, when one introduced HRM close-tube method in our laboratory for genotyping of of the main goals is the alignment to the international standards, it is the most common variants in the MTHFR gene: 677C>T (rs1801133: suggested that student’s evaluation has to become mandatory and its C>T) and 1298A>C (rs1801131: A>C). PCR amplification and HRM results should be made public by the university . More than a decade was performed on the LightCycler® 480 Real-Time PCR System ago I evaluated my teaching methods and presented the results at the (Roche). For validation purposes we evaluated specificity, sensitivity, ESHG meetings . Three years ago I decided to change the way I taught repeatability, reproducibility and the ability of the method to perform the practicals . reliable calls . We were able to perform unambiguous calls in 98 .4% Questionnaires were answered by 76 first year students of the Medical (n=381) of the cases for rs1801133: C>T and in 98 .1% (n=104) of the and Pharmacy University “Carol Davila” to evaluate the quality of the cases for rs1801131: A>C . For the 6 (1 .6%) and 2 (1 .9%) unknown practicals they attended during the first term in the Department of Ge- samples for rs1801133: C>T and rs1801131: A>C respectively, by re- netics . They were questioned about the quantity of information versus peating the analysis we reached 100% of calls . Since in the end all amount of time, the quality of information and presentation and if they calls were reliably detected by the LightCycler software we reached enjoyed the practicals . 100% specificity and sensitivity. Repeatability and reproducibility were Answers to the question: Have you been satisfied with the way the also consistent . In conclusion, after optimization and diagnostic valida- practicals unfolded? tion HRM of small amplicons is a reliable and precise method that can very much 7% be broadly applied in DNA diagnostics of other genes . a lot 42% Supported by VZFNM00064203(6112) and EuroGentest . enough 50% satisfactory 1% P09.71 almost not at all none training on quality management to support genetic testing not at all none laboratories in continuous improvement and progress towards For several years I have stopped asking students for an evaluation, because the re- accreditation sults were the same: almost half in favor of frontal teaching and the other half prefer- M. A. Morris1,2, S. Berwouts3,2, A. Wynants4,2, E. Dequeker3,2; ring the interactive method. Since I have modified my teaching method, the speed and 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic moléculaire, Service de Médecine Génétique, Uni- the amount of information also changed, but only 7% of students considered it was versity Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 2EuroGentest Network of Excellence, too much data. Leuven, Belgium, 3Centre of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Adapting the teaching method to the students’ present needs makes them more prone Belgium, 4Management Consulting & Research, Heverlee, Belgium. to enjoy the practicals. The study did not focus on achieving genetic knowledge, but ISO 15189:2007, the international standard developed specifically for apparently this did not improve. medical laboratories, requires that staff receives relevant training in quality assurance and quality management (5 .6 .1) . In response to the P09.69 growing interest in accreditation and quality improvement, a series of thrombophilic gene mutations: two different approaches to the interactive two-day training workshops were organized for genetics validation of commercial and “in-house” DNA diagnostic assays laboratories, within the framework of the European project EuroGen- A. Stambergova, J. Camajova, M. Macek Jr.; test . Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 5, Czech Republic. The subjects of these workshops varied from living with quality sys- Validation of molecular genetic analytical methods is the basic tool for tems and comparing the different standards for accreditation, to spe- quality assurance and has to be part of routine practice in clinical-diag- cific topics such as internal audit, managing the human side of changeTherapy for genetic disease 0 processes and IT support for quality management . Several quality assurance measures are demanded by regulatory orga- Since 2005, 156 different participants, from 85 institutes and 27 coun- nizations and accreditation bodies as outlined in published standards tries worldwide, have participated in the 8 workshops organized to and guidelines (e .g . ISO 15189 standard, the IVD Directive 98/79/EC, date . the OECD Quality Assurance Guideline) . In addition to the training sessions, an electronic survey was sent to all However, proper instructions or the know-how to fulfil these require- participating institutes in order to get a more detailed view on the prog- ments, especially for the validation of genetic tests, are lacking . ress laboratories make towards accreditation and the implementation A working group was created within EuroGentest, that aims to develop of different quality aspects such as document control, performing in- practical guidelines for - to begin with - the analytical validation of mo- ternal audits and tracking non-conformities . Furthermore, the value of lecular genetic tests . training in the improvement of a quality system was surveyed . The Through brainstorming meetings in Leuven (2007) and Prague (2008), answers received from more than 50 institutes have been analysed . literature studies and with the help of external experts, a background This survey gives us insight into the reaction of laboratories to the in- document was generated . It includes a consensus glossary of terms creasing pressure to develop their investment in continuous improve- (applicable to molecular genetic testing), a categorization of the vari- ment and accreditation . Moreover, we will anticipate and address top- able array of genetic test methods, discussions on the meaning of criti- ics on quality in future workshops, particularly adapted to the needs of cal performance characteristics for genetic tests and several generic the genetic testing laboratories . aids, such as a flowchart to guide the user to appropriate instructions, a generic validation SOP and a template file for the validation report. P09.72 Future plans include the experimental design of test validations, a sta- Genetic counsulting of families when one of the members is the tistical evaluation of ‘numbers’ in validation experiments, interlabora- carrier of balanced translocation tory (collaborative) trials and clinical validation . R. Sereikiene, V. Abraitis, D. Strazdienė; The document will be posted and submitted to a public and expert KAUNAS MEDICAL UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL, KAUNAS, Lithuania. consultation during the summer of 2008 . Infertility in the family is one of most common courses of genetic con- sulting . Between 266 consulted families we found 4 families with car- P10. Therapy for genetic disease rier of balanced translocation . By the example of these families we’ll try show the specific features of their genealogies and ethical aspects of P10.01 genetic consulting . Translocation examples in the families: comparative sequence analysis, structure prediction, primer 1 . Male/Female: 46 XY, t (1;4) (p36 .2; q32)/ 46 XX . design of ApolipoproteinE protein in Alzheimer’s disease 2 . Male/Female: 46 XY/ 46 XX, t (4;9) (p15 .3; q12) . K. Mahdieh1, K. R. Rupesh2; 3 . Male/Female: 45 XY; -13; -14; +t (13;14)/ 46 XX . 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IFREMER, Plou- 4 . Male/Female: 46 XY/ 46 XX, t (6;10) (q23; p13) . zane, France. Genealogies of these families had some characteristic features: Alzheimer’s disease (AD), neurodegenerative disease, is common 1 . Sterility . cause of dementia, characterized clinically by progressive intellec- 2 . Spontaneous abortions and miscarriages . tual deterioration together with declining activities of daily living and 3 . Stillborns . neuropsychiatric symptoms or behavioral changes . Researchers have 4 . Different anomalies of fetus . identified increased risk of developing late-onset AD to the apolipopro- 5 . The cases of mental retardation of unclear etiology between rela- tein E (apoE) gene found on chromosome 19 . In this study we have tives . compared the ApoE gene and its protein in different organisms to un- Some ethical problems rise during genetic counseling of these fami- derstand the mechanism of expression of ApoE . Multiple sequence lies: alignment (MSA) of the apoE gene revealed that it is analogous to all 1 . Who must say the results of chromosomal examination for healthy the other 16 organisms whereas the apoE protein is found to be 66% spouse - doctor or translocation suffering husband or wife? homologous . On analysis of apoE (NM_000041), it was found that 2 . What tactic should keep the doctor in cases when translocation car- ORF region was between 84-1034 position. Specific primers for the riers don’t agree inform other member of family? apoE coding region were designed which resulted in product size 1109 3. The examination of first line relatives (parents, brothers, sisters and bp . The apoE protein analysis showed that it was hydrophilic . 13 anti- children) and other relatives sometimes needs to avoid more fetal genic determinants were found when the apoE protein was analysed anomalies . What tactic must be of the doctor in case when couple for Antigenic prediction sites which could be used as potential targets . doesn’t want informing others? Is it ethical to hide information which The positions of alpha helix and b-sheets in the secondary structure of knows the doctor from relatives who might be interested in? the proteins were predicted along with 3D structure prediction of apoE . 4 . How explain family the results of examination in correct way to avoid The degenerate primers designed could be used as a diagnostic tool conflicts and sometimes divorces of the families? for identifying apoE protein expression in AD patients . The predicted antigenic sites on the apoE proteins could be used as an effective P09.73 target for interaction with candidate drugs for the control of the expres- towards practical guidelines for the validation of genetic sion of the apoE in AD patients, this has to be further evaluated using diagnostic tests in vitro and in vivo methods . E. Swinnen1,2, E. Bakker3, D. E. Barton4, S. Berwouts1,2, P. Bossuyt5, J. Cama- jova6,1, A. Corveleyn1,2, E. Dequeker1,2, T. Janssens1,2, M. Macek Jr.6,1, I. Mann7, P10.02 C. Mattocks8, M. Morris9, C. Müller10, V. Pratt11, I. Salden2, H. Scheffer12, A. Anthracyclines, an antiobiotic family with anti-proliferating Stambergova6,1, A. Wallace13, J. A. Wilson14, M. Zoccoli15, G. Matthijs1,2; activity, can elevate γ-globin expression in vitro and increase 1Eurogentest Network of Excellence, Leuven, Belgium, 2KUL, UZ Leuven, HbF production in human erythtoid cells Leuven, Belgium, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, P. N. Spyrou1, L. Kythreotis2, A. Kirri2, S. Christou2, M. Kleanthous1; 4Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 5University of Amsterdam, 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Makarios Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 6Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. 7Swiss Accreditation Service, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Salisbury District Hospi- Anthracyclines are a family of natural products produced by microor- tal, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 9University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzer- ganisms of the actinomycetes group . Some members of the anthracy- land, 10University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 11Nichols Institute, Chan- cline group of antibiotics show pharmacological and mostly anticancer tilly, VA, United States, 12University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The activities . Their biological activities are proposed to be the result of Netherlands, 13St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 14Sequenom, San drug-induced damage or structural alterations to DNA due to inhibition Diego, CA, United States, 15Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, United States. of enzymes that are involved in the DNA synthesis like topoisomerase Continuous advances in human genetics and biotechnological devel- II . opments have led to a rapid growth of nucleic acid-based diagnostic In this study we investigate whether some anthraclyclines could be testing in medical laboratories . To further improve the quality of genetic HbF inducers due to their DNA binding properties and the formation testing, it is necessary to support the implementation of reliable tests . of stable complexes with it . A group of other DNA binding agents wereTherapy for genetic disease  found to be strong HbF inducers . This group includes compounds like P10.05 cisplantin analoqs, Chromomycin-Mithramycin, Tallimustine and An- Studying the γ-globin induction pathway by hydroxyurea in K562 gelicin . Some Ribonucleotide reductase inhibitors like Hydroxyurea, cell lines Didox and Trimidox were also found to be strong HbF inducers . Ribo- Z. Deilami Khiabani1, J. Gharesouran2, A. Asgharian1, H. Najmabadi2, M. nucleotide reductase is an enzyme that plays an important role to DNA Banan2; replication and repair . These properties therefore amplify our specula- 1Cell and molecular biology,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of tion that Anthracyclines might be inducers of HbF . We examined the Iran, 2Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation following compounds: Doxorubicin, Aclarubicin, Idarubicin, Bleomycin Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and Daunorubicin on γ- and β- globin gene promoter activity in a dual β-thalassemia is a genetic disorder which may be ameliorated by in- luciferase assay in the GM979 cells. All of them increased the γ-globin duction of the fetal γ-globin gene. Several chemical agents can lead promoter activity over 2 fold and were then tested in erythroid liquid to the induction of γ-globin. One such chemical is hydroxyurea. This cultures derived from normal donors . Doxorubicin, Idarubicin and Dau- chemical is the only drug approved by the Federal Drug Administration norubicin showed increasing levels of HbF and were then tested to (FDA) for treatment of β-thalassemia. Despite its use in β-thalessemia thalassemic patients (preliminary results). The findings so far from all treatment, the mode of action hydroxyurea is poorly understood . Here, the measurements clearly show that the family of Anthracyclines could we have examined the effect of different hydroxyurea concentrations be a possible target for finding new HbF inducers. (50, 100, 200 µM) on γ-globin induction in the K562 erythroleukemia cell line . We have used non-radioactive Northern blot analysis and RT- P10.03 Real time PCR to measure γ-globin levels. We have determined that medical rehabilitation for life quality improvement in a case with there is a 3-4 fold induction of γ-globin using 100 µM and 200 µM arthrogryposis hydroxyurea concentrations . We have also optimized transfection con- M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2, C. Avram1; ditions of K562 cells to show the effect of positive and negative control 1Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2University of Medicine siRNAs . We are currently in the process of testing siRNAs against can- and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. didate gene(s) involved in this pathway . Arthrogryposis is a congenital disorder characterized by multiple joint contractures found throughout the body at birth . We present the case P10.06 of a girl of 3 .5 year-old with multiple congenital defects: arthrogryposis congenital Disorder of Glycosylation type ia: antisense involving bilateral hip, knee and ankle joints, together with sacral agen- therapeutics for an intronic variation causing exonization of an esis with lombar dysmorphism, anorectal agenesis, hydronephrosis of intronic sequence the left kidney as the result from reflux, right kidney hypoplasia, renal A. I. Vega1,2, C. Pérez-Cerdá1,2, G. Matthijs3, M. Adamowicz4, M. Ugarte1,2, B. fusion and heart anomalies: tetralogy of Fallot . Immediately after birth, Pérez1,2; in several steps, colostomy, left ureterocystoneostomy and suprapubic 1Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa. Dpto Biología Molecular. UAM, cystostomy were performed . Later in infancy corrective surgery for the Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Center of Human Genetics, Uni- heart defect was required . At the age of 2 years, surgery for the equin- versity of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4The Children´s Memorial Health Institute, ovarus deformities and for left genu flexum was performed. Medical Warsaw, Poland. rehabilitation tries to maximize independent function . The main goals Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of genetic were increasing the muscle tonus of upper-limbs, increase the rate of diseases resulting from defects in N-glycosylation of glycoconjugates . motion of the joints, establishment of stability for ambulation, learning The most common form of the disease is the CDG-Ia caused by a de- different schemes of movement according to her needs, obtaining of a ficiency in the cytosolic enzyme phosphomannomutase (PMM). PMM functional independence . The patient followed a complex rehabilitation converts mannose-6-phosphate to mannose 1-phosphate and is a key program with hydrokinetotherapy, electrotherapy, massage, occupa- enzyme in the generation of N-linked glycans . The clinical presentation tional therapy, psychological counseling . The therapies were success- of PMM deficiency ranges from very severe to milder phenotype. In ful, after 10 weeks an improvement of the moving capacity and of the this work we report the functional analysis of a nucleotide change iden- transfer in orthostatism with minimal external assistance, with the ob- tified in the deep intronic region of intron 7 (c.639-15479C>T) of PMM2 vious increasing of the patient’s satisfaction, were noticed . In order to gene and the use of antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (AMOs) fulfill our objectives the child will be hospitalized every two months for to restore normal splicing. First, we have confirmed using splicing as- functional evaluation and for continuing the physical therapies . say that this change provokes the exonization of 123bp between exon 7 and 8 in patient’s cDNA. Using modified morpholinos to block ac- P10.04 cess of the spliceosoma to 3´ and/or 5´ cryptic splice site we have Delineation of the 5-Azacytidine pathway by use of siRNAs demonstrated that this insertion is a disease-causing mutation . After J. Gharesouran1, A. Asgharian2, Z. Deilami Khiabani2, A. Aghajani1, H. Khor- transfection of a fibroblast cell line from the patient, the analysis of the ram Khorshid1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Banan1; effect of the AMO was done by conventional RT-PCR, determination of 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cell and molecu- PMM activity and western blot using polyclonal antibodies . The results lar biology,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. obtained shown that a correctly spliced mRNA was rescued and effi- Induction of γ-globin may become a useful means for treatment of β- ciently translated in a functional protein detected by western blot . PMM thalassemia . 5-Azacytidine (5-Aza) is a chemical compound that leads activity was rescued close to the value of control cell line . Our results to the induction of γ-globin, at least in part through blocking the func- offer a novel promise mutation-specific therapeutic approach in this tion of methyl transferases . In addition, it is known that the Methyl Do- genetic disease where is not possible other effective treatment . main Binding Protein 2 (MBD2) binds to methylated DNA and may be involved in repressing γ-globin expression. Therefore the function of 5- P10.07 Aza may in part be mediated through blocking MBD2 binding to DNA . treating congenital defects: a purposal of algorithm for Here we have looked at whether the K562 erythroleukemia cell line is nutritional intervention in individuals with cleft lip/palate an appropriate model system for studying this pathway . We have used R. J. Nogueira1, A. E. S. Lima1, L. G. Almstaden-Mendes2, V. L. Gil-da-Silva- non-radioactive northern blot analysis and real time PCR to show that Lopes2; γ-globin can be induced in K562 cells. In addition, we have validated 1Multiprofissional Nutritional Team-Clinical Hospital/UNICAMP, Campinas, Bra- the function of a published MBD2 siRNA sequence by showing that it zil, 2Department of Medical Genetics/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. can knock down MBD2-specific mRNAs in HeLa cells. We are in the Cleft lip and palate (CL/P) is one of the most common birth congeni- process of testing these siRNAs in K562 cells for 1) MBD2 knockdown tal defects, occurring in approximately 1/600- 1000 newborns babies and 2) γ-globin induction. Upon validation, K562 cells will be used fur- worldwide. In view of the feeding difficulties presented by children with ther to delineate this pathway . a cleft lip and/or palate and the importance of food in their growth and development, they should receive early and systematic healthcare, by a specialized team besides of regular pediatric care . Therefore, the search for strategies of low-cost and good effectiveness and improve of health care are recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) .Therapy for genetic disease  The diet of a child with a CL/P is critical for growth and development age range between 2 months and 5 years . The lot was divided in two besides adequate gain in weight, which is important to corrective groups: control group (15 subjects) and experiment group (15 sub- surgery at the right time . Despite of the high prevalence and the im- jects) . The study subjects underwent physiotherapy and physical ex- portance of nutritional intake, there are around 50 articles involving ercise and the experimental group followed a proprioceptive training nutritional approaches over 50 years . We present a proposal of an program . The intervention consisted of three sessions of 45 minutes algorithm for multiprofessional intervention for nutrition of CL/P babies each, per week . The children were assessed before, during and after before surgery . this physical intervention using Bayley Motor Scales of Infant Develop- ment . P10.08 Results: As the results indicated, the experimental group showed a mechanism of cmt1A phenotypic correction by high dose of statistically significant improvement in all measured values when com- ascorbic acid pared with the control group . S. Belin1, F. Kaya1, G. Diamantidis2, M. Fontes1; Conclusion: The proprioceptive training was superior in the improve- 1INSERM, Marseille, France, 2University, Thessaloniki, Greece. ment of the posture, of the transfers and of the balance, compared Charcot-Marie-Tooth [CMT] syndrome is the most common heredi- to classical physical therapy . The delays in motor development mile- tary peripheral neuropathy usually results from triploidy of the PMP22 stones were more severe in the study group compared to experimental gene . Preclinical trials using an animal model show that disabled mice group . force-fed with high doses of ascorbic acid partially recover muscular strength after a few months of treatment, and suggest that high doses P10.11 of ascorbic acid repress PMP22 expression (Passage et al, Nature Antisense Oligomer (AO) induced exon skipping in the mdx4cv medicine, 2004) . mouse model PMP22 gene expression was under the control of cAMP stimulation C. Mitrpant, S. Fletcher, S. D. Wilton; (Saberan et al, Gene, 2000) . Recently we demonstrated that ascor- Australian Neuromuscular Research Institute (ANRI), Perth, Australia. bic acid represses PMP22 gene expression by acting on intracellular Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a relentless progressive mus- cAMP levels and adenylate cyclase activity . This action is dose-depen- cular dystrophy is caused by protein truncating mutations in the dys- dent and specific to ascorbic acid, since repression is not observed trophin gene that result in the absence of functional dystrophin . Loss after treatment with other antioxidants (Kaya et al, Neuromuscular of dystrophin leads to irreparable membrane damage, thus promoting Disord, 2007) . Indeed we showed that ascorbic acid is a competitive calcium ion influx and cell death. inhibitor of cyclase adenylate enzyme . This work enabled us to pro- Antisense Oligomer (AO) induced exon skipping is a molecular inter- pose an unsuspected mechanism of action explaining the phenotype vention whereby AOs are targeted to motifs involving in pre-mRNA correction, and to identify two new potential therapeutic targets: the splicing. This has been used to induce specific exon removal and ascorbic acid would act directly on the PMP22 gene expression by by-pass the disease-causing gene lesion in the mdx mouse model of decreasing intracellular cAMP concentration via the inhibition of the muscular dystrophy . We are investigating exon skipping in the B6Ros . adenylate cyclase activity . Cg-Dmdmdx-4Cv/J (mdx 4CV) muscular dystrophy mouse, which carries a nonsense mutation in exon 53 of the dystrophin gene . To restore P10.09 the reading frame, both exons 52 and 53 must be excised from the U1snRNA-mediated rescue of mRNA processing in severe factor mature dystrophin gene transcript to by-pass the primary gene lesion VII deficiency and maintain the reading frame . 2’-O-Methyl AOs, on a phosphoro- F. Pagani1, M. PInotti2, F. Bernardi2; thioate backbone have been designed to mask these exons from the 1ICGEB, Trieste, Italy, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, splicing machinery and lead to their excision . Initial AO combinations University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. induced skipping of exons 52/53 and restored some protein expres- Small nuclear U1-RNAs (snRNAs), the spliceosome components se- sion . However the predominant transcript was missing only exon 53 as lectively recognizing donor splice sites (5’ss), were engineered to re- determined by RNA studies . We designed additional AOs to enhance store correct mRNA processing in a cellular model of severe coagula- exon skipping of both exons 52 and 53 . tion factor VII (FVII) deficiency, caused by the IVS7 9726+5g/a change. We highlight the importance of AO design to enhance efficiency of Three U1-snRNAs, complementary to the mutated 5’ss (U1+5a) or to single and multi-exon removal . neighbouring sequences, were expressed with FVII minigenes in a hepatoma cell line . P10.12 The U1-snRNAs reduced from 80% to 40% the exon 7 skipping, thus study on the chaperone effect of several iminosugars and increasing exon definition. The U1+5a construct also dramatically aminocyclitols on mutated glucocerebrosidases as a treatment increased recognition of the correct 5’ss over the 37bp-downstream for Gaucher disease cryptic site preferentially activated by the mutation, thus inducing ap- G. Sanchez-Olle1,2,3, M. Egido-Gabas4, J. Duque5, A. Yudego5, J. Casas4, A. preciable synthesis of normal transcripts (from barely detectable to Chabas5,3, D. Grinberg1,2,3, L. Vilageliu1,2,3; 50%) . This effect, which was dose-dependent, clearly demonstrated 1Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER- that impaired recognition by the U1-snRNA was the mechanism re- ER, Barcelona, Spain, 4RUBAM, Departament de Química Orgànica Biològica, sponsible for FVII deficiency. These findings suggest compensatory IIQAB-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain, 5Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Barcelona, U1-snRNAs as therapeutic tools in coagulation factor deficiencies Spain. caused by mutations at 5’ss, a frequent cause of severe defects . Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by the accumulation of glucosylceramide in lysosomes, because of acid P10.10 β-glucosidase deficiency. Some competitive inhibitors, at subinhibitory Influence of proprioceptive training program in children with concentrations, can work as chemical chaperones . We have tested Down syndrome the effect of two iminosugars, N-(n-nonyl)-deoxynojirimycin (NN-DNJ) E. Sirbu1, B. Almajan-Guta2, V. Almajan-Guta3, D. Stoicanescu4; and N-(n-butyl)-deoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ), and four aminocyclitols on 1West University of Timişoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2University Politehnica stable transfected COS-7 cells and patient fibroblasts. Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 3Speranta Special Care Center, Timisoara, In stable cell lines, NN-DNJ led to a 1 .2 to 1 .4-fold increase in the activ- Romania, 4University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. ity of G377S, N188S and wild-type GBAs at different concentrations . Background: In these days, Down syndrome comes again in the con- A slight increase was noticed in the activity of the N188S;E326K GBA cern of medical researchers because early intervention treatment can at 2.5 μM. NB-DNJ at 5 μM induced a 1.2-fold increase in the GBA improve the quality of life of these children . The goal of our study was activity of COS-7 cells transfected with the N188S and N188S;E326K to prove the efficiency of a proprioceptive training program on the mo- cDNAs . A slight increase was also observed in cells transfected with tor development stages of children with Down syndrome . the wild-type cDNA . The aminocyclitol C4 Ph showed a 1 .2 to 1 .4-fold Methods: The study was performed between September 2006 - Sep- increase on wild-type and N188S GBAs, at different concentrations . At tember 2007 . The study was performed on 30 children from the “Spe- 15 μM, 1.2-fold increase for N188S;E326K GBA was also observed. ranta” Special Care Center Timisoara (16 girls and 14 boys) with the In fibroblasts, treatment with NN-DNJ produced an increase of activityTherapy for genetic disease  in cells bearing the following genotypes: L444P;E326K/G202R (1 .3- P10.15 fold at 2.5 μM), D409H/N188S;E326K (1.4-fold at 5μM and 10μM, and Evaluation of transient transfection methods in Hu11 hybrid 1.2-fold at 20μM), and N370S/N370S (1.7-fold at 5μM and 10 μM, and cells 1.5-fold at 20μM). Treatment with the aminocyclitol C10 at different A. Asgharian1, J. Gharesouran2, Z. Deilami Khiabani1, H. Najmabadi2, M. concentrations increased 1 .5-fold the GBA activity in L444P/G202R Banan2; fibroblasts, and from 1.2 to 1.7-fold in L444P;E326K/G202R patient 1Cell and molecular biology,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of cells . Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P10.13 One important step in expression of exogenous genes in cells is trans- Hematopoietic stem cells therapy and risk of graft versus host fection . The Hu11 cell line is a mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cell line disease: A report from iran containing the human chromosome 11 (and thus the β-locus). Hu11 M. Ebrahimi1, M. Houshmand2,1; cells express the human globin genes and thus should useful for study- 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of ing the basis of globin gene regulation . In this study, we tested several Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. transient transfection methods in Hu11 hybrid cells. The PSV-β-Ga- Transplanted hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitor’s cells lactosidase vector was used as a control to monitor transfection ef- can treat malignant and nonmalignant disorders, including immu- ficiency. We tested commercially available reagents such as lipofecta- nological, gynecological, neurological, endocrinological and others minTM 2000 (Invitrogen), FuGENE® HD transfection Reagent (Roche), pathologies and disorders . The transplantation of HSC that was not X-tremeGENE siRNA transfection Reagent (Roche), HiPerfect Trans- genetically identical (allogeneic)to that of the recipient resulted in an fection Reagent (Qiagen) and DEAE-Dextran (Sigma) . Also Hu11 cells immunologic reaction by the donor lymphocytes against the recipient, were electroporated under different conditions . We have shown that causing inflammation of the target tissues, termed graft-versus-host different cationic lipid transfection reagents do not provide a reliable disease (GVHD) . GVHD is one of the major limiting factors in suc- and effective method of transfecting Hu11 cells . Also electroporation cessful HSC transplantation . A wide range of host antigens can initiate did not work well for this cell line . Therefore we suggest that the best graft-versus-host-disease, among them the human leukocyte antigens method for efficient transfection of Hu11 cells can be accomplished via (HLAs) . HLA-identical siblings or HLA-identical unrelated donors often a viral vector-based transfection procedure . have genetically different proteins that can be presented by MHC mol- ecules to the recipient’s T-cells, which see these antigens as foreign P10.16 and so mount an immune response . characteristics of patients with Hunter syndrome in spain and we enrolled 18 patients with one form of neuromuscular disorders at Portugal compared with those in the rest of the world: analysis Genetics Department of Medical Special Center in Tehran .The all pa- of data from HOs - the Hunter Outcome survey tients received transplants of HSC of the human embryonic liver . All G. Pintos-Morell1, E. Leão Teles2, M. del Toro Riera3, M. Beck4, R. Giugliani5, patients were treated on clinical protocols, which were reviewed and R. Martin6, J. Muenzer7, E. Wraith8; approved by the Embryotech and Special Medical Centers . All patients 1University Hospital ‘Germans Trias i Pujol’, Badalona, Spain, 2Sao Joao Hos- provided writing informed consent before being enrolled in the proto- pital, Porto, Portugal, 3Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4University cols . of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 5Medical Genetics Service, HCPA/UFRGS, Porto The diagnosis of acute GVHD was initially based on clinical signs must Alegre, Brazil, 6Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO, United States, 7University be confirm by positive biopsy results from at least one involved organ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 8Royal Manchester Children’s In period of observation GVHD is developed in nobody . The lowest risk Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. of GVHD is associated with that the HSC derived from liver do not con- Aims: To compare the characteristics of patients with Hunter syndrome tain the antigens of major histocompatibility complex on their surface (mucopolysaccharidosis type II) in Spain and Portugal with patients in what makes them tolerant towards recipients . the rest of the world (ROW) . Methods: Analysis of data from HOS - the Hunter Outcome Survey P10.14 - was conducted in January 2008 . HOS is a global outcome survey Effects of silibinin on cell growth and invasive properties established to assess the natural history of Hunter syndrome and the of a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, HepG-2, safety and effectiveness of enzyme replacement therapy with idursul- through inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 fase (Elaprase®; Shire HGT, Danderyd, Sweden) . As of January 2008, phosphorylation there were 367 ‘prospective’ patients included in HOS, 33 of whom M. Noori-Daloii, M. Momeny, M. Khorramizadeh, M. Yousefi, M. Yekaninejad, were from Spain and Portugal . R. Esmaeili, Z. Jahanshiri, A. Noori-Daloii, S. H. Ghaffari; Results: Mean age (±SD) at onset of symptoms in patients from Spain/ Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Portugal was 1 .7±1 .1 years and from the ROW 2 .1±1 .8 years . Delay The purpose of the current study is to evaluate the effect of silibinin on in diagnosis after symptom onset in Spain/Portugal was markedly less human hepatocellular carcinoma HepG-2 cells . MTT assay, LDH re- than that for the ROW (1 .1±1 .4 vs 2 .2±2 .9, respectively) . The occur- lease, Gelatin zymography, Griess reaction, Cell-based ERK 1/2 phos- rence of any neurological signs/symptoms was similar (84%) in pa- phorylation assay and quantitative real-time RT-PCR were employed tients from Spain/Portugal and the ROW . Respiratory symptoms were to appraise the effect of silibinin on cell proliferation, cytotoxicity, meta- reported in 75% of patients in Spain/Portugal and in 84% of patients static potential, nitric oxide (NO) production, ERK 1/2 phosphorylation from the ROW . Cardiovascular signs/symptoms were reported in 69% and activation in HepG-2 cells . Silibinin inhibited cell proliferation, ma- and 85% of patients from Spain/Portugal and the ROW, respectively . trix metalloproteinase 2 enzymatic activity, NO production and ERK Characteristic facial features were the most commonly reported man- 1/2 phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner without exerting any ifestation of Hunter syndrome, occurring in over 90% of patients in cytotoxicity effect . In addition, an expressive increase in mRNA levels Spain/Portugal and the ROW . of Raf kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP), sprouty-related protein 1 with Conclusions: This analysis of HOS data indicates no substantial dif- EVH-1 domain (Spred-1), sprouty-related protein with EVH-1 domain ference between patients with Hunter syndrome in Spain/Portugal and 2 (Spred-2) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 2 (TIMP-2) the ROW . However, it highlights the delay between the occurrence of coupled with a significant reduction in transcriptional levels of highly signs/symptoms and diagnosis, and the need for increased awareness expressed in cancer (Hec1) and MMP-2 were observed . Altogether, of this rare disease . these issues show for the first time that silibinin treatment could inhibit cell proliferation and invasive potential of HepG-2 cells through inhibi- P10.17 tion of ERK 1/2 cascade both directly (through suppression of ERK 1/2 Optimization of transient transfection of K562 in order to siRNA phosphorylation) and indirectly (through up-regulation of RKIP, Spred- transfection 1 and Spred-2) . In addition, cell growth and proliferation may be inhib- A. Asgharian1, J. Gharesouran2, Z. Deilami Khiabani1, H. Najmabadi2, M. ited by silibinin through down-regulation of Hec1 . Banan2; 1Cell and molecular biology,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare & RehabilitationTherapy for genetic disease  Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. decided to test the effect of two different drugs (bisphosphonates and The K562 cell line is an erythroleukemia cell line that is widely used for statins) known to act on the same biochemical pathway at different studies of globin gene regulation . In this study, we have tested several levels. We treated MAD fibroblasts in a two steps model (24 hrs statins transient transfection methods in K562 cells. The PSV-β-Galactosidase treatment and then 12hrs bisphosphonate in a single dose) . This treat- vector was used as a control to monitor transfection efficiency. We ment, showed an improvement of the cellular phenotype (reduction tested commercially available reagents such as LipofectaminTM 2000 of the number of misshapen nuclei and a partial rescue of the hetero- (Invitrogen), FuGENE® HD transfection Reagent (Roche), X-treme- chromatin organization) . Singularly, these drugs were ineffective . All GENE siRNA transfection Reagent (Roche), HiPerfect Transfection together these results, suggest that FTI treatment is ineffectiveness Reagent (Qiagen) and DEAE-Dextran (Sigma) . Also K562 cells were versus MADA patients, while inhibitors of prenylation pathways could electroporated under different conditions . Our Result demonstrated be considered as potential . that LipofectaminTM 2000 provide a reliable, effective and reproducible This work was supported by the AIFA (Italy) and EURO-Laminopathies method for transfecting K562 cells . We have also used LipofectaminTM (Contract LSHM-CT-2005-018690) . 2000 to successfully transfect positive and negative control siRNAs into K562 cells . We are now in the process of using this system to P10.20 study the effect of siRNAs against potential γ-globin repressors (in the A tendency in the treatment of mitochondrial complex i hope of inducing the γ-globin gene). deficiency B. Radeva1, M. Stancheva1, E. Naumova2; P10.18 1University Children Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Central laboratory of Clinical Loeys-Dietz syndrome: In- vitro restoration of fibrillin and elastin Immunology, UMBAL”Alexandrovska”’, Sofia, Bulgaria. production after treatment with losartan and dexamethasone The treatment of the mitochodrial disorders is difficult and not well C. P. Barnett, A. Hinek, T. J. Bradley, D. Chitayat; known .With an integral clinical-laboratory methode were diagnosed 5 Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. children with mitochondrial complex I deficiency: 2 patients with muta- A 2-year-old boy born to non-consanguineous parents was seen by us tion of ND5 gene and 3 - with ND3 , ND2, ND1 .Their mutations were following his fourth inguinal hernia repair . He was noted to have facial confirmed by PCR SBT methode of mitochodrial regions in peripheral dysmorphism including brachycephaly, high forehead, hypoplastic su- intravenous blood .The clinical symptoms were various .The child with praorbital ridges and malar areas, proptosis with ptosis, posteriorly ro- ND5 mutation- T 12880 C (with aminoacid change phenylalanine with tated ears, high arched palate with a normal uvula, arachnodactyly and leucine) had hemiparesis, weakness , muscle hypotonia, decreased camptodactyly . Echocardiography demonstrated a dilated aortic root sensitivity, the other boy (synonim basal changes), T 11311 C and poly- and tortuous aortic arch and branches . X-rays revealed craniocervical morphisms- convulsions, ophthalmoplegia, ataxia ,decreased hearing instability, craniosynostosis and generalized osteopenia . Loeys-Dietz and vision, weakness and fatiguity . The patient with ND3 mutation had syndrome (LDS) was suspected clinically and DNA analysis of the the same symptoms, but more severe: atrophy of n . opticus , deafness TGFBR1 gene revealed a missense mutation in codon 4 (c .722C>T) due to neuritis nervi acustici and severe ataxia . The child with ND2 mu- leading to substitution p .S241L . No mutations in the TGFBR2 or FBN1 tation C 5472 G and multiple polymorphysms had muscle hypotonia, genes were detected . hyporeflexia, myoclonic convulsions.After treatment with high doses In vitro studies of skin fibroblasts derived from this patient indicated vitamins B1, B2, B6, B12, Q10, L-carnitine the general condition and that they were significantly deficient in elastin and fibrillin gene expres- neurologic status improved . The children with ND5 mutation recovered sion (RT-PCR technique) . Consistently, immunohistochemistry con- at all , as the patients with ND 3 and other mutations who showed an firmed a lack of adequate production of elastin and fibrillin. Production improval too . The treatment of the children proceeds . of fibulins 1, 2 and 5, auxiliary components of elastic fibers shown to be important in normal elastogenesis, was not affected . Treatment of P10.21 the cultured fibroblasts with losartan (angiotensin II receptor blocker) indicating FtA Elute: for the collection, processing, and elution or dexamethasone restored normal production of elastic and fibrillin of DNA from biologically clear samples for use in downstream fibers. In vitro treatment of fibroblasts derived from other LDS patients amplification technologies is underway to assess the reproducibility of these findings and may J. Dinan1, S. Judice2, N. Nelson3, L. Battalagine2, M. Green1, B. Moran4, M. provide more information on the potential for future clinical use . Harvey3, B. Parker3; Our findings further highlight the overall role of imbalanced signal 1Whatman International, Maidstone, Kent, United Kingdom, 2Whatman Inc, transduction through TGF receptors that lead to impaired elastogen- sanford, ME, United States, 3Whatman Inc, Sanford, ME, United States, 4What- esis in LDS and similar diseases . man Inc, New Jersey, NJ, United States. Collecting samples using an oral swab and Indicating FTA Elute is a P10.19 non-invasive procedure that can be carried out easily and safely by the towards a pharmacological therapy for mandibuloacral layperson, thus providing an ideal format for collecting human genetic Dysplasia syndrome material from virtually anywhere in the world . A. Vielle-Canonge1, F. Gullotta2, S. Salvatori2, P. Molinaro2, F. Lombardi1, S. Ci- To visualize sample collection and placement, Indicating FTA Elute has acci1, M. D’Adamo3, P. Sbraccia3, A. M. Nardone2, M. R. D’Apice1, G. Lattanzi4, been developed for use with clear biological samples by the incorpora- N. M. Maraldi4, G. Novelli1,5; tion of a colour indicating dye that distinguishes the clear sample once 1Departments of Biopathology and Diagnostic Imaging, Rome, Italy, 2Depart- it is applied to the matrix . It is functionally equivalent to traditional FTA ments of medical genetics, A.O.U. Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 3Depart- Elute in that it protects DNA samples from degradation and provides a ment of Internal Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 4IGM- source of amplifiable DNA which is eluted from its matrix with a simple CNR, Unit of Bologna, c/o Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 5University heat and water elution step . We ran a number of tests on various bio- of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States. logical samples to show that DNA eluted from Indicating FTA Elute is Recently, different groups have demonstrated that the farnesyl tran- functionally identical to that eluted from traditional FTA Elute . The aim serase inhibitors (FTIs) were able to reverse in-vitro and in-vivo some was to demonstrate that Indicating FTA Elute provides a template for phenotypic manifestations of progeroid syndromes secondary to LMNA amplification dependent assays such as STR and allelic discrimination and/or ZMPSTE24 mutations (Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome analysis but greatly simplified and optimized sample extraction from and restrictive dermopathy) . The rationale of this treatment is based the matrix . on blockage of the toxic effect of the farnesylated forms of prelamin In summary, Indicating FTA Elute in combination with an oral swab A which in turn is responsible of cellular morphology alterations and represents a revolutionary, non-invasive method for simplified genetic genomic instability . In order to verify if this treatment is reproducible sample collection, sample transport in the mail, simplified DNA extrac- also in the mandibuloacral dysplasia (MADA), we studied the cellular tion requiring nothing more than water and heat, plus the added benefit effects of FTIs treatment on primary fibroblasts cell lines after 72 hrs of storing the samples at room temperature for literally years if this is at different concentrations (10 - 500 nM) of the drug . We observed that a requirement . Indicating FTA Elute is therefore perfectly positioned to this treatment induces in MADA’s cells, an increase of abnormal nuclei support the emerging discipline of pharmacogenomics or personalized in a dose-manner dependent effect . On the basis of these results, we medicine .Therapy for genetic disease  P10.22 rics, Sana Klinikum Lichtenberg, Berlin, Germany, 3Dept. of Pediatrics & Oxidative stress in nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss Endocrinol.&Metab. Diseases, Leiden Univ. Med. Center, Leiden, The Nether- H. T. El-Bassyouni1, A. M. Ashour1, M. Afifi2, A. Ezzat1; lands. 1National Research Center, Guiza, Egypt, 2Hearing and speech Institute, Guiza, Short stature due to SHOX deficiency represents a common congeni- Egypt. tal form of growth failure and is involved in the etiology of “idiopathic” Introduction: Ototoxicity seems to result from the inhibition of cochlear short stature and the growth deficits and skeletal anomalies in Léri antioxidant defenses, causing an increase in the amount of reactive Weill, Langer and Turner syndrome . While much is known on the clini- oxygen species. These findings suggest a causal relationship between cal and molecular aspects of SHOX haploinsufficiency, the integration the formation of reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress and func- of SHOX in the signalling pathways regulating bone growth is currently tional/morphological ear damage . not defined. Here we identify NPPB encoding the natriuretic peptide Aim: to shed more light on the link between oxidative stress and non- BNP, a well known approved cardiac and natriuretic peptide hormone syndromic sensorineural hearing loss . (drug), as a transcriptional target of SHOX . The ability of SHOX to Methods: auditory function was monitored along with plasma concen- transactivate the NPPB endogenous promoter was demonstrated in trations of copper, zinc, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and iron . luciferase reporter assays using serial deletions of the NPPB promoter Further more, lipid peroxidation, ß carotene, vitamin A, E and C activi- region . Binding of SHOX to the NPPB promoter was also demon- ties and immunoglobulin G, M and A levels were estimated . strated in vivo by chromatin fixation and immunoprecipitation. We also Results: Significant decrease in calcium, phosphorus, ß carotene, and demonstrate the lack of promoter activation in two SHOX mutants from vitamin E activities were found, as well as low levels of immunoglobu- patients with Léri-Weill syndrome . In addition, immunohistochemical lin G and M . Increase in lipid peroxidation was observed indicating analysis of human growth plate sections showed for the first time a oxidative stress which suggests a putative role of antioxidants in the co-expression of BNP and SHOX in late proliferative and hypertrophic pathogenesis of sensorineural hearing loss . chondrocytes . Together these data strongly suggest that BNP repre- Conclusion: The results support the hypothesis that dietary and im- sents a direct target of SHOX . mune factors influence individual susceptibility to hearing loss. Further One may speculate that BNP as a downstream effector of SHOX may studies are needed to verify whether antioxidants, correction of defi- also open up new potential avenues for the treatment of short stature . cient nutrients and/or immune modulation would improve sensorineu- BNP in the systemic circulation is likely to reach growth plate chondro- ral hearing loss . cytes. It may either directly influence NPR-B signaling or indirectly in- crease local CNP levels by saturating the competing receptor NPR-C . P10.23 Role of amniotic fluid mesenchymal stem cells in gene and cell P10.25 therapy Designing and constructing a new package for further suicide F. Bolda1, A. Bosi2, R. Baffelli2, G. Porta3, W. Quasim4, B. Gaspar4, F. Porta2, A. gene therapy Lanfranchi2; S. Hajizadeh-Sikaroodi1, S. Zeinali2, A. Kayhan3, M. Jafarpour2, L. Teimoori- 1Stem Cell Lab, Oncohaematology and BMT Units, Ospedale dei Bambini,, Toolabi2; brescia, Italy, 2Stem Cell Lab, Oncohaematology and BMT Units, Ospedale dei 1Research and Science Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Bambini, Brescia, Italy, 3Università dell’Insubria, Varese, Italy, 4Department of 2Department of molecular medicine, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Clinical Immunology, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Republic of Iran, 3Department of Hepatitis and AIDS, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Kingdom. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells capable of differ- entiating into diverse lineages: osteocytes, chondrocytes, adipocytes, neuronal cells and cardiomyocytes. MSCs were initially identified in A commonly used strategy for gene therapy of solid tumors is suicide adult bone marrow (BM), but cells resemblings BM-MSCs have also gene therapy . In order to decrease the side-effects of suicide gene been found in many other tissues: adult and foetal peripheral blood, therapy it would be better to express the suicide genes selectively in foetal liver, foetal spleen, placenta, umbilical cord, amniotic membrane cancerous tissues. Using cancer specific promoters is the most ap- and synovial fluid. plicable strategy to reach this aim . CD (Cytosine Deaminase) and TK Human amniotic fluid (HAF) obtained during the process of amniocen- (Thymidine Kinase) are used as suicide genes, but a suitable vector is tesis is a valid source of MSCs and they could be a valid vehicles for needed for inserting any promoters upstream of them . gene therapy . Firstly, the new MCS was designed by studying the sequence of our The aim of this study was to isolate MSCs from amniotic fluid and to own pUCLacZ (engineered pUC which can express LacZ in eukary- test their transduction efficiency. otic cells because of its BGH-polyA downstream of LacZ) . Two partial HAF specimens were obtained between 15 and 18 weeks’ gestation by complementary 37 base long oligonucleotides were designed . amniocentesis, previous written consent . Cytosine deaminase and thymidine kinase genes were amplified by Amniotic-fluid MSCs (AFMSCs) were cultured under specific condi- PCR on saccharomyces cerevisiae and herpes simplex virus DNA, tions for 7 weeks and analysed by flow cytometry and quantitative real and then were inserted downstream of MCS instead of lacZ . time PCR to asses the presence and the expression levels of specific Insertion of the MCS bidirectionally into pUClacZ was proved by PCR markers . Mesenchymal markers (CD73, CD106, CD54, CD90, CD29, and digestion analysis . In fact we made six constructs which are ca- CD44, CD105) present a peak of expression between 3rd and 4Th week pable of adopting suitable and specific promoters upstream of these of colture . two suicide genes and LacZ reporter gene . To asses the transducibility of AFMSC we used a SIN HIV-1-based pUC-RMCS-TK lentiviral vector . This vector encloses SFFV-U3 promoter and eGFP . It pUC-RMCS-CD also encodes a mutant WPRE and cPPT . pUC-FMCS-TK Transduction efficiency was 60%. We demonstrate with the immunois- pUC-FMCS-CD tochemestry and molecular techniques the presence of human multi- pUC-LacZ-CD potent MSCs in the second-trimester amniotic fluid. We suggest that pUC-LacZ-TK AFMSCs may be good target for prenatal gene therapy The model These constructs are compatible plasmids for further tumor specific under investigation is severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) due suicide gene therapy as the availability of suitable restriction sites in to adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA). MCS enables us to clone any promoter directionally upstream of repor- ter and suicide genes . These reporter and suicide constructs can be P10.24 used in gene therapy of any types of cancer by the potential of accep- BNP is a transcriptional target of the short stature homeobox ting any tumor specific promoter upstream of their genes. gene SHOX A. Marchini1, B. Häcker1, T. Marttila1, V. Hesse2, J. Emons3, B. Weiß1, M. Kar- perien3, G. A. Rappold1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Dept. of Pediat-Therapy for genetic disease  P10.26 a role in the beta-oxidation of VLCFA into peroxisomes . The Abcd1 Treatment of SMA fibroblasts and lymphoblasts with drugs that knock-out mice develop a spinal cord disease that mimicks AMN in increase smN expression reveals no responders and no additive adult patients, with late onset at 20 months of age . The mechanisms effects underlying cerebral demyelination or axonal degeneration in spinal E. Also-Rallo, L. Alias, L. Caselles, S. Bernal, R. Martínez, C. Soler-Botija, P. cord are unknown . Here, we present evidence by GC/MS that MDAL Gallano, M. Baiget, E. F. Tizzano; (malonaldehyde-lysine), a consequence of lipoxidative damage to Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. proteins, accumulates in the spinal cord of Abcd1 knockout mice as Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular genetic disor- early as 3 .5 months of age . At 12 months, Abcd1- mice accumulate der caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene . The homologous copy additional proteins modified by oxidative damage arising from metal- (SMN2) is always present in SMA patients . Exon 7 is spliced out of catalyzed oxidation and glycoxidation/lipoxidation . While we show that most SMN2 transcripts (delta7) whereas SMN1 gene transcripts con- VLCFA excess activate enzymatic antioxidant defences at the protein tain mainly exon 7 (full-length) . Recent advances in SMA treatment expression levels, both in neural tissue, in ex-vivo organotypic spinal with pharmacologic agents have resulted in an increase in SMN mRNA cord slices from Abcd1- mice and in human ALD fibroblasts, we also and protein levels in vitro . We performed a systematic analysis of SMN demonstrate that the loss of Abcd1 gene function hampers oxidative expression in primary fibroblasts and lymphoblasts from 7 SMA pa- stress homeostasis. We find that the α-tocopherol analog Trolox is tients with varying clinical severity and different SMN1 genotypes to able to reverse oxidative lesions in vitro, thus providing therapeutic determine expression differences in two accessible tissues (skin and hope. These results pave the way for the identification of therapeutic blood) . The basal expression of SMN mRNA full-length and delta7 in targets that could reverse the deregulated response to oxidative stress fibroblasts and lymphoblasts at 24 and 48 hours was performed by in X-ALD . quantitative real time PCR. The ratio SMNFL/SMNΔ 7 was significantly higher in control cells than in patients (p<0.001). The FL/Δ 7 ratios P10.28 ranged between 0.8-1.53 in SMA fibroblasts whereas they were be- Recombinant lentiviral particles for gene therapy of β- tween 1 .18-2 .82 in lymphoblasts . Furthermore, we investigated the thalassemia response of these cell lines to different drugs such as valproic acid, M. Bikhof Torbati1, F. Jamshidi A.2, H. Khanahmad2, M. Karimipor2, F. Mary- phenylbutyrate and hydroxyurea. We classified the samples according ami2, A. Amanzadeh2, M. Sadeghizadeh3, M. Shokrgozar2, S. Zeinali2; to the increase in SMN expression as responders or non responders 1Islamic Azad University–Shahre Rey Branch and Science and Research Cam- (to one or more of the drugs) . Moreover, the combination of two of the pus., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pasteur Institute of Iran, Molecular drugs showed no synergistic effect in the responder cases . Despite Medicine Department, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tarbiat Modarres Uni- the similarity of the basal SMN expression in our cells, the results of versity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. treatments that increase SMN expression was very variable, suggest- β-thalassemia disease is caused by absence or reduction of β-globin ing individual response factors . Supported by FIS05-2416, CIBERER chain synthesis. The β-globin gene is controlled by LCR. Gene therapy and Proyect GENAME . using homologous recombination is method of choice for replacing the defective beta-globin gene with the normal one . One of the effective P10.27 therapeutic methods for this disease is gene therapy by lentiviral vec- Oxidative stress damage as early event in the pathogenesis of tors . X-Adrenoleukodystrophy: therapeutic implications The capacity of lentiviral vectors is approximately 9 kb . The transgene A. Pujol1,2, S. Fourcade3,2, J. Lopez-Erauskin3,2, J. Galino3,2, C. Duval3, F. Villar- was designed as a 6 kb construct containing mini LCR and β-globin roya4,5, I. Ferrer6,7, R. Pamplona8, M. Portero-Otín8; gene. HS2, HS3, HS4 segments (mini LCR) and β-globin gene with 5’ 1Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, and 3’ UTR amplified from the genomic DNA from a normal individual Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica by PCR . Each of segment was cloned into pTZ57R/T vector and then de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de Llobregat-Barcelona, Spain, 4Bioquimica sub cloned in pBGGT vector . Finally this construct was subcloned into i Biologia Molecular, and Institut de Biomedicina IBUB, Universitat de Barce- a lenti transfer vector and confirmed by restriction digestion and se- lona, Barcelona, Spain, 5CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y Nutrición, quencing . Transfer vector and three packaging plasmids (Plp1, Plp2, ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 6Institut de Neuropatologia de Bellvitge, Universitat Plp/VSVG) were cotransfected into 293T packaging cell line by the use de Barcelona, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat-Barcelona, Spain, 7CIBERNED, ISCIII, of lipofectamine 2000. Presence of transgene was confirmed in the Barcelona, Spain, 8Departament de Medicina Experimental, Universitat de harvested viruses by RT PCR on extracted RNA from these recombi- Lleida-IRBLLEIDA, Lleida, Spain. nant lentiviruses and also by p24 ELISA test . The titer of lentiviral stock X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a fatal neurodegenera- was determined in a HT1080, K562 cell lines and compared with COS- tive disorder, characterized by progressive cerebral demyelination 7 cell line . This titer, in HT1080 cell line, was higher than COS-7 and (CCALD) or spinal cord neurodegeneration (adrenomyeloneuropathy, K562 . The remained transduced COS-7 colonies were expanded and AMN), adrenal insufficiency and accumulation of very long-chain fatty DNA was extracted . PCR was used to evaluate random integration of acids (VLCFA) in tissues . The disease is caused by mutations in the construct in the genome and compared with homologues recombina- ABCD1 gene, which encodes a peroxisomal transporter that plays tion in this gene transfer technique .EMPAG Plenary Lectures  EMPAG PLENARY LECTURES cancer, although a significant improvement was observed in breast cancer group after counselling . The levels of anxiety and depression EPL1.1 indicated a significant reduction at follow-ups. At tow-weeks follow-up, Recall and interpretation in genetic counselling, after intake and the correct estimation of personal risk for developing hereditary can- non-informative DNA-test results in BRCA1/2: discrepancies, cer, compared to initial estimation pre-counselling, had changed from explanations and consequences 47% to 90% in the intervention and from 45% to 85% in control group . J. Vos1, C. J. Van Asperen1, J. C. Oosterwijk2, E. B. Gomez Garcia3, F. H. The majority (86% in control and 95% in intervention group) intended Menko4, J. M. Collee5, A. M. Stiggelbout6, A. Tibben1; to communicate the genetic information to their relatives . 1Leiden University Medical Center, Center of Human and Clinical Genet- Conclusion: Enhanced information did not improve the participants risk ics, dep. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University Hospital perception . However the intention of informing relatives was elevated . Groningen, dep. of clinical genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Center, dep. of clinical genetics, Maastricht, The Nether- EPL1.3 lands, 4VU University Medical Center, dep. of clinical genetics, Amsterdam, The Determining the genetic status of women newly diagnosed with Netherlands, 5Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, dep. of clinical genetics, breast cancer prior to treatment decisions: An ethical challenge Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 6Leiden University Medical Center, dep. of Medi- E. A. Lobb1,2, N. Hallowell3, K. Barlow-Stewart4, G. Suthers5; cal Decision Making, Leiden, The Netherlands. 1Medical Psychology Research Unit, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Aus- Background The patients’ subjective interpretation of genetic counsel- tralia, 2WA Centre for Cancer & Palliative Care, Curtin University of Technology, ling may be as important as correct understanding . Perth, Australia, 3Public Health Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edin- Methods In study I, 166 cancer patients filled-in a questionnaire after burgh, United Kingdom, 4Centre for Genetics Education, Royal North Shore intake for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer . To date, 31 of them re- Hospital, St Leonards, Australia, 5Familial Cancer Unit, Department of Genetic ceived an inconclusive (no-mutation) DNA-test result and filled-in a Medicine, Children’s Youth & Women’s Health Service, Adelaide, Australia. second questionnaire . In study II, 24 cancer patients were interviewed Background: Ethical issues raised in genetic consultations for com- 1-3 years after receiving an Unclassified Variant-result (i.e. variant-of- mon diseases, for example, confidentiality and the disclosure of ge- uncertain-clinical-significance). netic information from bioethical, legal and user perspectives have Results In study I, although most counselees correctly recalled the been documented . However, less is known about cancer genetics ser- communicated medium heredity and intermediate/high cancer risks, vice providers’ experience of ethical issues that arise in their practice . they interpreted this like pathogenic information . After inconclusive- Aims: This study aimed to document the types of issues practitioners results, counselees correctly recalled the counsellor communicating define as ethically contentious in their practice, with what frequency a non-informative DNA-result with unchanged cancer risks . However, they occur, or how they attempt to resolve them . Method: We under- heredity was recalled as low and interpreted as medium . took semi-structured telephone interviews with 21 genetic counsel- In study II, sixty-seven percent recalled having received a non-infor- lors and 13 clinicians . All interviews were tape-recorded, transcribed mative DNA-result, but 80% interpreted this as pathogenic . verbatim and a thematic analysis was undertaken . Results: BRCA1/2 In both studies, discrepancy between interpretation and recall were mutation testing to tailor the management of newly diagnosed high risk explained by previous interpretations, health history, genetic uncer- women was identified as a future ethical challenge for cancer genet- tainty, denial coping style, autonomy, self-acceptance, low need for ics services. Themes identified included balancing the ethical concept certainty . of “do no harm” with the rights of women to be fully informed prior In both studies, interpretation explained changes in intended and ac- to making treatment decisions; questioning the ability of a woman to tual cancer screening and surgery; in study I, recall explained some of fully comprehend the implications of a positive mutation test on herself these changes . and other family members and managing the increasing client load on Discussion Counselees subjectively interpreted intake information and limited clinic resources . The importance of involving genetic counsel- non-informative DNA-results as being more pathogenic than how they lors in the multi-disciplinary team was emphasised . Clinicians identi- factually recalled counselling sessions . fied fewer barriers to fast tracking BRCA1/2 testing than did genetic Interpretation explained more than recall . Previous interpretations, counsellors . Conclusion: Further understanding of the barriers to the health, and personality explained recall-interpretation discrepancies . management of BRCA1/2 testing in newly diagnosed breast cancer The decrease in recalled/interpreted heredity after inconclusive results patients is needed to guide future cancer genetics practice as clinical is probably due to correction of pathogenic interpretation at intake, testing is likely to transform the direction, priorities and processes of and need for certainty . Counsellors and researchers should address cancer genetic services . discrepancies between the counselees’ recall and interpretation of ge- netic information . EPL1.4 impact of using family history on motivation to prevent type 2 EPL1.2 diabetes: an Rct is enhanced information at genetic counselling necessary? A M. Pijl1,2, D. R. M. Timmermans1,2, L. Claassen1,2, A. C. J. W. Janssens3, G. randomised study Nijpels1,4, T. M. Marteau5, L. Henneman1,2; A. Roshanai1, R. Rosenquist2, K. Nordin1; 1Department of Public and Occupational Health, VU University Medical Center, 1Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Depart- Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2EMGO-Institute, VU University Medical Center, ment of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden. Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Public Health, Erasmus Universi- Purpose: The aim of this randomized study was to explore the effect ty Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of General Prac- of receiving enhanced onco-genetic information on probands’ knowl- tice, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Psychology edge, risk perception, distress and communicating information to at- & Genetics Research group, King’s College, London, United Kingdom. risk relatives . Genetic susceptibility testing for many multifactorial diseases is not Patient and methods: A total of 148 subjects (134 female and 14 male) yet warranted . Family history is an important risk factor for many com- who attended genetic counselling at the onco-genetic clinic of Uppsala mon chronic diseases that may be used as a surrogate marker for University Hospital, Sweden (2003-2006) were randomised to informa- genetic susceptibility . The aim of this study was to assess the poten- tion (n=85) or control (n=78) groups . The intervention group received tial effectiveness of communicating familial risk of type 2 diabetes and the videotaped session, a copy of medical records, pedigree and a emphasising preventive options, on intentions to change behaviour to pamphlet about basic genetic concepts . Additionally, they had contact reduce the risk . with a specialist nurse for more discussion and further questions . The Individuals with a positive family history of diabetes were randomised control group received the standard information and the video in as- into two groups: risk information based on general risk factors and sociation with last follow-up eight month later . The knowledge about familial risk (n=54) (intervention group) or risk information based on hereditary cancer, levels of emotional distress and personal risk esti- general risk factors alone (n=54) (control group) . The information was mations were measured at the base line, two weeks and eight months provided during a personal consultation . Intentions to change health later . behaviour, self-reported behaviours (healthy diet; physical activity), Results: The majority had a high level of knowledge about hereditary perceived causes and severity of diabetes, perceived controllability,EMPAG Plenary Lectures  and perceived risk were assessed using questionnaires (at baseline, attitudes of different stakeholders (minors, healthcare professionals, one-week, and three-months follow-up) . parents and relatives of affected individuals) towards genetic testing Compared with those receiving information based on general risk fac- in asymptomatic minors . Fourthly, the attitudes of European clinical tors alone, those receiving information on familial risk perceived he- geneticists were gathered with regard to genetic testing in asymptom- redity to be a more important cause of diabetes (p<0 .01) and greater atic minors . control over developing diabetes (p=0 .001) . Although at one-week fol- Results . Based on this preparatory work a draft guideline and back- low-up there were no differences in intentions to change behaviour ground paper were elaborated . These will be discussed with the Pro- between the two groups, at three-months follow-up the intervention fessional and Public Policy Committee of the European Society of Hu- group reported having eaten more healthily (p=0 .01) . man Genetics . Afterwards, both documents will be sent out for public Familial risk information given in a personal consultation did not result consultation . in fatalism . There was some evidence to suggest it increased healthy behaviour. More research is needed to confirm these findings in a larg- EPL2.2 er sample, using objective measures of health-related behaviours . Public attitudes towards genetic testing for susceptibility to major depression EPL1.5 A. Wilde1, B. Meiser1, P. B. Mitchell1, P. R. Schofield2; illness risk representations and preventive behaviour in people 1University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2Prince of Wales diagnosed with Familial Hypercholesterolemia by DNA-testing Medical Research Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia. L. Claassen1, L. Henneman1, I. Kindt2, T. M. Marteau3, D. R. M. Timmermans1; Introduction: Successful intervention in psychiatry based on genetic 1EMGO-Institute, Department of Public and Occupational Health, VU University risk will depend on public understanding of and attitudes towards the Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Foundation for Tracing Heredi- complexity of risk prediction involving susceptibility genes and gene- tary Hypercholesterolemia (StOEH), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Psychology environment interactions . This study aimed to qualitatively evaluate at- & Genetics Research Group, King’s College, London, United Kingdom. titudes and beliefs regarding the psychosocial implications of genetic The objective of the study was to explore illness risk representations risk for major depression in an urbanised population . and preventive behaviour of people diagnosed with Familial hypercho- Method: Participants (N=36) of focus groups discussed their under- lesterolemia by DNA-testing . standing of the role of genes in psychiatric disorders and their beliefs The study employed a cross-sectional design, using Leventhal’s Com- and attitudes towards genetic testing for risk for major depression . mon Sense Model of self-regulation of health and illness as a frame- Results: More than half the participants reported personal or family work, and was carried out among people recently diagnosed with FH history of psychiatric disorders . The majority (67%) of participants in- by DNA-testing . Illness risk representations and preventive behaviour dicated interest in having a genetic test for susceptibility to major de- of 81 participants were assessed by self-administered postal question- pression, if it was available . After discussion of perceived psychosocial naires . implications, only 42% still favoured having the test . All participants still A majority of participants (75%) perceived their risk of developing CVD interested in genetic risk testing for major depression reported they as lower or equal to that of an average person their age . Although would only do so through trusted medical professionals . Participants in general participants believed strongly in the efficacy of the recom- were unanimously against independent genetic testing via the inter- mended actions, medication was seen as being somewhat more ef- net . fective than a healthy diet and physical activity in reducing the risk of Discussion: Having a family history of psychiatric disorders was a ma- CVD (t (65) = 2 .460, p= .017) . Of hypercholesterolemics, 88% reported jor reason for interest in having a genetic test to determine risk for using cholesterol-lowering drugs as prescribed, whereas only 50% of depression, which participants reported would enable them to be bet- all participants reported following recommendations concerning diet ter prepared. Psychosocial implications influencing change of attitude and physical activity. 70% reported having one or more first-degree included privacy issues and fear of genetic discrimination by insurance relatives with CVD . Participants with more affected family members companies and employers . had higher risk perceptions and were more likely to perceive CVD as Conclusion: The study highlights the importance of public education a permanent condition, consider hereditary as a likely cause of CVD, about psychiatric genetics, potential risks and benefits of genetic test- and report following recommendations concerning diet and physical ing and availability of appropriate support services in association with activity . future genetic risk testing in psychiatry . In conclusion: In general FH screened positives are optimistic about their risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Those with more first- EPL2.3 degree family members affected with CVD are less optimistic about Exploring Psychiatric Genetics through interactive Drama their risk and more likely to adopt a healthy diet or to be physically F. Ticehurst1, B. Williams2, L. Osborn3, P. Gibbins4, J. Davies4; active . 1Wales Gene Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Genetic Interest Group, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Freelance Writer, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Gwent Theatre EPL2.1 Company, Abergavenny, United Kingdom. Genetic testing in asymptomatic minors: social and ethical The Wales Gene Park recently collaborated with the Genetic Inter- issues est Group and Gwent Theatre to develop and produce an interactive P. Borry, K. Dierickx; theatre workshop exploring contemporary developments in human ge- Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. netics for young people from schools and colleges across Wales . The Background . Although various guidelines and position papers have collaboration combined expertise in scientific and social and ethical discussed in the past the ethical aspects of genetic testing in asymp- aspects of genetics, science communication and in developing drama tomatic minors, the European Society of Human Genetics had not en- techniques for education . The main aim of the project was to use an dorsed any statement exclusively focused on this issue . innovative and creative approach to engage young people and encour- Objective . Within the project Eurogentest attention has been devoted age understanding and appreciation of different aspects of a complex to the provision of appropriate counselling to accompany genetic test- area of biomedical science and the associated social and ethical is- ing, the education of patients and professionals, and the ethical, legal sues . The project was funded by a Wellcome Trust Public Engagement and social issues surrounding testing . The focus of the ethics unit was Society Award . oriented towards the study of the ethical issues related to genetic test- Working with a writer, the project team developed a challenging drama ing in minors . centred on a young man’s experience of mental illness . The perfor- Method . Firstly, research has been performed on the existing recom- mance explored questions and issues related to genetics and mental mendations regarding predictive genetic testing in minors and carrier health including those surrounding family relationships, expectations testing, with as main attention to identify areas of agreement and dis- of ‘normality’ and social responsibility . The young people’s participa- agreement . Secondly, the medical-ethical and medical-legal literature tion was task driven and structured to facilitate an intellectually and regarding predictive genetic testing in minors, carrier testing, the po- emotionally stimulating learning experience, requiring them to take an sition of minors and patient rights was studied . Thirdly, a systematic investigatory and mediatory role in the drama . Additional educational literature review has been realized to gather information regarding the resources for use in school extended the learning experience beyondEMPAG Plenary Lectures  the activity itself . EPL3.2 This presentation draws on material produced by participants during Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) and prenatal the development of the project and subsequent performances to illus- diagnosis (PND) for cancer predisposition syndromes: reported trate how aspects of the methodology used within the project sought practices and attitudes of French professionals to engage participants and to facilitate their appreciation complexity of C. M. Julian-Reynier1,2, F. Chabal3, F. Nowak4, T. Frebourg5, D. Lemery6, C. the issues raised . Noguès7, F. Puech8, F. Thepot9, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet10; 1INSERM (UMR912), Marseille, France, 2Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, EPL2.4 France, 3UMR912 INSERM, Marseille, France, 4Institut National du Cancer, Pa- Professional ambivalence: accounts of ethical practice in ris, France, 5University Hospital, Rouen, France, 6University Hospital, Clermont- childhood genetic testing Ferrand, France, 7Regional Cancer Centre, Saint-Cloud, France, 8University M. A. Arribas-Ayllon, S. Sarangi, A. Clarke; Hospital (Jeanne de Flandre Hospital), Lille, France, 9Agence de Biomédecine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Paris, France, 10Institut Curie, Paris, France. Childhood genetic testing raises complex ethical and moral dilemmas PGD and terminations of pregnancy for foetal indications are regis- for both families and professionals . In the family sphere, the role of tered in France but the spontaneous demand experienced by medical communication is a key aspect in the transmission of `genetic respon- professionals in their practice is unknown . sibility’ between adults and children . In the professional sphere, ge- Objectives : to describe the reported demand and acceptability of netic responsibility is an interactional accomplishment emerging from PGD/PND for cancer predisposition syndromes such as observed by competing views over what constitutes the `best interests’ of the child . cancer geneticists and prenatal diagnosis centres . In the present paper we extend our previous research into parental Methods: Mail/postal survey (self-administered questionnaires) among accounts of childhood genetic testing and explore the ethical explana- all French cancer geneticists (N=123) and multi-disciplinary prenatal tions/descriptions of professionals in research interviews . Interviews diagnosis (MPD) teams (N=47) registered by the French regulatory (n=20) were conducted with professional practitioners involved in the biomedicine agency . genetic diagnosis and management of children and their families . We Results: Cancer geneticists (47 y .o , SD=8) and MPD team coordina- first identify four inter-related themes - juxtaposition of parental rights tors (55 y .o, SD=7) answered in 62% and 64% of the cases, respec- vis-à-vis child’s autonomy, elicitation of the child’s autonomy, avoid- tively . Half the cancer geneticists reported a spontaneous demand ance of parental responsibility and acknowledgement of uncertainty from their consultees during the preceding year (50% for PGD, 59% - and then, using Rhetorical Discourse Analysis, examine the range of for PND) . The issue of PGD, had been raised for the same pathologies devices through which ethical explanations are situationally illustrated: as for PND but less frequently . PND was discussed for Familial Ad- contrast, reported speech, constructed dialogue, character and event enomatosis Polyposis (n=57), Retinoblastoma (n=45), NEM1 (n=34), work . An important device for facilitating ethical explanations is the use Breast-Ovarian Cancer (n=20) and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (n=8) . MPD of extreme case scenarios which reconstructs dilemmas as justifica- teams only reported 6 requests for PGD (5 for FAP; 1 for BRCA1) . tions of professional conduct . Our analysis of professional accounts When cancers are likely to occur during early childhood with high suggests that ethical practice is not a simple matter of implementing penetrance, high severity and no effective prevention/treatment, the principles but managing the practical consequences of interactions acceptability of PGD/PND was very high (>80%) . When cancers are with parents and children . We conclude that more attention is needed likely to occur before 50 y .o . but never in childhood and that an effec- to understand the way professional practitioners construct and share tive non deleterious prevention/treatment is available, the acceptability cases as useful illustrations of evidence-based ethical practice . of both interventions was low but much higher for PGD (40%) than for PND (<27%) . EPL3.1 Conclusion: Spontaneous demand for PGD/PND for cancer predis- Patients’ attitudes to the use of preimplantation genetic posing syndromes is already an issue in France . diagnosis for inherited predispositions to bowel cancer A. A. D. Melville, H. E. Musgrave, T. Clancy; EPL3.3 Medical Genetics Research Group and Regional Genetics Service, University motivations for genetic testing among individuals at risk of of Manchester and CMMC NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. hereditary breast-ovarian cancer (HBOc) and Lynch syndromes Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) and Hereditary Non-Polypo- D. Fortuny1, N. Gadea1, B. Graña2, T. Ramón y Cajal3, A. Torres4, J. Brunet2, A. sis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) are dominantly inherited cancer pre- Velasco2, E. Darder5, J. Sánz4, C. López3, J. Balmaña1; disposition syndromes which confer a significantly increased risk of 1Hospital Universatario Vall d’hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 2Medical oncology de- bowel and other cancers . The Human Fertilisation and Embryology partment ICO, Hospital Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain, 3Medical oncology depart- Authority (HFEA) have approved preimplantation genetic diagnosis ment. Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Medical oncology department, (PGD) for FAP and HNPCC in the UK . Semi-structured telephone Hospital Sant Joan, Reus, Spain, 5Medical oncology department ICO, Hospital interviews were used to explore the views of 6 FAP and 8 HNPCC Josep Trueta, Barcelona, Spain. mutation carriers (6 men and 8 women) regarding the use of PGD for Background: Knowing the motivations for genetic testing may help ad- their condition and other scenarios . The general acceptability of the dress pre-test genetic counselling sessions more individually . use of PGD depended on the perceived severity of the condition in Methods: Individuals (n=292) undergoing genetic testing for HBOC question and views about the moral status of the embryo/foetus during and Lynch syndrome who had received genetic counselling were in- development . While both patient groups perceived FAP or HNPCC to cluded in a prospective multicenter study (IMASS) .Individuals com- have a low impact on quality of life, approximately half of the partici- pleted a self-reported questionnaire about demographic and clinical pants accepted the use of PGD for their condition in principle . Fewer information,psychological well-being and motivations about genetic participants however, from both the FAP and HNPCC groups, would testing .Chi-square test was used to compare clinical and demographi- consider personally using PGD for their condition . The importance of cal variables with the main motivation for genetic testing . individual choice around reproductive decision-making was a central Results: Overall,240 individuals (82%) were women,median age= 44y theme although there were concerns about the expansion of PGD into (18-88) .One hundred and eighty-one (62%) had been diagnosed with non-medical trait selection . The main advantage of PGD was seen to cancer,236 (81%) were at risk of HBOC,189 (62%) had children,154 be avoiding termination of pregnancy. Disadvantages identified includ- were probands (65%), and 125 (43%) had the perception of being a ed the emotional and financial costs of undergoing the procedure, and mutation carrier .The three main reasons to undergo genetic testing the relatively low chance of a successful pregnancy . were:to know if their children were at risk in 134 (46%),to know their cancer risk in 90 (31%),and to know if they need more screening prac- tices in 40 (14%) . A greater proportion of individuals >30 y,and those affected by cancer,or having children,or probands reported that knowing if their children were at risk was the main reason to undergo genetic testing (p> 0 .001 in all cases),while individuals <30y,and those non-affected by cancer,not having children,and relatives undergoing testing of aEMPAG Plenary Lectures 0 mutation identified in the family reported knowing their own risk as the have undergone genetic testing, with 75% of those who have received main reason (p<0 .001) . results identified as mutation carriers. At baseline, test takers reported Conclusions: The main motivation reported by individuals undergoing significantly higher levels of distress compared to decliners (Z=-2 .27, genetic testing is to know if their children are at risk .Pre-test genetic p=0.02). Carriers reported significantly reduced depression scores two counselling sessions need to address specific motivations and con- weeks after receipt of a positive result (Z=-2 .25, p=0 .02) . Distress was cerns reported by individuals being tested . relatively uncommon in this familial melanoma cohort, even after re- ceipt of positive genetic test results . EPL3.4 Exploring the influence of the family social network on the EPL4.1 psychological well-being of individuals undergoing genetic Antenatal screening for fetal abnormality - ensuring informed counseling and testing for Lynch syndrome choice for parents D. W. Hadley, S. Ashida, N. R. Kuhn, J. F. Jenkins, C. M. McBride, L. M. Koe- H. Skirton1, O. Barr2, J. Frost3, T. Wells1; hly; 1University of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2University of Ulster, Belfast, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. United Kingdom, 3University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom. Facilitating family communication is an important component of ge- Antenatal screening for fetal abnormalities is available in many Euro- netic counseling . However, little is known about how the information pean countries. Previous research has identified that parental choice obtained through the genetic counseling process is translated and regarding whether to accept screening is limited by lack of information communicated to family members . Furthermore, we do not know the and the attitude of health professionals that the screening is ‘routine’ . effect of family conversations on the cognitive and social outcomes of The aim of this study was to identify the ways in which prospective other family members . parents can be supported to make informed decisions about antenatal The current study focuses on families (240 persons representing 35 screening . unrelated families) known to carry a mutation in a mismatch repair In Phase 1, focus groups were held in 5 UK regions with prospective gene associated with Lynch syndrome . We investigated whether pre- parents (pregnant women and partners) and professionals offering vious family experiences with genetic services and communication screening . Transcribed data were analysed using a grounded theory within the family network, are associated with a decline or increase in approach . In Phase 2, the focus group data were used to develop psychological distress or cancer worry . Dependent variables examined questionnaires . These were completed by prospective parents and included distress, depressive symptoms, and cancer worries . Indepen- relevant health professionals . Data were analysed using descriptive dent variables included 1) time (days) between provision of genetic statistics and cross tabulations . test results to the proband and the provision of genetic counseling to Findings indicate that parents feel overloaded with information at the family members at risk to inherit the mutation and; 2) the generation of start of the pregnancy about a range of topics; this restricts the at- the family member relative to the proband (older, same, or younger) . tention paid to the screening decision . Some midwives were anxious Results indicate an increase in depressive symptoms (p = .06) and when parents declined screening, due to fear of litigation . Appropriate cancer worry (p=.01) with increasing time from the probands’ notifica- information is frequently unavailable to those whose first language is tion . Family members in the same generation (p < .01) as the proband not English or who are illiterate . Experience of the personal lives of or previous generation (p<.01) experienced a significant increase in people with disabilities influenced parents and midwives in their atti- distress with increasing time from the probands’ notification; however, tudes to screening . Parents were keen to have additional resources in those in younger generations experienced a significant decrease in this area . Resources focussed on the lives of affected persons and a distress (p= .03) . decision-making tool for parents may help to ensure informed choice in Gaining insight about social influence processes will provide critical antenatal screening . This information needs to be available in a com- information for developing innovative genetic and genomic-based edu- prehensible form for all parents . cation & counseling programs that target families . EPL4.2 EPL3.5 the role of attitudinal ambivalence towards Down’s syndrome in Genetic counselling and testing for melanoma risk in Australia: prenatal testing decisions A prospective study of uptake and psychological implications L. D. Bryant1, J. M. Green2, J. Hewison1; N. A. Kasparian1,2, B. Meiser3,2, P. N. Butow4, J. M. Simpson5, G. J. Mann6; 1Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United King- 1School of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New South Wales, dom, 2Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York, United King- Kensington, Australia, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales dom. Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 3Prince of Wales Clinical School, University There is a growing consensus that decisions about prenatal testing of New South Wales, Kensington, Australia, 4Medical Psychology Research should reflect the individual’s attitudes and values: but what if the Unit, School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 5School individual’s attitudes are ambivalent? This study investigated the po- of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 6Westmead Institute tential relationships between attitudinal ambivalence towards Down’s for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium Institute, syndrome and testing and termination decisions . Westmead, Australia. Data was collected from women attending an antenatal clinic in the UK . This prospective study is one of the first worldwide to examine uptake Using a questionnaire distributed at the booking appointment, attitudes and implications of genetic testing for melanoma risk amongst indi- towards using testing and termination for Down’s syndrome were col- viduals with a strong family history of melanoma . Families comprising lected along with attitudes and attitudinal ambivalence towards Down’s three or more relatives with a confirmed melanoma diagnosis were syndrome itself . Screening uptake was obtained from patient records . ascertained via the Westmead Institute for Cancer Research/Univer- Overall, attitudes and attitudinal ambivalence towards Down’s syn- sity of Sydney centre of the Genetic Epidemiology of Melanoma Study . drome were not good predictors of screening behaviour and women Eligibility criteria included identification of a family-specific mutation in with high levels of ambivalence were not less likely to use prenatal the CDKN2A gene via the research protocol, and no previous genetic screening . However, women who were unsure about amniocentesis testing for clinical purposes . A series of mailed, self-report question- and termination were more likely to hold ambivalent attitudes towards naires were used to collect data at: notification of genetic test avail- Down’s syndrome than were women who gave a definite yes/no re- ability (January 2005), and two weeks and 12 months after receipt of sponse . In particular, a higher level of ambivalence about the effect genetic test results (for ‘test takers’), or 12 months after notification of a child with Down’s syndrome on parental quality of life predicted a (for ‘test decliners’) . One-hundred twenty-one eligible individuals (48% ‘don’t know’ response . Ambivalence correlated positively with higher male) returned baseline questionnaires (response rate of 72%) . At levels of religiosity and was associated with a desire to make decisions baseline, mean psychological distress scores were relatively low . Fac- in partnership with a significant other. tors associated with distress included: personal history of melanoma Psychological research shows that ambivalent individuals are more (OR=3 .37, p=0 .03), perceiving greater family-related consequences of likely to be influenced by factors external to their own attitudes, such melanoma (OR=2 .52, p<0 .0001), and displaying a tendency to monitor as the perceived opinions of others. The findings from this study sug- for risk-relevant information (OR=3 .12, p=0 .01) . So far, 25 participants gest that holding ambivalent attitudes towards Down’s syndrome mayEMPAG Plenary Lectures  have implications for the facilitation of ‘autonomous’ informed choice EPL4.5 in the testing context . „it‘s something i need to consider“: women‘s decisions about population carrier screening for fragile X syndrome EPL4.3 A. D. Archibald1,2, A. M. Jaques1, S. Wake3, S. A. Metcalfe1,2; ‘Balance’ is in the eye of the beholder: perceptions of balanced 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of information to support informed choices via AnsWeR (Antenatal Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, screening Web Resource) Australia. S. Ahmed, L. D. Bryant, J. Hewison; Population carrier screening for fragile X syndrome (FXS) identifies University of Leeds, LEEDS, United Kingdom. carriers, and provides information for reproductive decision making . Objectives: AnSWeR (Antenatal Screening Web Resource), designed Few studies have explored women’s decisions when offered carrier to support informed choices in prenatal testing, aims to provide bal- testing for FXS through a population screening program . This study anced information about disability from the perspective of disabled is an in-depth exploration of factors that influenced women’s choice people and their families . Following our independent evaluation of regarding the carrier test . AnSWeR, this paper presents participants’ evaluation of AnSWeR in In Victoria, Australia a pilot study was conducted offering carrier screen- terms of providing balanced information . Setting: U .K . Method: Eight ing for FXS to women in a pre-conception setting . Women completed a focus groups with health professionals, participants from the general questionnaire, were offered screening, and completed a second ques- population, and parents with personal experience of the conditions . tionnaire one month later or after receiving their result . A selection of Questionnaires were completed by parents of newborns, people with women then participated in follow-up interviews . spina-bifida or cystic fibrosis, and fifteen professionals with special ex- 318 women participated in the study and 20% of women chose test- pertise in this area . Findings: Information about experiences of living ing revealing one pre-mutation carrier and three grey zone results . 31 with the tested-for conditions and terminating affected pregnancies was women were interviewed: 13 who chose to be tested, including three considered important to support informed decisions . However, partici- with positive results (two grey-zones, one pre-mutation); and 18 who pants differed in their perceptions of whether the information about the chose not to be tested . tested-for conditions was balanced . For example, participants believed Factors that influenced test choice included: the woman’s perception that photographs of people with the tested-for conditions introduced of the benefits of screening, her life stage and whether she had prior biases - both positive and negative . Within the context of supporting experience with health related issues . No women who were tested re- informed choice, participants also talked about the significance of gretted their decision and it was clear that providing women with time providing information about women’s experiences of terminating af- aided the decision making process . Overall women were supportive of fected pregnancies. Conclusion: This study highlights the difficulty of population carrier screening for FXS in a pre-conception setting . designing ‘balanced’ information about tested-for conditions and a lack This is the first attitudinal study to include women who declined of methodology for doing so . We conclude that AnSWeR provides a screening as well as those who accepted . These results provide valu- counterbalance to other websites that focus on more medical aspects able insight into factors that influenced women’s decisions regarding of disability . Its aim to provide ‘balanced’ information would be aided testing and will help inform future development of carrier screening by increasing the number and range of case studies available on the programs . website, for both family members and individuals living with the tested- for conditions, and women terminating affected pregnancies . EPL5.1 Verification of consumers’ experiences and perceptions of EPL4.4 genetic discrimination and its impact on utilisation of genetic testing times, challenging choices; women, prenatal testing and testing genetic counselling K. K. Barlow-Stewart1, S. Taylor2, S. Treloar3, M. Stranger4,5, M. Otlowski4,5; J. M. Hodgson1, M. A. R. Sahhar1,2, L. H. Gillam1,3, S. A. Metcalfe1,3; 1The Centre for Genetics Education, Sydney, Australia, 2Department of Social 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Genetic Health Work and Human Services, Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, Aus- Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 3University of Melbourne, Melbourne, tralia, 3Centre for Military and Veterans’ Health, The University of Queensland, Australia. Brisbane, Australia, 4Centre for Law and Genetics, University of Tasmania, Although prenatal testing is increasingly considered to be a ‘routine’ Hobart, Australia, 5School of Law, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia. part of many women’s pregnancy experience it is unclear how women A major component of the Australian Genetic Discrimination Project experience this process or whether they are making informed deci- 2002-5 was to undertake a systematic process of verification of con- sions to participate . Genetic counselling exists to support women at sumer accounts of alleged genetic discrimination, defined as the dif- this time but there is a dearth of research exploring either prenatal ferential treatment of an asymptomatic person on the basis of their genetic counselling process or women’s experiences . This research real or assumed genotype or genetic characteristics . Asymptomatic in- aimed to:- dividuals reporting incidents in a survey conducted through Australian •explore the experiences of women who received an increased result clinical genetics services 1998-2003 were recruited for the subsequent from a prenatal screening test, attended genetic counselling and made verification process. Others were recruited through genetics support a decision about diagnostic prenatal testing groups and referrals from clinical genetics professionals. Verification of •examine, in detail, the process of prenatal genetic counselling alleged incidents of genetic discrimination was determined, with con- Women attending genetic counselling following an increased risk re- sent, through interview, document analysis and, where appropriate, sult from a screening test were invited to participate . Two data sets direct contact with the third party involved . Reported incidents of nega- were obtained:- tive treatment in life insurance, employment, and health service do- 1 . 21 genetic counselling sessions were audiotaped, transcribed and mains met criteria for verification in 27/99 instances. Verification was analysed using content and discourse analysis (Data set 1) possible in 14 cases (7 breast and ovarian cancer; 3 HNPCC; 3 Hun- 2 . 15 semi-structured follow up interviews with women from Data set 1 tington disease and one each of hereditary haemochromatosis and were audiotaped, transcribed and analysed thematically (Data set 2) polycystic kidney disease) . All involved life insurance products . Issues Rigorous qualitative research methodologies produced rich insights included fear of genetic discrimination that impacted upon uptake and into counselling process and evocative accounts of women’s experi- access to genetic testing for relatives; overly broad exclusion clauses; ences . Most women reported high levels of distress and decisional inability to increase policy amount; denial of insurance; coercion to conflict and many women did not make an informed choice to partici- access genetic test results and lack of recognition of prophylactic and pate in either screening or diagnostic testing. Research findings and screening strategies in underwriting decisions. In the course of verifi- theoretical literature are used to demonstrate that facilitating informed cation, the decision-making process underpinning the life insurance choices is an ethically appropriate model for prenatal genetic counsel- underwriting was elucidated and reversal of adverse decisions follow- ling practice. A contemporary model for practice, specifically address- ing challenges to the company or provision of expert clinical genetics ing women’s distress and actively encouraging clients to deliberate advice was confirmed. Verification is a potentially fruitful but a complex fully, is proposed and critiqued . and challenging process .EMPAG Plenary Lectures  EPL5.2 EPL5.4 the multiplex initiative: a study to determine who seeks free Privatising susceptibility to disease: the need for regulation? multiplex genetic susceptibility testing among a healthy A. J. Clarke1, I. Frayling2, M. Arribas-Ayllon1, S. Sarangi1; population of American adults 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University Hospital of Wales, Car- C. M. McBride1, S. Hensley-Alford2, R. Reid3, E. Larson3, A. D. Baxevanis1, L. diff, United Kingdom. C. Brody1; As genetic technologies continue to reach new areas of healthcare, 1National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, there are concerns whether genetic services might be compromised Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, United by consumer-oriented practices, especially promoted via TV or the States, 3Group Health Cooperative, Seattle, WA, United States. internet . The marketing of genetic testing as capable of shaping life- Genetic tests designed to provide individuals estimates of their dis- styles through the forecasting of future health may promise consum- ease risk are now commercially available . In theory, this information ers more than the science can deliver, emphasising the supposed can be used to guide risk reduction behaviors . Currently, little is known ‘benefits of knowing’ while downplaying the potential hazards. From about who might avail themselves of such testing and how they would the professionals’ point of view, the marketing of commercial genetic interpret their test results . To understand the impact of such testing, we services may misrepresent the complexity and uncertainty of genetic developed a prototype genetic test including 15 polymorphisms asso- risk, obscuring reality with the fog of marketing . To illustrate our point, ciated with increased risk for eight common conditions . Healthy adults we consider a recent reality-based TV programme, broadcast in the ages 24-40 receiving care at a large managed-care organization are UK, that documented the experiences of four ‘celebrities’ who con- offered testing via Web-based information modules (http://multiplex . sented to testing in a private London-based practice . Our analysis of nih .gov) . Individuals opting for testing receive test results by mail, with the programme’s transcript will show how interactions with the clients telephone follow-up from a research educator; they are contacted departed from established protocols of professional practice in several three months after receiving test results for a final telephone survey. ways: overestimating clinical validity, underestimating the clinical un- Our study design enables us to evaluate approaches that facilitate de- certainty and the possibility of problems from test results, and practic- cision making about genetic tests, assess methods for communicat- ing inappropriately directive (`promotional’) counselling . How should ing test results, and explore whether health system factors influence the genetics services community in Europe respond to such develop- health outcomes . Baseline surveys have been completed on ~1600 ments? Our findings emphasise the already well recognised need for individuals. For most, this is their first experience with clinical research. the development of regulatory and legislative approaches to monitor The majority of those completing the baseline survey are high school and/or prevent such practices . We consider several strategies for es- graduates, married, self-report being in excellent or good health, and tablishing standards of professional practice . One important concern are relatively familiar with their family’s health history . So far, 472 indi- is to ensure that too heavy-handed an approach does not inhibit the viduals visited the Web site to consider testing; 272 have decided to appropriate development of genetic services offered in good faith by undergo testing . Factors regarding reviewing information about testing non-specialist health professionals . on the Web and ultimate uptake of testing will be presented . Early results are already providing insight regarding how healthy individuals EPL5.5 might respond to genetic susceptibility testing . Gene patents and diagnostics: numbers don’t count N. Berthels1,2, B. Verbeure1, E. van Zimmeren1, G. Van Overwalle1, G. Mat- EPL5.3 thijs2; Willingness for blood donation for genomic studies: a 1Centre for Intellectual Property Rights, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center comparative study between scientists and the public for Human Genetics, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium. K. Muto1, A. Nagai2, A. Tamakoshi3, I. Ishiyama2, K. Kato4, Z. Yamagata2; Gene patenting is allegedly abundant and hampering access to ge- 1The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 2Yamanashi University, Yamanashi, netic testing . This was given proof when Myriad Genetics exerted its Japan, 3Aichi Medical University, Aichi, Japan, 4Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. exclusive rights to BRCA1/2 . The case highlighted problems of patent- Objectives: To compare attitudes between scientists and the public in ing and licensing of genes and methods for genetic diagnosis, and Japan towards human genomic research and to seek new approaches laboratories’ ignorance to patents, infringement, and risk for being liti- for better science communication, we conducted questionnaire sur- gated . In practice, laboratories usually lack legal expertise to engage veys and focused group interviews . in patent analysis and licensing negotiations . Patent abundance could Methods: Self-reporting questionnaires were sent by post to 4,257 create ‘patent thickets’, e .g . when many patents owned by several pat- scientists regarding molecular biology and human genetics/ genom- ent owners relate to a single test, and complicate licensing . ics via two academic societies in Japan . They were asked about their We aim at elucidating the patent situation in genetic diagnostics . De- value and risk cognition towards genome sciences, social norms for tailed patent landscape analyses of triplet repeat expansion diseases accountability and responsibility . We compared these results with the - Fragile X, Huntington disease, spinocerebellar ataxia, Friedreich data we obtained from 2,171 citizens in 2005 . ataxia, myotonic dystrophy, Kennedy disease - show patents’ valid- Results: A total of 1,494 completed our questionnaire (586 men and ity in time and territory, scope of protection, and, where possible, li- 157 women) . The total response rate was 35 .1% . Both groups support censing mode. Both in Europe and US, disease-specific patents are genome sciences very positively . The main difference was observed granted, and applications under examination . Moreover, the patent on willingness of blood donation for genomic research . 74 .8 % of the situation of these diseases is complicated by ‘generic’ patents relating scientist group responded that they were willing to donate for genomic to their shared etiology . Broad in scope, these patents could also be research regarding healthcare, while 39 .3% of the citizen group did . overlooked in disease-specific patent searches because of their non- Regarding the conditions for donation, the scientist group responded disease-specific nature. that they would donate their blood when they could agree the research In Europe gene patenting seems less abundant than proclaimed, purpose and significance (87.3%). On the other hands, most of the citi- in contrast to the US where patent thickets, and overlapping patent zen group responded that they would donate if researchers disclosed scope, are observed . Gene patent families not always have a Euro- personal results (78 .5%) . From the FGI data to students, their under- pean equivalent, or the European patent has lapsed in most, or all, standings of “breach of personal information” and “disclosure of per- countries . Despite low gene patent numbers in Europe as observed in sonal analyzed data” were obscure and were influenced by the media this study, caution should remain towards broad patents and potential which criticized science . Discussion: We need to start discussions on restrictive licensing conditions . the process of disclosure of personal analyzed data to each research participant for future human genomic research . EPL6.1 Psychosocial impact of X-linked carrier status: Experiences of Female Adrenoleukodystrophy carriers J. Bowen1, R. Mountford2, L. Kerzin-Storrar3; 1Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Liverpool Women’s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 3Regional GeneticEMPAG Plenary Lectures  Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, CMMC NHS Trust and Univer- ers and involved semi-structured interviews with fourteen adolescents sity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (eight males and six females) aged 16-20 years . Analysis of the inter- We report the results of a qualitative study of the psychosocial impact view transcripts was performed using the constant comparative meth- of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) on female carriers . ALD is an X-linked odology . metabolic disorder with extreme variability in phenotype, including the Overall, both male and female participants reported that they had risk of symptoms in female heterozygotes . Carrier testing based on coped well with being affected by NF1, and although some identified biochemical assay is unreliable, but accurate mutation based testing that they felt ‘isolated’ or ‘different’ to others, this had usually not pre- has been available in the UK since 1999 . vented them from ‘getting on’ with life . Some of the older participants Eighteen women with a confirmed ALD gene mutation were inter- felt they had learned to cope with NF1 better over time, although male viewed, and the transcripts analysed using the constant comparison participants frequently commented upon uncertainties regarding future method . The impact of the test result often correlated with the timing of progression . the test, with less impact described by those who had requested testing The main areas of importance to both male and female participants in the mid teens, before reproduction, and more traumatic responses were the challenges of talking to others about NF1, impact on educa- recalled by women who had testing at the same time as other emo- tion, developing friendships, relationships with parents, reproductive tional events, such as pregnancy . For the majority of women, carrier issues and concerns about the future . Cosmetic aspects of NF1 and status had an ongoing impact, including feeling different and frequent employment concerns appeared more important to female partici- intrusive thoughts . Women who had female relatives with symptoms, pants . but were asymptomatic themselves, expressed anxiety about the risk While further studies are required to confirm and expand these initial of symptoms developing, against a perceived lack of medical under- findings, this study adds insight into the experiences and views of af- standing and treatment options . fected young people . These findings add to the broader literature on psychosocial impact of X-linked carrier status, and contribute new evidence that the implica- EPL6.4 tions for female carriers extend beyond reproduction . Genetic counsel- Quality of life in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutation carriers ling should include discussion of the potential impact on self-image as I. Christiaans1, I. M. van Langen1, E. Birnie2, G. J. Bonsel2, A. A. M. Wilde3, E. well as living with the uncertainty of late onset manifestations in an M. A. Smets1,4; increasing number of X-linked conditions where this is an issue . 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Health Policy and Management, Erasmus Medical EPL6.2 Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Academic the marital relationship and psychological wellbeing in patients Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Psy- with myotonic Dystrophy chology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. R. Timman1, A. Rotteveel2, A. Wintzen1, A. Tibben2; Background: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common au- 1Neurology, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, tosomal dominant heart disease associated with heart failure and The Netherlands. sudden cardiac death (SCD) . Quality of life (QoL) was found to be Introduction: Myotonic dystrophy (MD) is characterised by progressive impaired in symptomatic HCM patients but has never been assessed muscular weakness and myotonia . Other organs are involved as well, in mutation carriers, with or without manifest HCM . including the brain, implying, among others, mental slowness and lack Methods: From approached HCM mutation carriers, 89% (n=212) of initiative, and causing problems in daily life both for patients and completed a questionnaire . QoL was assessed using the Short Form their spouses . Some couples seem to deal with these problems satis- 36 Health Survey (SF-36) and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression factorily while others experience great trouble . Scale (HADS) and compared with reported QoL-data of HCM patients Objectives: to describe the relationship of severity of MD, marital sat- and the general Dutch population . Demographic, clinical and illness isfaction and psychological well-being in MD-patients and their part- perception related variables were evaluated as predictors of QoL . ners . Results: HCM carriers’ QoL did not differ from the Dutch population . Methods: 69 MD-couples were interviewed regarding the influence of Carriers with HCM had lower QoL scores than carriers without HCM, MD on their marital relationship, and they filled out questionnaires on but higher scores than previously reported in HCM patients . Surpris- severity of MD, anxiety and depression (HADS), hopelessness (BHS), ingly, carriers without HCM scored significantly better than the gen- and general psychological health (GHQ-12) . eral population on several QoL subscales . Best predictors of impaired Results: For patients, the need for help was associated with a worse physical QoL were: having symptoms (β=5.4, p=0.001) and stronger view on the future, a worse general well-being, more anxiety and more belief in serious consequences (β=4.2, p<0.001); predictors of impaired depression . For their partners, a lack of initiative was associated with mental QoL were: stronger emotional reactions (β=2.0, p=0.032) and a worse general well-being and more anxiety . Marital satisfaction was higher perceived risk of symptoms (β=0.7, p=0.034). Important pre- associated with a better view on the future for patients, and a better dictors of anxiety were: female gender (β=1.3, p=0.008) and stronger general well being, less anxiety and less depression in partners . It is emotional reactions (β=1.2, p=0.002). Stronger belief in serious conse- remarkable that no less than 40 % of the patients and, particularly, quences (β=0.9, p=0.004) and perceived risk of SCD (β=0.3, p=0.002) female partners had BHS scores suggestive of clinically relevant de- predicted depression . pression . Conclusions: HCM carriers’ QoL is comparable to QoL reported in the Conclusion: Severity of MD places a heavy burden on patients and, Dutch population. Presence of manifest HCM influences QoL in carri- especially, on female partners . Marital satisfaction is a strong predictor ers, but other variables, mainly illness perception related, are stronger of a better well-being, both for patients and partners, but more so for predictors of QoL . the latter . EPL6.5 EPL6.3 Developing a cancer genetic-specific measure of coping Living with NF1: the persectives of young people C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, H. Jones1, K. Brain1, K. Hood3, A. Murray4; K. F. May1, R. A. Collier2, L. Kerzin-Storrar3; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 1West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service, Birmingham, United King- United Kingdom, 2Nursing, Health and Social Care Research Centre; Cardiff dom, 2Nottingham Regional Clinical Genetics Service, Nottingham, United King- University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Health Sciences Research; dom, 3North West Regional Genetics Service, Manchester, United Kingdom. Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Uni- Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a genetic condition of variable phe- versity Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom. notype and progression, with several features (including learning dif- Background Generic measures of coping fail to capture the process ficulties and cosmetic effects) which may occur during childhood and of undergoing a specific health process such as cancer genetic risk adolescence . Previous psychosocial research on the effects on young assessment . A coping matrix has been developed to provide greater people has largely been based on reports from parents or retrospec- specificity of measurement, by breaking the risk assessment process tive reports of affected adults on their childhoods . into a number of specific stressors, and identifying the coping efforts This qualitative, exploratory study was conducted by two research- used in response to each stressor .EMPAG Workshops  Methods The matrix measures 11 recognised stressors and 8 specific 10Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. coping strategies for individuals undergoing cancer genetic risk as- The EuroGentest network is a 5 year collaboration between many Eu- sessment, identified through previous research. The matrix was pilot- ropean experts, the aim of the which is to harmonise and standardise ed within a psychological questionnaire as part of a randomised trial of genetic testing in Europe . In Unit 3, counselling issues have been the a coping intervention (CARIAD) . focus . Recommendations have been made about the need for certain Findings Preliminary analyses revealed that 134 of the 139 respon- types of genetic testing (e .g . prenatal, predictive) to be accompanied dents completed the matrix, with the current data reported from the by appropriate genetic counselling, as well as psychosocial support in first 50 participants. Of the three most frequently endorsed stressors, some instances, to safeguard those being tested . However, if genetic 60% of respondents were quite a bit/very worried about how family healthcare is to be evaluated or audited, appropriate standards and members would react if found to be at increased risk, and primarily measurable outcomes need to be defined. made use of social support; 54% were quite a bit/very worried about Assessing the outcomes of genetic counselling has long been a chal- how they would cope if found to be at increased risk and primarily lenge to those in the field. Many outcomes (e.g. altered sense of con- coped through positive appraisal; and 48% were quite a bit/very wor- trol, peace of mind, ability to plan for the future) are difficult to mea- ried about having to wait to find out their own risk and coped mainly sure . In addition, the structure of health services differs greatly across through acceptance . European countries . The Expert Group of Unit 3 has devised an as- Discussion Participants reacted in different ways to different stressors, sessment tool, setting standards and potential measurable outcomes although emotion-focused strategies were the most common overall . for genetic counselling . The standards address aspects of the service The completion rates for the matrix and specificity of responses pro- including access to peer support and continuing professional educa- vided suggests this coping matrix may be an acceptable measurement tion, supervision of junior staff, waiting times, physical clinical environ- tool . Further data collection and validation is ongoing . ment and communication with counsellees . A set of measures that can be applied across different systems of healthcare has been drafted . EMPAG WORKSHOPS In this workshop, we will present work already undertaken, but the main aim will be to engender discussion and to use the feedback and EW1.1 ideas generated to further develop a set of assessment tools that will talking about disability in prenatal genetic counselling be applicable to genetic counselling services in the European context . sessions: identifying tensions and developing strategies J. M. Hodgson1, J. Weil2; EW3.1 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Workshop: Genetic counseling and predictive testing: A California, San Francisco, CA, United States. dynamic perspective To facilitate informed decision-making in prenatal genetic counselling A. Tibben1,2, L. Hoffman3; it is essential that counselees and counsellors engage in a process 1Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medi- that provides: cal Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Department of Oncology, a) relevant information concerning the nature of genetic conditions Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. b) an opportunity for counselees to consider parenting a child with a Genetic counseling aims to allow counselees to make informed deci- disability sions and act accordingly . In this workshop we wish to explore how This workshop will provide an opportunity for participants to reflect on genetic counseling and the procedure of predictive testing can ben- the sensitivities inherent in such discussions and participate in devel- efit from both psychodynamic and family therapy theory and practice. oping strategies for best practice in addressing these complex issues . First, psychodynamic theory and its application in genetic counseling Academic literature and an ethical analysis of the goals of prenatal will be clarified using four models: the developmental, object-relation- genetic counselling will be presented to demonstrate that facilitation of ship, the self-psychology and the drive model . Second the relevance informed decision-making is an ethically appropriate goal of prenatal of and application of structural family therapy theory will be described . genetic counselling . Data from an Australian research project and the Third, elaboration of two clinical cases will show the usefulness of results of an interactive workshop at the 2007 NSGC Convention will these theories . Finally, we will explore the requirements of training and provide further evidence of the need for more effective communication education, in both psychodynamic and structural family theory and about disability in prenatal genetic counselling and identify complexi- practice, in genetic counseling . Participants are invited to bring their ties and impediments involved in doing so . Preliminary suggestions for own cases . addressing these issues will be presented . A small group format will then be used in which participants will discuss EW4.1 and reflect on their experiences of communicating about disability, Analysing the social dimensions of coping in families: a identify specific tensions and concerns associated with such dialogue, workshop on presenting the results in clinical practice and develop strategies to promote effective and ethically appropriate H. G. Van Spijker, T. Brouwer; discourse between counselees and counsellors . Written outlines from Medical Genetics University Medical Centre, 3508 CA Utrecht, The Nether- the groups will be used to develop a preliminary summary and synthe- lands. sis, with further participant discussion . It is anticipated that this work- Coping is commonly viewed as an individual stress response, but it shop will provide valuable information that can be complemented by has also a social dimension . How do people experience stress in so- input from consumer groups and other stakeholders . cial groups, like families? How do they engage together in actions to deal with a stressor, like a genetic disease? In clinical practice, obtain- EW2.1 ing a family history is an essential skill for genetic counsellors . It pro- Assessing Quality of counselling in the context of Genetic vides a basis for making a diagnosis, determining risk, and assessing testing Workshop the needs for patient education and psychosocial support . Valuable H. Skirton1, H. Kaariainen2, E. Rantanen3, M. Hietala3, J. Sequeiros4, U. Krist- psychosocial information can be obtained in parallel with medical-ge- offersson5, L. Kerzin-Storrar6, A. Tibben7, G. Evers-Keibooms8, A. Faucett9, A. netic information . The family pedigree however does not show data on Clarke10; social interactions within the family, although ‘the process [of gathering 1Faculty of Health and Social Work, University of Plymouth, Taunton, United family data] frequently induces a thoughtful frame of mind that is both Kingdom, 2National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of inward- and outward-looking regarding family members and family dy- Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 4IBMC, University of namics’ . (Weil, Psychosocial genetic counseling, 2000) . Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, In this workshop, we start with an introduction of a conceptual model Lund, Sweden, 6Regional Genetics Service & Medical Genetics Research on social dimensions of coping, illustrated by data from a family ques- Group, CMMC & University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Cen- tionnaire we used in a study on coping strategies . Next, we present tre for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, some tools by which the information about social interactions within a The Netherlands, 8Centre for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, family visually and conceptually can be organized . These tools can be Belgium, 9Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, helpful in analysing the dynamics of a family: kin and nonkin relation- ships, communication patterns, social roles and messages . In this wayEMPAG Posters  insight is gained into the processes within the nuclear and blended ics Team & Cancer Genetics Unit, Institute of Cancer Research/Royal Marsden family and the history of the extended family . This insight can be useful NHS Foundation Trust, London/Sutton, United Kingdom, 3Medical Genetics in getting a process of change going in the way counselees cope with Research Group and Regional Genetics Service, University of Manchester and the genetic information . Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s University Hospitals NHS Trust, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4IVF Hammersmith, Queen EMPAG POSTERS Charlotte’s and Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Purpose: Mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes predispose indi- EP01. Reproductive issues in genetics viduals to breast, ovarian, prostate and other cancers, generally from the mid-third decade onwards . Penetrance is not complete, and op- EP01.01 tions for substantial risk reduction are available . A subset of people cite How can prenatal genetic counseling be conducted in a country reproductive decision-making as a motivation for undergoing predic- where abortion is not considered as women’s right? tive testing, but very little is known about how BRCA status impacts on C. Tamura; these decisions . With the recent (2006) decision by the HFEA to grant Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan. licences for pre-implantation genetic diagnosis for late onset cancer Abortion in Japan is primarily illegal with the exception of special rea- predisposition, this ongoing study exploring reproductive behaviour sons, such as maternal health threats, financial difficulties, etc. Fetal and attitudes to prenatal testing and PGD is timely . problems are not included in these exceptions . If women want abortion, Method: A qualitative approach using semi-structured, in depth in- they have to ask permission from doctors and partners . When prenatal terviews, analysed using interpretative phenomenological analysis . diagnosis revealed fetal problems, doctors use a financial reason as We aim to recruit up to 40 women and men who have had a posi- an excuse to allow abortion . In this way, prenatal diagnosis and selec- tive BRCA1/2 predictive genetic test during the preceding 5 years, tive abortion is available . About one percent of all pregnant women between the ages of 18 and 45, who did not have children at the time undergo amniocentesis . Professional societies established guidelines they were tested . for prenatal diagnosis, and state that it can be conducted only to test Results: Data will be presented from analysis of interviews completed childhood-onset severe conditions . If women want prenatal diagnosis, to date . Preliminary analysis indicates that BRCA status does affect doctors, often clinical geneticists, have to make ethically sound judg- reproductive decision making in a variety of ways, including timing of ment, and will tell women whether or not they can undergo testing . having children and number of children planned . BRCA status is also Although genetics societies have certified some non-MD genetic coun- taken into account in partner-relationship building . Prenatal testing, selors recently, genetic counseling in Japan is supposed to be pro- either pre- or post- implantation would not be considered by interview- vided by clinical geneticists, as they have done for over thirty years . ees personally, although they would not object to use by other BRCA And, clinical geneticists are regarded as authorities who make ethical carriers . judgment on prenatal diagnosis and selective abortion . Thus, genetic counseling in Japan seems to be a place where clients need to make EP01.04 an inquiry to ask permission to undergo prenatal diagnosis, and ge- Attitudes of young women with cystic fibrosis to pregnancy and neticists sometimes try to convince women not to undergo testing, or motherhood sometimes give clients permission to do it . S. J. Kenwrick1, E. Chapman2; Appropriate prenatal genetic counseling approach in Japan should 1Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Papworth Hospital, be considered, but, it is difficult because those who are regarded as Cambridge, United Kingdom. genetic counseling providers believe that their current practice is an Over the past two decades, improvements in treatment have resulted appropriate way of genetic counseling in Japan . in most patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) reaching adulthood. Conse- quently, more affected individuals are becoming parents . Pregnancy is EP01.02 not considered dangerous for women with mild disease and good lung PGD for BRcA - a novel clinical experience function, but health and survival may be compromised by pancreatic M. Sagi, A. Eilat, N. Weinberg N, M. Werner, E. Girsh, Y. Siminovsky, E. Aizen- insufficiency and poor lung function. Clearly, careful counselling is re- man, D. Abeliovich, T. Peretz, A. Simon, N. Laufer; quired to discuss the risks of having an affected child, health risks of Hadassah University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. pregnancy as well as how to cope with illness while raising a family . The option of offering PGD for BRCA1/2 to carriers who are of re- The purpose of this pilot study was to explore psychosocial issues con- productive age was recently discussed in the literature . This raises cerning pregnancy and motherhood among young women with cystic medical, psychological and ethical dilemmas . Our cancer-genetic fibrosis, in order to inform reproductive counselling. Semi-structured counseling team started recently to discuss this option with young car- interviews were conducted for five women with CF, aged between 20 riers . Six women, 4 of them carrying a mutation in BRCA1 and 2 in and 25, and transcripts subjected to qualitative, thematic analysis . BRCA2, applied for further genetic and reproductive counseling in our Emergent themes highlight a wide variety of issues for these women PGD clinic . Four of these carriers were healthy but had at least one centred around; desire for a family, health risks, relationships and com- 1st degree relative with breast cancer (BC), and 2 were 4 years post munication with others, difficulties in motherhood and the prospect of a BC diagnosis . All women needed IVF because of coexisting infertil- child with CF . The results show that young women with CF may have ity . After counseling, 4 women declined the option (including the two varying attitudes towards pregnancy and motherhood, depending in BC survivors who eventually conceived naturally) and 2 underwent the part on their current health, their upbringing, professional opinion and PGD procedure. One of them conceived in her first treatment attempt. social support available . Participants with a strong desire to have chil- In this case, 8 embryos with 7 or more cells were biopsied . The blas- dren viewed this as a natural progression and described strategies to tomeres were analysed, using PCR for the BRCA2-6174delT mutation cope with potential health problems . The study also highlights a num- together with linked polymorphic microsatellites . Four embryos were ber of measures that may help in counselling these women, including conclusively diagnosed as BRCA2 wt, 2 of these were transferred, access to the experience of mothers with CF . leading to a twin pregnancy . Because the woman would not have ter- minated a pregnancy in case of misdiagnosis, amniocentesis was not EP01.05 performed. Her request to confirm the PGD in her newborns after birth Reproductive decision making in cF carrier couples; an raises additional legal and ethical dilemma of testing minors for adult explorative study in couples with an affected child onset disease . R. Jassi, W. H. Beckett, T. Roberts, M. McAllister, D. Scotcher; Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, CMMC EP01.03 NHS Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Hereditary breast/ovarian cancer predisposition and This study is part of wider qualitative research project exploring repro- reproductive decision-making ductive decision making in cystic fibrosis (CF) carrier couples. Here L. Ormondroyd1, C. Moynihan1, R. Eeles2, G. Evans3, S. Lavery4, M. Watson1; we describe the personal experience of 19 participants living with the 1Psychology Research Group, Institute of Cancer Research/Royal Marsden condition because they had a child affected by CF . Men and women NHS Foundation Trust, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2Translational Cancer Genet- in each couple were interviewed separately by different researchers inEMPAG Posters  their own home . influenced by the physical attachment to pregnancy and possibly their It emerged from the analysis that different approaches were taken by role as primary carer . participating parents before they reached a reproductive decision, and CF carrier couples who have a healthy child in their first at-risk preg- while several factors influenced this, the first diagnosis of CF in the nancy may feel that they have “used up their luck”, which may lead to family had a particularly significant influence. Parents in this study ap- a decision to limit family size . peared to have undergone an adaptation process during which they overcame the initial shock of a CF diagnosis in their child, developed EP01.08 a more positive outlook based largely on their own experiences of CF, Ancestry-based preconceptional cF and HbPs carrier screening and then felt able to address further reproductive decisions . However, in a multi-ethnic population: attitude and participation, following adaptation, some differences between the sexes emerged . psychological outcomes, reproductive intentions and Women frequently acknowledged that the decisions remained fluid satisfaction and dynamic, whereas men tended to portray a more rigid standpoint P. Lakeman, A. M. C. Plass, L. Henneman, P. D. Bezemer, M. C. Cornel, L. P. once a particular decision had been reached . Furthermore, men and ten Kate; women often felt that they had inherently different roles in reproductive VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. decision making, with the ultimate decision resting with the woman . In Objective: to investigate attitude and participation, psychological out- most cases, couples felt that the decision was made together, without comes, reproductive intentions and satisfaction in ancestry-based pre- significant external influence. conceptional carrier screening for cystic fibrosis (CF) and hemoglobin- opathies (HbPs) . EP01.06 Methods: 9,453 individuals were offered carrier-testing, which was Uptake of genetic counselling and prenatal diagnostic services conditional on survey-participation . Eligible for test-participation were for cF in ireland invitees who were planning a pregnancy with their partner . Both part- D. M. Lambert1,2, M. Morgan1, S. Lynch2; ners’ ancestry determined eligibility for the CF and/or HbP-test(s) . Data 1Children’s Univeristy Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre for Medical were gathered with structured questionnaires, one of which was based Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. on the Theory of Planned Behaviour, among 418 invitees of whom 247 Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common recessive condition in Ireland with 1 refrained from testing and 171 intended to participate in the testing, in 19 carriers and 1 in 1440 affected . From January 2004 to July 2007, but of whom 143 actually did . Non-Western participants (n= 46) were 76 patients were sent appointments for genetic counseling for CF: 23 under-represented . (30%) were routine referrals from the CF clinic for a new CF family; Results: All survey-participants, Western and non-Western, had a and 53 (70%) were GP referrals for positive family history . positive attitude towards test-participation . Among those who refrained For GP referrals the risk of being a CF carrier was: CF affected (3 .7%), from test-participation, 68% would participate in this kind of screening known carrier (20 .7%), 2/3 risk (22 .6%), ½ risk (41 .5%), ¼ risk (7 .5%), in the future if it became possible . Time and effort needed for par- population risk (1 .9%) . 66% had a partner while 34% wanted to dis- ticipation were important declining factors . The majority reported no cuss carrier status before finding a partner. Those at higher risk of predominant feelings of stigmatization . More non-Western (23%) than being a carrier were more likely to wait until they had a partner before Western participants (10%) thought that there would be discrimination being referred . Five of 53 (9%) were found to be at a 1 in 4 risk of CF . against carriers . In general, the test-participants reported low levels Of 25 families with a child with CF, 21 of the 23 referred attended the of anxiety, intended to draw reproductive decisions from test-results, genetics appointment . Of the 30 families at 1 in 4 risk of CF, 15 (50%) were satisfied and none of them regretted participation. remained childless since . For 26 of 30 couples a molecular prenatal Conclusion: Ancestry-based preconceptional CF and HbPs carrier diagnosis was available, with 12 having a pregnancy and 5 (42%) a screening was evaluated as positive and desirable among Western prenatal test . 4 indicated interest in pre-implantation genetic diagnosis and non-Western participants . No major adverse psychological out- (PGD) . 6 families (20%) had members seen for cascade screening al- comes were reported . The effort and time needed for participation was though the offer was made to all . The uptake for prenatal diagnosis and an important reason for declining participation, which might be over- screening of family members is lower than other European countries, come by facilitating access to the screening . perhaps reflecting the illegality of termination and PGD in Ireland. EP01.09 EP01.07 Recruiting for reproductive choices Reproductive decision making in cF carrier couples; an S. Karner1, B. Wieser1, W. Berger2; explorative study in couples without an affected child 1IFZ, Graz, Austria, 2IFF, Klagenfurt, Austria. J. Myring1, R. Sayers2, T. Roberts3, D. Scotcher3, M. McAllister4,3; Prenatal testing has become a routine practice of antenatal care . 1Clinical Genetics, NHS Tayside, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield Clinical According to international standards informed consent is a require- Genetics Service, Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United ment prior to testing . However, due to the introduction of non-invasive Kingdom, 3Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, screening (nuchal translucency measurement and the combined ma- CMMC NHS Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, ternal blood test), this arrangement is undermined in some important 4Nowgen (A Centre for Genetic Healthcare), Manchester, United Kingdom. ways. There is a tendency that counselling starts not before the first We report on part of a larger research project which uses qualitative screening, but only if the results are conspicuous . methodology to explore the reproductive decision making process in In Austria antenatal care is organised in a comprehensive programme CF carrier couples . 5 males and 7 females from CF carrier couples that is mandatory for all pregnant women . The aim of this programme without an affected child were interviewed individually in their home, to is to secure the wellbeing of both the mother and her child . We argue explore both male and female perspectives of the reproductive deci- that because of the contextualisation of non-invasive screening into sion making process . the routine antenatal care it is difficult for pregnant women to distin- Data analysis revealed that while couples may consider different sce- guish between mandatory and elective examinations of antenatal care . narios, the decision making process remains largely unstructured . Per- This is especially relevant for the quality of informed consent that can sonal experiences of CF were an important factor: Individuals had to be achieved in prenatal screening and subsequent diagnostic testing weigh up their perception of the physical difficulties of CF, the fact that of the foetus . CF is not an intellectually disabling condition, and their attachment to The presented case addresses recruiting processes for prenatal test- someone with CF . Individuals may not fully engage with their risk of ing and subsequent reproductive choices . We will present data which having a child with CF during the decision making process, which may show how non-invasive screening has significantly changed prenatal lead them to be unprepared for bad news . testing in Austria . From 2002 on there is a sharp increase in diag- Men and women may play different roles within the reproductive deci- nosed cases per tested pregnant woman . The current abortion rate of sion making process . Men appeared to take on a supportive role, tend- Down’s syndrome foetuses is about 94% . The remaining 6% include ing to agree with their partner . Women felt that the decision was mu- those who screened false-negative, decided against screening or test- tual and intuitive, possibly due to this support from their partner . Both ing, and those who decided not to terminate the pregnancy . partners felt that ultimately, the decision was primarily the woman’s;EMPAG Posters  EP01.10 cer significantly affected PSA uptake [p<.01] and perceived benefits Association of coL1A1 Gene alleles with the development of to PSA screening [p< .01] . Health anxiety was associated with pros- symphysis joints pathology in pregnant women in the Kazakh tate cancer worry and perceived risk [p< .05] . Men were more likely to population have a PSA test if older, married, reporting perceived benefits to PSA S. K. Kyzdarbaeva L.I.; screening, and rating personal risk as greater . US men were more NCAGP, Almaty, Kazakhstan. likely to have a PSA test and reported higher perceived risk of prostate Pregnancy has a negative influence on the skeleton and the develop- cancer and perceived benefit of testing. The cost of PSA testing was a ment of osteoporosis . Patients with symptoms of symphysiolysis are barrier [p< .05](US only) . seen in the symphysiopatias clinic . Conclusions: Findings support the view that family history is a determi- Objective To investigate the distribution of TG polymorphisms in the nant both of PSA uptake and perceptions of prostate cancer risk . This CoLl A1 gene with development symphysis joints pathology of Kazakh study found some differences between US and UK men . Variations are population . most likely associated with health system differences . Subjects DNK 42 healthy pregnant females (the control group) and 30 pregnant with symphysopathias (patient group) . EP03. Genetic risk and testing: carriers of Results . The GG genotype was present in 64,2% of Healthy pregnant women and in 36,6%, of the patient group (p<0,05) . The TT genotype x-linked conditions was 3 times more prevalent in controls than in patients (16,6 % and 4,7 % respectively) . Prevalence of the T allele in the control group was EP03.1 20,2 %, bit it was only - 40,0 ±4,8 % in the patient group (p<0,05) . cardiac screening in Becker and Duchenne muscular Dystrophy Conclusion . This study demonstrated that the T- allele of the CoL1A1 carriers known to the North West Genetic Family Register in gene may be a predictor of susceptibility for symphysiopatias . Manchester, UK P. D. Greene, G. Hall, H. Kingston, L. Kerzin-Storrar; EP01.11 Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, CMMC the study of reproductive behavior in exposed populations NHS Trust and University of Manc, Manchester, United Kingdom. P. W. Izhevskij; We report patient responses and cardiac outcomes of 122 Duchene State Research Center - Institute of Biophysics, Moscow, Russian Federation. and 43 Becker Muscular Dystrophy carriers (aged between 20-77years) The aim of this research was the study of possible unfavorable influ- who were offered cardiology screening as part of their annual register ence the radiation factor on the populations by means: contact . The Becker (BMD) and Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) • analysis of the radiation doses absorbed by population; Register was set up in 1980 to foster long term contact with families • determination of pre- and post-accidental rate of unfavorable preg- and to offer genetic counselling, carrier testing and discussions around nancy outcomes (UPO) in exposed populations . reproduction for women in families with muscular dystrophy . The materials were collected in 226 populations of Belorussia and The evidence of cardiac complications in dystrophinopathy carriers Russia . The given districts have different levels of 137Cs surface con- has been widely reported resulting in guidelines for cardiology screen- tamination: up to 111*104 - to 148*104 Bk/m2 . Doses accumulated since ing from the 107th ENMC (European Neuromuscular Centre) Interna- 1986 to 1992 was rated for a person who was continuously resident in tional Workshop. In the light of these we wrote to confirmed / obligate studied populated areas . carrier women informing them of their cardiomyopathy risk . So far, 95 The materials were collected retrospectively by interview by specially DMD and 33 BMD carriers have requested referral for cardiac screen- form . Women (2233) from a random sample, who were continuously ing, the majority of whom were happy to be referred directly and only a resident, both 1208 of them lived in town and 1025 lived in the country . few described shock or anxiety upon receiving their letter . All the pregnancy outcomes of questioned women at reproductive age Dystrophinopathy is one of several X-linked conditions in which symp- in the two temporary intervals: preaccidental (1980 - 85) and postac- toms amongst carrier women are increasingly recognised . We will ex- cidental (1986 - 92) . plore the role and responsibility of genetic registers in re-contacting In the postaccidental period UPO rate reliably increased and the in- women about unforeseen complications and the acceptability of this crease rate was much more in the united population . The data obtained from the patient’s perspective . don’t allow us to isolate reliably the radiation-induced component in Cardiac screening amongst this cohort showed a much lower incidence postaccidental reproductive behavior of the studied populations . of clinical problems than had been anticipated from previous studies . In populations which were exposed to ionizing radiation, in postac- cidental period were noted the decrease of the live-birth rate and in- EP04. Genetic conditions: impact on crease of the medical abortion’s rate, that can be caused the stress situation and the decrease of standard of living . significant others EP02. Genetic risk and testing: impact on EP04.1 Legacy for the living - A collaborative model of referral between men state coroner‘s office and a clinical genetic service R. M. Forbes1, R. Savarirayan1, M. Lynch2, N. Morgan3; EP02.1 1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2Victorian Insti- PsA screening: A comparison of attitudes and behaviour in Us tute of Forensic Medicine, Southbank ,Victoria, Australia, 3Victorian Institute of and UK men with a family history of prostate cancer Forensic Medicine, Southbank, Victoria, Australia. M. Watson1, R. McCurdy2, J. Bloom3, C. Moynihan4, S. Stewart5; The Coronial Service Centre receives approximately 4000 reports of 1Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2University of California deaths each year . The majority of these reports are referred to the Berkley, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3University of California Berkeley, VIFM for autopsy to establish cause of death . During the course of a San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Unit- forensic invesitgation into the cause of death the pathologist may dis- ed Kingdom, 5University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States. cover information of direct relevance to the health of first-degree family Purpose: This study compared PSA screening, attitudes and risk per- members . Traditionally exchange of information between forensic pa- ceptions of US and UK men with a family history of prostate cancer . thologist and families has been limited due to emphasis placed on the Methods: 272 healthy white males [150 US/122 UK], aged 35 - 74 legal nature of the investigation . with a family history of prostate cancer . Multivariate logistic regression We present a program that has been successfully established be- tested associations between screening behaviour and components of tween the Family Liaison Coordinators at VIFM and GHSV . Families the health belief model, adjusted for socio-demographic and family his- identified as being “at risk” of a genetic condition are given the op- tory variables . portunity to discuss findings of the autopsy. Implications for surviving Results: College educated men and those with more cases of prostate family members is discussed and the availability of referral to GHSV, cancer in the family were more likely to rate their prostate cancer risk with family consent, is provided . Due to the complexity and specialised as “greater than average” . Having a family member with prostate can- nature of the conditions, benefits of collaboration have been two-wayEMPAG Posters  with resultant specialist care for the families . where the numbers of genetic tests are growing, the need to educate An audit of conditions referred to GHSV, uptake by families, role of and develop non-medical practitioners who are competent in genetics genetic counsellor at coronial and clinical service and outcomes over is essential . Importantly, nurses and counsellors may also be work- a 2 year period is discussed and presented as a model for future and ing in situations with few colleagues, where peer support is hard to extended collaboration between forensic and clinical medical genetics access . To address these needs, late in 2007, with the support of the unit . ESHG, a new European Network of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors was initiated . EP05. Access to genetic services An invitation to join the network was sent to EuroGentest and ESHG members, requesting that they pass it on to any genetic nurses or (challenges in Europe) counsellors known to them in their countries. Language is a difficulty and colleagues from several countries have offered to translate the in- EP05.1 formation for colleagues who do not speak English . It is clear from the Why don’t Deaf People come for Genetic counselling? responses that professionals in many countries are trying to develop A. Middleton1, S. Emery2, G. Turner2, A. Clarke1, S. Sarangi3; this new profession and are keen to use the network for support during 1Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, this important period . United Kingdom, 2Department of Languages & Intercultural Studies, School of A questionnaire has been sent to establish the aims and focus of this Management & Languages, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, network and the findings will be presented at an initial meeting of the 3Health Communication Research Centre, School of English, Communication network at the EMPAG/ESHG conference in Barcelona and Philosophy, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. As of February 2008, the network has 72 registered members from Despite genetic deafness being one of the most common genetic con- Netherlands, France, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, It- ditions, deaf adults very rarely access genetic counselling, neither to aly, Croatia, Bulgaria, UK, Czech Republic, Greece, Belgium, Cyprus, discuss deafness nor other conditions that may be running through Ireland, Turkey, Israel, Switzerland, Poland and Iceland . their family, e .g . cancer . Each genetics centre in the UK will have sev- eral thousand deaf sign language users within their catchment area; EP05.4 however, referrals are likely to be received for less than 5 deaf adults the value of personal interaction: can a family history per year . There may be many complex reasons behind this - e .g . lack questionnaire replace a face-to-face family history gathering of information, assumptions about inheritance, mistaken beliefs of a appointment with the genetic counsellor for parents of children link between present-day genetics services and eugenic practices of with an undiagnosed genetic syndrome? the past or fears about being told not to have children . This project B. J. Dell1, G. Westwood2, C. Phelps3; aims to gather the views of various different groups of people with 1School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Clinical Genetics Ser- deafness, looking specifically at the above issues. 30 interviews have vice, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, been conducted in sign language and qualitative analysis performed . United Kingdom. Video clips of deaf people signing their views about genetics will be Evidence suggests that parents often feel unprepared for their contact shared as well as results from a large (n = 1000) quantitative study with Genetic Services (Skirton, 2006) . Whilst family history question- gathering attitudes. The research findings offer suggestions as to why naires (FHQ) are increasingly used to gather data prior to attending a currently genetics services are very rarely used by deaf patients in the genetics clinic, such questionnaires have been found to raise anxiety UK . Once more is understood about this then steps can be taken to (Phelps et al, 2006) and can act as a barrier to accessing services address access issues . (Geer et al, 2001) . This pilot study explored the impact of completing a specially developed FHQ upon subsequent perceptions of providing a EP05.2 family history face-to-face . Genetic Led multidisciplinary clinics As communities of Seven parents completed the FHQ and an evaluation questionnaire . Practice Results revealed that whilst the completion of the FHQ did not have S. A. Watts; any overall negative impact, it did have the potential to raise distress Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. when asking for sensitive details such as miscarriages . Care for patients and their families with genetic disease has become Four parents also completed telephone interviews to explore their per- increasingly complex in recent years due to a rapid rise in scientific ceptions of the FHQ and their appointment with the Genetic Counsel- knowledge, expanding technological innovation and demand for ser- lor . Thematic analysis revealed that parents encountered obstacles to vices, resulting in a need for multidisciplinary working . Although such the completion of the FHQ and that they appreciated their personal working is well documented in general healthcare there is sparse lit- interaction with the Genetic Counsellor, which provided an opportunity erature within the specialty of clinical genetics . The results of an eth- for them to gain reassurance, to ask questions about the referral pro- nographic study, which sought to examine the way in which patient cess and to clarify the relevance of the family history details . care was organised and delivered in three multidisciplinary clinics The combination of both the FHQ and the Genetic Counsellor clinic in a Regional Genetic Centre in the UK, will be presented . Different was the preferred option, permitting the parents to be better prepared models of healthcare were identified. However, data analysis using to utilise their contact with the genetic services . the theoretical framework of Communities of Practice (Wenger 1998), a theory of social learning and participation, suggests that function- ing of the clinics is more closely related to the way in which clinicians establish a specific pattern of working together. The principal factor EP06. Lay beliefs and public understanding that contributes to the success of the clinics is that of coherence . The Genetic Counsellors play a crucial role to this coherence by acting of genetics as maintainers of the clinic . The results of this study contribute to our understanding of multidisciplinary working within clinical genetics and EP06.1 are important for the future planning and implementation of healthcare Using ethnography to optimise clinical practice in cancer for patients with genetic disease . genetics services M. T. Saleh1,2, B. Meiser2, K. Tucker3, J. Kirk4, M. Eisenbruch5, K. Barlow-Stew- EP05.3 art1; European Network of Genetic Nurses and counsellors 1Centre for Genetics Education, St Leonards, NSW, Australia, 2The University C. Patch1, H. Skirton2; of NSW, Sydney, Australia, 3Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Prince of Wales Hospital, 1Guys and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Uni- Sydney, Australia, 4Familial Cancer Service, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Aus- versity of Plymouth, Taunton, United Kingdom. tralia, 5Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. While there are a growing number of non-medical genetic practitioners This project explores, using ethnography, the cultural beliefs about in clinical practice in Europe, there is no European-wide organisa- inherited susceptibility to cancer amongst the Arabic-Australian Com- tion dedicated to the needs of those professionals . In an environment munity .EMPAG Posters  A group of 15 individuals who identify themselves as Arabic-Australian frequently mentioned for not taking part in the test after all was ‘lack of were recruited through two Sydney familial cancer services . Ethno- time’. But, in asking about social influence it appeared that sometimes graphic interviews explored themes such as beliefs about inherited ill- parents, other family members, friends or GPs had expressed their nesses including inherited susceptibility to cancer, cultural beliefs and doubts about the couple’s intention to take part in such a test . practices when communicating within families about inherited cancers Even though lack of time was the most frequently mentioned reason and the impact, if any, of attending a cancer genetics service on these for not taking part in a preconception carrier-screening test after clearly beliefs and practices . Thematic analysis of interview summaries identi- having expressed the intention to do so, the negative input of the social fied common outcomes, informing the development of an explanatory environment might have played a major role in not carrying out one’s model for inherited susceptibility to cancer in this sample . intentions . Most couples were surprised by the negative reactions of The cultural backgrounds of the 7 males and 8 females interviewed their social environment and reevaluated test participation as being were Egyptian, Iraqi, Lebanese and Turkish, and ages ranged from less important . 29 to 82 years (median age 54) . Participants generally were highly ac- culturated as measured by their English language proficiency and had EP06.4 a good understanding of the genetic basis of the cancer in their fam- Attitudes towards thalassaemia carrier testing in saudi arabis ily . There was little or no discrepency between the individuals’ beliefs H. Y. Alabdulwahed; about inherited cancer and the model of clinical practice utilised in the Dhahran Health Center, Saudi Aramco, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. clinics attended . Thalassaemia is a life limiting condition, characterised by severe anae- People of an Arabic-Australian background are one of the fastest grow- mia which requires frequent blood transfusions . It is a global health ing ethnic groups in Australia . It is therefore important to document problem, and is prevalent in countries with a history of malaria out- their beliefs to ensure they are compatible with the current models of break . Thalassaemia is a recessively inherited condition, i .e . both par- practice in cancer genetics clinics . ents have to carry the thalassaemia gene in order to have affected A better understanding and awareness of cultural beliefs and potential children . Carriers do not show any symptoms of thalassaemia, and areas of disparity will guide optimal cancer genetics service provision . a blood test is necessary to identify carrier status . There are many More research is needed to confirm reported beliefs of non-attending mass public screening programmes throughout the world which aim family members . to control and prevent this condition . In 2004, Saudi Arabia started a compulsory premarital screening programme to identify thalassaemia EP06.2 carriers, along with carriers of another haemoglobinopathy (sickle cell the public understanding of newborn screening anaemia) . To date no attempt has been made to investigate the Saudi B. Wieser; people’s thoughts and feelings towards the screening . This qualita- IFZ, Graz, Austria. tive study used a semi-structured interview guide and was designed to Neonatal screening for genetic disorders is a routine practice for many explore the attitude of Saudis who have undergone mandatory screen- decades . In particular, screening for PKU has become a standard pro- ing for thalassaemia . Sixteen individuals participated in the study . The cedure . However, internationally the way by which neonatal screening primary findings were that: participants accepted and supported the is carried out varies notably . Especially for disorders where treatment premarital screening programme; their motivations to undergo testing options are not as straightforward as they are for PKU, screening may included: having healthy children, reducing the incidence of hereditary be offered, but only on voluntary basis . Austria has decided to expand diseases in the country, and removing any risk in entering an arranged its programme significantly in 2002. The introduction of tandem-mass- (usually consanguineous) marriage; the majority of participants lacked spectrometry plays a crucial role in this regard . With this technology knowledge about screening; and many misconceptions and negative it became possible to screen for 30 inherited disorders . All together feelings towards screening emerged . The main conclusion is that there the Austrian neonatal screening programme comprises as many as is a pressing need to increase public awareness about screening ad- 23 conditions . vantages and, more importantly, to educate individuals undergoing In this paper I will especially address the issue of the public under- carrier testing . standing of newborn screening . I will do so by drawing on the Wilson and Jungner guidelines as developed for the WHO. Specifically I will address the 6th principle: “The test should be acceptable to the popula- tion” (cf . Dhondt 2007) . Taking this requirement seriously this raises EP07. Disclosure of test results important issues of lay understanding of genetic disorders and the way in which an expansion of newborn screening can be perceived . The (professionals/patients/families/third issue will be contextualised into the historical context in which the Aus- trian newborn screening programme has been initiated . I will also con- parties) trast the Austrian case from other European countries in order to point out differences of the way in which a public understanding of newborn EP07.1 screening can be facilitated . communicating genetics research results to families: problems arising when the patient participant is deceased EP06.3 L. Ormondroyd1, C. Moynihan1, A. Ardern-Jones2, R. Eeles3, C. Foster4, S. Why do intenders not behave: exploring the gap between the Davolls1, M. Watson1; intention to take part in preconceptional carrierscreening for 1Psychology Research Group, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United cystic fibrosis and/or haemoglobinopathies and not doing so Kingdom, 2Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Lon- A. C. Plass1,2, P. Lakeman1, J. Wenink1,2, M. C. Cornel1,2; don/Sutton, United Kingdom, 3Translational Cancer Genetics Team and Cancer 1VU University medical center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2EMGO-institute, Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London/Sutton, United Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Kingdom, 4Macmillan Research Unit, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Univer- The aim of this study was to explore why couples who intended to par- sity of Sounthampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. ticipate in a preconceptional carrierscreening for cystic fibrosis and/or Purpose: This study explores communication within families of clini- haemoglobinopathies (N=142), did not take part in the test after all cally significant genetics research results, after the death of the patient (N=66), particularly beyond reasons like of lack of time . participant . BRCA2 mutations were found in several men after their All 66 couples were called up and asked whether they were willing to death from prostate cancer . Spouses were given the results in a ge- answer a few questions directly or some time later at their home about netic counselling session and asked to inform relatives . their non-participation in the test . All phone calls and face-to-face inter- Method: Cross sectional, qualitative exploratory study . Interviews with views were recorded and analyzed using the IPA-method . 13 relatives, including informers and recipients of the information, were 41 couples were contactable . 13 couples no longer belonged to the analysed using interpretative phenomenological analysis . research target group of couples that were planning a pregnancy in Results: Dissemination was hampered when communication channels the future, and were excluded . 20 couples agreed to a telephone-in- between relatives were limited, because of family rifts or socially dis- terview and 5 others were interviewed at their home . The reason most tant or problematic relationships . When informing other branches ofEMPAG Posters 0 the family, relatives approached individuals in the generation of the EP07.4 deceased man, regardless of their risk status, who were then respon- the psychological impact of genetic testing of symptomatic sible for informing younger relatives . Most people informed by a rela- patients - A literature review tive did not seek genetic counselling . The informing relative may not F. Vansenne, P. M. M. Bossuyt, C. A. J. M. de Borgie; have sufficient authority for the information either to be taken seriously, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. or to challenge individual constructions about the aetiology of cancer . At present more and more genetic risk factors are identified to explain This impeded information transmission to further at risk relatives . Most the development of common disease . As a consequence an increas- participants knew of relatives who had not been told about their cancer ing number of genetic tests are becoming available to clinicians . To risk . guide the appropriate use and clinical utility of genetic tests it is impor- Research Implications: When recruiting participants to genetics re- tant to consider the psychological impact of testing . In this study we search studies, consideration should be given to requesting contact performed a literature review to evaluate the psychological impact of details of specific relatives, in the event of clinically significant results genetic testing and its measurement in symptomatic patients . becoming available post mortem. We completed a systematic literature search from 1966 to april 2007 . Clinical Implications: The limited efficiency of information transfer Relevant studies were identified from searches of Medline, Embase among relatives is discussed in the context of a potential role for ge- and Psychinfo databases . Additionally we searched for recent over- netics services in contacting at risk relatives directly . view articles and relevant reports and in the Health Technology As- sessment and Dare database . Prospective studies, evaluating genetic EP07.2 testing in symptomatic patients (n≥20) and using at least one stan- Exploring family communication after receipt of BRCA1/2 dardized psychological outcome were included and evaluated . results: Early data from family cases In total 1233 studies were identified. After abstraction of information 17 C. Jacobs1, M. Wallace2, J. Smith3, S. Michie2; studies were eligible and independently assessed . In half of the stud- 1Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Uni- ies all participants were female, diagnosed with breast and/or ovarian versity College London, Department of Psychology, London, United Kingdom, cancer . Socio-demographics were comparable between the studies . 3Birkbeck College, Department of Psychology, London, United Kingdom. Methodology used to measure the impact of genetic testing, protocols, Research investigating family communication about test results for the and psychological outcome definitions differed substantially among BRCA1/2 genes has largely been quantitative or limited to investiga- the reviewed studies . tion with individuals undergoing testing . Little is known about how test information is communicated to other family members or received by Little research has been conducted to support the feasibility on when them . This study examines how results of BRCA1/2 gene mutations and how to evaluate the psychosocial impact of genetic testing in are received by affected index patients and communicated through symptomatic patients . Because of discordant results and short-term the family. The study examines the flow of information from clinician follow-up it is uncertain whether patients experience long-term nega- to patient and on to relatives; factors influencing communication; the tive psychosocial consequences of genetic testing . This important impact of communication on cognition, emotion, behaviour and family clinical evaluation question should be addressed in future research . relationships; and decision-making regarding risk management . Results consultations with participants are audio-recorded . One month EP08. Predictive testing: process and later, interviews with participants explore their understanding of, and response to, the test result, and the experience of communicating this impact to first-degree relatives. Similar interviews are then conducted with relatives recruited by the index patients, with whom results have been EP08.1 shared . All interviews are recorded, transcribed and analysed . Decision making for young adults in predictive genetic testing Early data from family cases will be presented to illustrate the factors K. M. Mattingley1, G. Betts2, M. Freckmann1, R. Sachdev1; influencing family communication, and the impact of communication on 1Clinical Genetics, St George Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney Children’s risk perception, emotional state, behaviour and family relationships . Hospital, Sydney, Australia. The value of these findings both clinically and scientifically will be dis- In recent years a number of articles have discussed the predictive test- cussed . ing process in minors and young adults . A young individual’s ability to make an informed and responsible decision regarding predictive testing EP07.3 and the potential harm this may cause has been a contentious issue . A Active Non-Disclosure in the Familial cancer setting: A case more recent view (1) argues that assessment of the individual’s maturity Report of judgement in the decision making process, should be a consideration M. K. Kentwell, M. Harris, G. Lindemann; in predictive genetic testing protocols for minors . Should this not also Familial Cancer Centre, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia. be applied to young adults? Not all adults by the nature of their age are A 77 year old woman unaffected by cancer was shown to carry the ‘mature’ in their decision making ability . Cognitive but also psychosocial family specific BRCA2 mutation identified in her sister. At the results factors influence decision making whether in adolescence or adulthood. disclosure appointment, the client stated she would not inform her four Legally ‘mature’ by age may not mean cognitive or psychosocial maturity daughters, aged in their 30s and 40s of her positive result . and can result in immature decision making . Should we then deny young This presentation will analyse the client and genetic counsellor’s per- adults who don’t have a mature outlook access to testing? The case of spective, and the interaction between the two . Firstly, the reasons why three sisters, 18 to 22 years of age, at 50% risk for Huntington disease the client elected not to share her results with her daughters will be and their journey through the predictive testing process is presented and explored . These include perception about effectiveness of risk man- discussed . agement, family relationships and communication, perceived recep- 1 . Richards, FH . (2006) Maturity of judgement in decision making for tivity of the daughters regarding genetic information, judgement of predictive testing for nontreatable adult-onset neurogenetic conditions: a how the daughters would cope with the knowledge of their mother’s case against predictive testing of minors . Clinical Genetics 70: 396-401 . BRCA2 mutation carrier status, the perceived harm which may arise from disclosure and personal belief in the daughters’ right not to know . EP08.2 Secondly, from the Genetic Counsellor’s perspective, the counselling Accurately assessing uptake of predictive testing for Huntington strategies utilised during and following the disclosure appointment will disease. be outlined. In addition, the discussion will reflect on the challenges R. J. Tassicker; encountered in counselling the client, and the impact of a consultation Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Australia. involving non-disclosure on the Genetic Counsellor . The presentation The current literature fails to provide an accurate calculation for the will also describe the self-reflection which occurred in attempting to uptake of predictive testing for Huntington disease. Uptake figures are define the Genetic Counsellor’s role in this case, and the ethical ques- reported from several centres based on the total number of people tions the Genetic Counsellor asked herself around the issue of non- who have undertaken predictive testing as a percentage of those esti- disclosure . mated to be at 50% risk in their catchment area . This method producedEMPAG Posters  a figure of 35% from this state’s service, much higher than observation ric scales measuring the individual and systemic resilience of those who of the local pedigrees indicated. Reworking uptake as an annual figure wish to carry out the Predictive Test (PT) . partly corrects for the length of time a program has been operating . Content: According to one of the objectives of GAIN (Azorean Group of Other identified errors include the use of the cumulative total of those Neurogenetics Research), the continued improvement of the protocol of who have tested, with a static denominator of those at 50% risk; and the Genetic Counseling for the PT, and after the completion of a detailed the failure to exclude from the at-risk group those who are too young study of revaluations of PT’s until 2006, which led us to consider the im- (ineligible) to test . portance of the first interview in psychosocial adjustment to the test result, Most studies have used population prevalence of Huntington disease we started a new methodology in psychosocial assessment of the candi- to calculate the total of those at 50% risk . We report new data for this dates for the PT . state, Victoria, estimating the prevalence to be 8 per 100,000 in 1999 . This approach seeks to identify the different types of these individuals, Additional information collated from the Huntington Disease Register taking into account the influence of risk factors increased or decreased of Victoria indicated that for every diagnosed person, there were 4 .2 as the interaction with the individual protective factors and its relational individuals at 50% risk (1:4 .2), a lower ratio than the1:5 hypothesized system, making prognosis of a better or worse adapt to the results of PT . in the literature . We are currently developing an uptake formula which In this sense, we’ve followed a set of criteria which take into account the more accurately incorporates the variables . Our calculation gives an evaluation of the self, the kind of argument used by individuals and the uptake of approximately 13% for this region . An accurate uptake is systemic factors within and outside the family . necessary to assess and interpret testing behavior . This assessment allows the scheduling of sessions of psychosocial coun- seling, aimed enhance the protective factors and minimize the risk factors EP08.3 prior to the predictive test, for a better psychological adjustment after the Psychosocial genetics: psychological long term family impact predictive genetic information . (5 years) of the predictive test for machado-Joseph disease on Azores EP08.5 C. D. Gonzalez1, E. M. Gomes2, M. Lima3, C. Bettencourt3, T. Kay4, J. Santos5, Psychology of predictive medicine: Acceptance of testing for J. Vasconcelos5; genetic predisposition to breast cancer 1Serviço de Psiquiatria do Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, A. V. Shopova, S. Shopova, E. Simeonov; Portugal, 2Grupo Açoriano de Investigação Neurogenética, Ponta Delgada, Por- Medical Faculty, Sofia, Bulgaria. tugal, 3Centro de Investigação em Recursos Naturais (CIRN) e Departamento This presentation is the closing part of longitudinal study over atti- de Biologia, Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 4Serviço de tude of Bulgarian people towards the possibilities and achievements Medicina Genética, Hospital D. Estefânia, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Serviço de Neuro- of genetic science. The first part that included women, health-care logia do Hospital Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal. workers(non-genetics) was “Acceptance of testing for genetic predis- Objective: Evaluate the long term(5 years) psychological impact in the position to breast cancer: The attitude of medical professionals .” pre-symptomatic genetic testing(PT) for the Machado-Joseph disease The second part covered the acknowledgments of medical or biologi- (MJD) in Azores, the motivations for the test and the disease repre- cal students and was titled “Acceptance of testing for genetic predispo- sentations . sition of academic youth to PS DNA t for autosomal dominant inherited Methods: Scales to measure the individual well-being;family satisfac- late onset diseases” . tion, semi-structured interviews of psychosocial assessment and fam- At this third level we expanded our study in the opinion of non-medical ily dynamics . healthy people . Results: Of the 53 individuals revalued, 92 .45% say that would take In conclusion this study compares the three groups- MD specialists, again the PT, presenting as the main motivation planning their future students and non-medical healthy people mainly towards: based on the test results . 1 . Information sources . In terms of geographic distribution of individuals, its to highlight that in 2 . Attitude of the possibilities of “predictive medicine” . Flores island, all individuals reassessed said that they would do again 3 . Personal choice in genetic case situation . the PT,maintaining the motivation initially submitted . Regarding family dynamics, 58 .49% of those claim not notice any EP08.6 change, however this information is opposed by the results of the inter- Lessons of uncertainty from a rare inherited neurodegenerative views conducted, in which it is noted that 24 .53% of these individuals disease: may it be a model? describes changes in dynamics either by approximation or by distanc- E. Di Maria1,2, S. Gattone2, V. Viassolo2, F. Forzano2, F. Faravelli2; ing family . 1University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory of Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Conculsions: The study shows that most of the individuals who made Genova, Italy. the PT for MJD would repeat it, considering that knowing the test result The acronym IBMPFD designates inclusion body myopathy with Pag- contributed to “plan their future .” et’s disease of the bone and frontotemporal dementia, a rare auto- In terms of family dynamics, it is apparent that changes were focusing somal dominant disorder caused by missense mutations in the VCP on these two opposing poles: the remote and closer family . gene . The disease usually presents in adult life; no effective treatment Levels of moderate and severe stress in subjects reflect the influence is available . of the results of PT in the psychological well-being of individuals . When we encountered the questions and the needs of an at-risk family It´s clear that the results of PT, influence the psychosocial situation of member, we dealt with a disease characterised by: i) variable involve- the individuals and their family dynamics, justifying the need for a psy- ment of multiple systems; ii) age-dependent, yet unpredictable, pen- chosocial monitoring of individuals and families during the program . etrance of each of the cardinal signs; iii) possible occurrence of pro- gressive cognitive decline . The co-presence of these features makes EP08.4 IBMPFD a compelling model for genetic counselling, as it resembles a Psychosocial evaluation for the predictive test of the machado- complex disorder despite the Mendelian mode of inheritance . joseph disease The recommendations for predictive testing published for familial C. D. Gonzalez1, E. M. Gomes2, M. Lima3, C. Bettencourt3, T. Kay4, J. Santos5, dementias state that the protocol developed for Huntington’s dis- J. Vasconcelos5; ease (HD) should be followed . However, the deterministic scenario 1Serviço de Psiquiatria do Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, prompted by the HD mutation may appear simplistic when we face a Portugal, 2GAIN - Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, number of additional uncertainties, including: i) the inability to predict 3Centro de Investigação em Recursos Naturais (CIRN) e Departamento de Bio- the clinical presentation, i .e . the involvement of either muscles, bones, logia, Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 4Serviço de Medicina brain, or all; ii) the low predictive value of a negative test result, due Genética, Hospital D. Estefânia, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Serviço de Neurologia do to the high prevalence of cognitive decline among aged individuals . Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal. Nevertheless, it can be inferred from literature that predictive testing Objective: To publicise the methodology used in the psychosocial evalua- was performed in families included in research protocols, although the tion process prior to the test for Machado-Joseph disease of the Azores . genetic counselling procedures were not mentioned . We will address Methods: Semi- structured interview, family genogram and psychomet- some of these issues, by comparing the theme of multiple uncertain-EMPAG Posters  ties raised by IBMPFD with the evidence from the genetic counselling EP09. Predisposition to common diseases: protocols available for other neurodegenerative and neuromuscular disorders . genetic testing and preventive behaviour EP08.7 EP09.1 the role of the disease in the psychological impact of Women’s attitudes towards genetic susceptibility screening for presymptomatic testing for scA2 and FAP AttRV30m: breast cancer to target disease prevention knowledge of the disease in the family, degree of kinship and L. Henneman1,2, C. M. Bouwman1,2, D. R. M. Timmermans1,2, C. G. Van El1,3, H. gender of the transmitting parent Meijers-Heijboer1,3; M. Paneque Herrera1,2, C. Lemos1, L. Velázquez Pérez2, J. Sequeiros1, M. 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2EMGO Institute, Fleming1; Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, The 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2CIRAH, Holguín, Cuba. Netherlands. To study factors of psychological impact of presymptomatic testing Currently, breast cancer screening is offered to all women based on (PST) of spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) and familial amyloid age, usually beginning at age 50 . It has been suggested that suscep- polyneuropathy (FAP ATTRV30M), we analyzed (i) the effect of previ- tibility testing for breast cancer genes may be used for risk profiling ous experience with the disease in the family, kinship with closest af- to target interventions (i .e . mammography screening) only to those at fected relative and gender of transmitting parent, when adapting to test higher risk . The aim of the study was to explore women’s attitudes results; and (ii) differences in the course of psychological wellbeing in towards population genetic susceptibility screening to target breast 63 subjects, 28 offspring at risk for FAP, Portugal, and 35 at risk for cancer prevention . SCA2, Cuba (who up-took testing May 2004 to April 2006) . Four focus groups were conducted with 26 women aged 40-73 years . Persons with less previous knowledge of the disease in the family re- Women were selected irrespective of personal or family history of ferred more anxiety; lower levels of anxiety and depression were seen breast cancer . when the disease was present in first-degree relatives; having an af- The results show that in general women are positive towards genetic fected mother was associated with lower levels of depression, both risk profiling for breast cancer, provided that in the lower risk group, immediately and one year after results . Offspring at-risk for FAP had though maybe less frequent, women are still offered mammography less anxiety that those at-risk for SCA2, during the whole follow-up (1 screening . Women reported that they would expect that some women year), though differences were not significant. would find it difficult to cope with knowing to be at higher risk. Others A longer period of contact with the disease, closer kinship and an af- believed that in this way women would be able to change their lifestyle fected mother all lessen the impact of PST, as expressed in levels of or start screening at earlier age . Bottlenecks mentioned by the women anxiety and depression . were potential problems with insurance, expected high costs of testing, putting too much emphasis on genetics . Women recognized that this EP08.8 risk profiling was just for one disease, but were ambiguous whether or is emotional impact of genetic testing related to the subjective not it should be extended to other diseases . risk to be a mutation carrier ? the example of neuroendocrine In conclusion, these results suggest that women currently offered tumors breast cancer screening based on age, accept a possible future sus- K. Lahlou-Laforet1, S. M. Consoli1, X. Jeunemaitre2, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo2; ceptibility screening for breast cancer, but also identified issues that 1C-L Psychiatry Department, Paris 5 University of Medicine, Georges Pompidou need to be discussed and studied further . European Hospital, Paris, France, 2Department of genetics, Georges Pompidou European Hospital, Paris, France. EP09.2 Paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma are generally benign neuroen- Health behaviour after genetic counseling: A population-based docrine tumors, inherited in about 25% of cases (autosomal dominant study model), causing by germline mutations in SDHD, SDHB, SDHC, VHL, E. M. Mikkelsen1, L. Sunde2, C. Johansen3, S. P. Johnsen1; RET or NF1 genes . The hereditary form of the disease is characterized 1Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, by an early onset with a higher risk of recurrency and/or malignancy . Denmark, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Genetic testing of patients and their families opens to earlier diagnosis Denmark, 3Department of Psychosocial Cancer Research, The Danish Cancer and treatment of asymptomatic tumors in mutation carriers . Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. Objective: To evaluate emotional impact of genetic testing in consecu- Background: Alcohol consumption and obesity are known risk fac- tive patients met during oncogenetic multisciplinary consultation dedi- tors for breast cancer . Together with other health behaviours, such cated to pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas . as physical exercise and smoking, they may also influence the risk Methods: Baseline state and trait-anxiety (STAI), depression (BDI-13) of hereditary breast cancer . To date, however, very few studies have and subjective risk to be career of the mutation were assessed before addressed the impact of genetic counseling on any of these health the blood sample . A second assessment of state-anxiety, depression behaviours . and traumatic impact of the announcement (IES-R) was performed af- Purpose: To assess the impact of genetic counseling on health be- ter the definitive test result. haviours, in terms of smoking, physical exercise, alcohol intake and Results: 29 subjects were tested and 22 received the definitive result diet habits . (12 positive, 10 negative) . Baseline depression was correlated with the Method: A population-based prospective cohort study including wom- number of children (rho=0 .40; p=0 .03) . There was no change in state en (N=319) who received their first genetic counselling for hereditary anxiety and depression after the test result . Psychological scores were breast and ovarian cancer risk, and two reference groups . Reference not associated with subject’s status (index case or relative) . State-anx- Group I consists of women (N = 417) who received mammography . iety, depression and impact of event scores did not differ according to Reference Group II consists of women (N = 1,271) randomly selected the test result . A higher impact of the result was found when subjects from the Danish population . expected to be carriers whereas they actually were not (p<0 .05) . Data were collected by standardized, questionnaires mailed prior to Conclusion: Our data encourage to evaluate the subjective risk to be a counseling or mammography and 12 months post-counselling . mutation carrier before the test and to be particularly careful when the Results: Findings on smoking, physical exercise, alcohol intake and result is opposite to the subjective risk . diet habits will be presented and discussed .EMPAG Posters  EP10. Genetic counselling: communicating EP10.03 What physicians tell to individuals at risk of breast and ovarian genetic information cancer syndrome (HBOs) referred for genetic counselling. IMASS Spanish cohort EP10.01 E. Darder, B. Graña, A. Velasco, D. Fortuny, T. Ramón y Cajal, A. Torres, J. Pitfalls in communicating 5-Probe FisH results- Lessons learned Sanz, C. López, N. Gadea, I. Mensa, C. Saura, J. Brunet, J. Balmaña; in genetic counselling IMASS, Barcelona, Spain. M. I. Ross1, G. McGillivray2; Background: Individuals at risk of HBOS are referred to genetic coun- 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Clayton, Victoria, Australia, 2Murdoch selling units for genetic testing . It is unknown how much information Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne Victoria, Australia. these individuals get by their reference physicians before counselling . In Victoria Australia, all pregnant women are offered serum screening Materials and Methods: Spanish individuals at risk of HBOCS referred to identify those fetuses which are considered to be at an increased to genetic counselling were asked to participate in a multicenter study risk for Trisomy 21, Trisomy 18 and Neural Tube defects . Women re- by fulfilling a self-completed questionnaire before BRCA1/2 testing . turning an increased risk may be counselled by their general prac- Variables were analysed using descriptive statistics and Fisher Exact titioner, obstetrician, midwife or genetic counsellor, and are offered test with SPSS . diagnostic testing . Many choose to have a FISH analysis as part of the Results: Overall, 243 individuals were enrolled . Median age was 44 diagnostic testing . years (range 19-88), 88% were women and 67% had a previous diag- I present a number of women who experienced a normal FISH result nosis of cancer . Most participants (65%) were referred by a physician, from diagnostic testing, many believing that this was the complete re- 30% by a relative and 5% were self-referred . The reference physician sult . They were later found to have a (different) abnormal karyotype- did not inform 48% of individuals about their risk of developing cancer, an event that caused distress and confusion . of those informed 70% were told to have a higher cancer risk than the I discuss their varied reactions and emotions in response to this average population . Physician informed 46% of total individuals about “changed” result, and how they addressed the unexpected and difficult the possibility of genetic testing recommending it to 37% . Seventy- decision-making that followed . five individuals (31%) did not received any information about genetic Examination of these cases highlights the need to exercise great care counselling/testing before their risk assessment visit, while the main when giving and discussing prenatal FISH results in the setting of in- information source for 74 (30%) was the media . A similar proportion of creased risk for aneuploidy via serum screening . Clearer information cancer patients and healthy individuals at risk of HBOS received previ- given when the test is offered may alleviate these situations, but does ous information by the reference physician (53% vs . 49%, p=0 .58) . little to reduce anxiety . The cases also demonstrate a need to provide Conclusions: A low percentage of individuals at risk of HBOS are in- ongoing education for health professionals who offer these tests to formed by their reference physician about their cancer risk and ge- their clients, often also believing that the normal FISH result is an ac- netic predisposition before genetic counselling . Further efforts have curate description of the final result. to be done to improve medical awareness about hereditary cancer syndromes . EP10.02 Family Perspectives on inherited Arrhythmia services EP10.04 C. R. Honeywell1,2, B. Wilson2, R. Gow1; Cancer Knowledge, Risk Perception, and Cancer Worry after 1Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Genetic counselling for Hereditary Breast cancer in spain. Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. E. Cabrera1, A. Zabalegui1, M. Peris2, I. Blanco2; Assessing the interests and experiences of individuals affected by ge- 1Universitat Internacional de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genetic Counseling netic conditions is an important component of service development . In Unit. Prevention and Cancer Control Department. Catalan Institute of Oncology, the genetic arrhythmia literature, there is a paucity of information about L’Hospitalet, Spain. what both affected and at-risk family members feel are the important Identification of a genetic basis underlying breast cancer has led to an elements of their care . We present the results of an anonymised survey increase in demand for genetic counselling about individual risks of the administered to patients and their relatives who have been assessed disease . Genetic Counselling Units are becoming an integral part of for genetic arrhythmia through the CHEO Inherited Arrhythmia Clinic . cancer services . It is, therefore, important to assess how attendance at A response rate of 52% was achieved with online and postal surveys . these clinics impacts on cancer knowledge, cancer-related concerns, The respondents were 55 individuals (45% male) from 25 families, and risk perceptions . Previously, we have reported a validation of a aged 14 to 70+ years who attended the clinic because of diagnosed or Spanish Translation of the Cancer Worry Scale, Escala de Preocu- suspected long QT syndrome, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardio- pación por Cáncer, which can be used to asses cancer worry in the myopathy, or catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia . setting of genetic counselling . A total of 212 Spanish patients were Results: Respondents perceive education and protective follow-up consecutively recruited, and 152 completed all questionnaires before care to be the most important roles of an inherited arrhythmia service . and one and 6 months after genetic counselling . Cancer knowledge, Healthcare decision-making and support also emerged as important including breast cancer prevention measures, significantly increases roles. At the first appointment, primary information needs concern the after genetic counselling . Patients’ risk perception did not correlate heart condition itself, long-term outcomes, and restriction of activities . with the actual breast cancer risk calculated by the counsellors . Pa- Support group information is a low priority initially, but emerges later tients’ perceived risk did not modify after genetic counselling . Patients as an important requirement . With respect to timing of genetic coun- were significantly less worried after counselling. Higher levels of worry selling, respondents indicated no strong preference for counselling in were predicted by high degree of perceived risk of developing cancer, advance, same-day or after heart investigations . However, 70% of re- higher levels of anxiety and low level of education . In conclusion, coun- spondents expressed that the location of counselling matters; the ma- sellors met the patients’ psychological needs to a satisfactory degree jority expect face-to-face counselling in a private location. These find- during counselling . However, patients did not fully understand their risk ings provide insight into families’ preferences for inherited arrhythmia of developing cancer . services, and how such services might be most optimally configured to meet their needs within inevitable resource constraints . EP10.05 Breast cancer Genetic counselling in cyprus: First epidemiological data V. C. Anastasiadou1,2, E. S Aristidou1, A. Hadjisavvas3, Y. Marcou4, E. Kakouri4, T. Delikurt1, K. Kyriacou3; 1Clinical Genetics Service, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Makarios Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Electron Microscopy and Molecular Pathology, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genet-EMPAG Posters  ics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Bank of Cyprus Oncology Center, Nicosia, Cyprus. which they believed would enhance care by non-genetics profes- Cancer Genetic Counselling in Cyprus was established recently . sionals . They valued certain attitudes: providing genetic information Breast cancer patients, account for the majority of referrals at present . without judgement; being mindful of the use of terminology; and being They are referred to the Cancer Genetics Clinic based on age of diag- aware of the emotional impact of genetic information on individuals nosis, type of cancer and family history . Referred patients are offered and the wider family . Tailoring the information provided to individual two counselling appointments to be appropriately informed of the risks, preferences and informing people where they can access further infor- benefits, and limitations prior to decision making for testing. Results mation were also considered important . are communicated through a further appointment which is followed by These results have implications for the education and practice of all other counselling appointments according to the needs of the patients health professionals involved in providing genetic information . They and their family . are being used in the UK to raise health professionals’ awareness of In 2007, 103 breast cancer patients and healthy relatives at risk were genetics and to inform the integration of genetics into professional seen at the CGCC . We analyzed the variability within this patient group training . in terms of demographic information . The 101 female and 2 male patients were mainly referred by their on- EP10.08 cologists . In terms of age, 4 were < 30, 42 were 30-39, 29 were 40-49 Evaluating service Development: a community based genetic and 28 were > 50 yrs . 97 were Greek Cypriot, 1 was Turkish Cypriot service for consanguineous families of south Asian origin and 5 were of other ethnic backgrounds . Genetic counselling for can- N. Khan1, R. Macleod1, J. Benson2, V. Hollings3, H. Kingston1; cer predisposition genes was in general well appreciated . Uptake of 1Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics research Group, Manchester, genetic testing by patients and their family members were diverse . United Kingdom, 2East lancashire Teaching Hospital, Blackburn, United King- These and other data are being analyzed currently and will be reported dom, 3Blackburn with Darwen Primary Care Trust, Blackburn, United Kingdom. in this poster . A UK Department of Health service development project developed community based, hospital linked genetic services for Asian families EP10.06 affected by autosomal recessive conditions . The 2 year pilot project the increased incidence of breast cancer makes obligatory the (2005-2007) took place in Blackburn a town in the North of England genetic counseling where 20 .4% of the population are of Asian Origin, 50-60% marriages H. Vaida1, I. Tomulescu2, L. Filimon1, G. Roseanu1, M. Marian1; are consanguineous and there is a high incidence of autosomal reces- 1Faculty of Socio-Human Sciences, Oradea, Romania, 2Faculty of Sciences, sive disorders . The aim was to provide a culturally sensitive service by Oradea, Romania. an Asian speaking genetic counsellor . An evaluation determined how In our days there are more and more cases of different cancer types . genetic information was understood, received and transmitted within We can mention many causes responsible for the appearance of these families and factors that affected decisions about genetic testing cancer: environmental, chemical, physical and biological factors . Of and sharing of information . course, in many cases the inheritance has an important role in appear- A total of 42 families affected by a range of autosomal recessive dis- ance of different types of cancer . Our study is about the dynamics of orders were included . On average 5 extended family members were cancer in our county during the 1990-1999 period and the necessity of seen from each index family referred . Uptake of the service was 95% genetic counseling of the persons who have cancer affected relatives . with positive feedback from families . We analysed the data from Medical Direction of Bihor county in men- Evaluation Key points: tioned period . We made a statistical study about the incidence of breast • 97% of families found the service useful and informative . cancer in our county . Also we show the stages for genetic counseling • The number of requests for prenatal diagnosis and carrier testing in two types of groups (one already breast cancer affected and one demonstrates utility . with relatives affected) . • Families identified language and a lack of understanding about Ge- We studied the incidence of breast cancer in feminine population . Also, netic services as previous barriers to accessing services . we studied the area of proceeding and type of cancer . The stages in Key outputs: genetic counseling in breast cancer must include: family and medical • development of protocols/care pathways to access appropriate family history, hereditary vs . sporadic cancer, genes associated with cancer, members . risk assessment, testing options, test results, screening options, pos- • establishment of a community based hospital linked genetic service . sible prevention options and psychosocial assessment . • contact with families previously unknown to clinical genetics service . The breast cancer has an increased incidence in Bihor county . The The paper will highlight families’ views and feedback on the service incidence depends in some types of cancer on patient sort (mascu- and make recommendations for future practice . line or feminine), age and proceeding area . Because of these, genetic counseling is very important in prevention of this type of cancer . EP10.09 Attributions as perdictors for level of functioning and EP10.07 depression in cancer patients communicating genetic information: learning from patient M. Marian1, G. Roseanu1, I. Tomulescu2; experiences and preferences 1Faculty of Socio-Human Sciences, Oradea, Romania, 2Faculty of Sciences, C. L. Bennett1, S. Burke2,1, J. Bedward2, P. Farndon1; Oradea, Romania. 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, In this study we aimed at analyzing weather a negative attributional United Kingdom, 2Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Bir- style is an efficient predictor, for both the male and female patient’s mingham, United Kingdom. future evolution, depending on their stage of illness and type of diag- Where do patients get information about the genetic basis of their con- nosis . Our main objective was to uncover changes and reactions at dition? What healthcare professional groups outside specialist genetics the psychological level of the patients during their stay at the oncol- services provide genetic information and what kinds of information are ogy ward or during medical interventions . By interviewing the patients given? How would patients prefer to receive such information? A quali- (before we administered specific instruments based on the learned tative study was conducted in the UK in 2006 to explore these issues, helplessness theory, such as the Attributional Style Questionnaire) we through telephone interviews with 27 people with or at risk of genetic gathered information regarding their level of functioning which led to conditions and parents of children affected by a genetic condition . the formation of three independent groups . The results highlight the range of healthcare professionals who may be Patients diagnosed with cancer (overall 120 subjects) who did not show approached by patients seeking information and indicate a perceived any symptoms of mental disturbance, 67 females and 53 males who need for greater awareness of genetic aspects of conditions amongst were diagnosed with cancer, classified as having stage one and two, healthcare professionals . Patients acknowledged that healthcare pro- and 36 stage three and four 84 . A total of 79 patients suffering from fessionals cannot be familiar with all genetic conditions in detail, but depression were included in the study, 34 males and 45 females . felt that identifying and referring patients appropriately, and acknowl- Regression analysis showed that the negative attributional style is an edging professional limitations of expertise, were important . efficient predictor for depression in the case of patients suffering from Patients gave us their views on the knowledge, skills and attitudes cancer of the digestive tube . The negative attributional style is a veryEMPAG Posters  efficient predictor for the level of functioning and perceived pain in the EP10.12 case of patients suffering from pulmonary cancer and digestive tube . „Do you know why the doctor sent you?“ - characteristics of the Overall, the results show that the negative attributional mechanisms genetic counselling process in a multicultural antenatal context coupled with other socio-cognitive variables can increase the level of in Johannesburg south Africa depression for patients diagnosed with cancer, on the background of T. Wessels1, C. Penn2; lack of control and / or deficient functioning. 1Division Human Genetics, Johannesburg, South Africa, 2University of the Wit- watersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. EP10.10 Few genetic counselling (GC) research studies have examined the GC An international online survey of genetic health professionals’ process itself, particularly within multicultural settings . State-funded an- practice involving family communication tenatal GC clinics in South Africa service culturally diverse populations L. E. Forrest1,2, M. B. Delatycki1,3, L. Curnow3, L. Skene4, M. Aitken1; and this research study aims to investigate the nature of these encoun- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2The University of ters . Using qualitative methodology, the required data is obtained from Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, GC sessions and post-session interviews with genetic counsellors and Australia, 4The University of Melbourne Law School, Parkville, Australia. the women using the service . GC sessions are video recorded, tran- Communication of genetic information in families is becoming increas- scribed and analysed using thematic content analysis . The results of ingly important due to the low numbers of at-risk family members that three sessions from two counsellors will be presented. Initial findings contact genetic services for counselling . Genetic counsellors and clini- suggest that there is an almost standard structured GC format used cal geneticists (genetic health professionals) are responsible for edu- by counsellors which includes: establishing patient’s expectations, ex- cating and discussing the familial implications of a genetic diagnosis plaining GC role, obtaining information, providing information, facilitat- with probands and consultands . However, genetic health profession- ing decision-making and making referrals . Time spent on each aspect als’ practice in family communication is largely unexplored . varies according to the women’s understanding of language and con- This is the first international survey to be developed and validated tent (as assessed by the counsellor), depth of emotional engagement which aims to explore genetic health professionals’ current practice and counsellor’s skills of communication and relationship building . involving family communication . The survey was administered online Analysis of the nature of the sessions shows some themes emerg- and participants were recruited through the membership email lists of ing and these include: encouraging discussions, attempts to connect, organisations with clinical geneticists and genetic counsellors as pro- clarifying techniques, simple language and patient beliefs . This initial fessional members . analysis showed heightened counsellor awareness of the need to use The survey was completed by 628 genetic health professionals . The comprehensible language to convey concepts and counsellor willing- results demonstrate that the majority of genetic health professionals ness, but difficulty in eliciting and responding to emotional content in always identify which relatives are at-risk (95 .6%) and encourage the face of language and cultural differences . communication about the genetic condition to these family members (95 .4%) . There were generally no differences between clinical geneti- EP10.13 cists and genetic counsellors practice (p>0 .05) when counselling pro- Evaluation of genetic counselling in a hospital-based clinical bands about at-risk relatives, except when discussing which relatives service are at-risk of developing Huntington disease (p=0 .02) . Genetic health C. Serra-Juhé1,2, I. Valenzuela-Palafoll1,2, M. Del Campo1,2, S. García-Miñaúr2, professionals’ practice did not vary greatly when compared across four T. Vendrell2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,2; scenarios which each involved a genetic diagnosis of haemochroma- 1Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, U-735 CIBERER, Barcelona, tosis, familial adenomatous polyposis, Huntington disease or a bal- Barcelona, Spain, 2Programa de Medecina Molecular i Genètica, Hospital Vall anced reciprocal chromosomal translocation . d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. The results of this survey provide an insight into genetic health profes- In order to ascertain the effectiveness of genetic counselling it is nec- sionals’ practice internationally and provide information for the devel- essary first to evaluate how it is carried out and identify aspects that opment of evidence-based practice for genetic and non-genetic health need to be improved . There are few published studies on this topic . Our professionals in the area of family communication . aim was to evaluate the genetic counselling provided by the Genetics Service of the Vall d´Hebron Hospital in Barcelona . Seventy-four out EP10.11 of 108 cases/families (68%) seen in clinic from February to December Genetic counseling in the muslim World : the challenges 2007 were eligible and agreed to participate in this study . Each partici- A. I. Al-Aqeel; pant answered a questionnaire before and after the consultation . Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The whole survey was developed taking into account previous work Genetic counseling is the process in which an individual or a family and publications on the evaluation of genetic counselling . We were obtains information and advice about a genetic condition that may af- particularly interested to study the patient’s prior expectations and fect the individual, his progeny, his relatives, or the family as a whole . whether they had been met during the consultation, patient’s satisfac- Based on this knowledge he can take the pertinent decision regarding tion (instrumental, affective and procedural aspects), and the level of marriage, reproduction, abortion and health management . comprehension of genetic and medical information given during the Genetic counseling includes five themes, medical management, risk consultation . Other epidemiological data, such as gender or age, were determination, risk options, reproductive decision making, and support also collected . Subsequently, a statistical analysis was performed . services .It involves a partnership of physicians, genetic counselors, Participants were satisfied with the genetic counselling received (mean and genetics support groups . The majority of clinical geneticists sub- score of 3 .42 / 4, equivalent to 85 .5% maximum satisfaction), and their scribe to the principle of non-directive ness: information about risks, expectations were met in 79% . They answered correctly 84% of the natural history, treatment, and outcome are presented in a balanced questions about medical and genetic information given to them by the and neutral manner, but decisions about reproduction are left to the geneticist during the consultation . In summary, the evaluation of the family . genetic counselling service was globally quite positive and allowed to Public health authorities are increasingly concerned by the high rate of identify some aspects that could be improved . births with genetic disorders especially in developing countries where Muslims are a majority . Therefore it is imperative to scrutinize the avail- EP10.14 able methods of prevention and management of genetic disorders . In clinician-patient interaction during genetic consultation and the Muslim World and in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), genetic counselling - Case study in five genetic clinics in Colombia counselling involves many challenges, as it has to be carried within the M. C. Rodas Perez1, J. Powell1, M. Thorogood1, J. C. Prieto2,3, I. Zarante2; context of religion and culture, according to Islamic ethical and cultural 1Health Sciences Research Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry, United background of the individual, with community-based genetic counsel- Kingdom, 2Human Genetics Institute, Javeriana University, Bogota, Colombia, ing in one’s own language, in the presence of paucity of expertise, 3Bogota Health Service, Bogota, Colombia. resources and technology . In Colombia and Latin America, genetics services are relatively new, and little attention has been paid to the critical process of communica- tion during genetic consultation and counselling .EMPAG Posters  In collaboration with the Bogota Health Service (Ministry of Health and dramaturgical perspective . Social Protection of Colombia), the Medical Genetics group of the Co- Based on a theme-oriented discourse analysis of over 50 audio-record- lombian Association of Human Genetics, and the University of War- ings of genetic counselling sessions covering a range of conditions, wick (UK), we observed 25 genetic consultations in Colombian genetic we suggest that different familial lines are mutated along self-other clinics and undertook semi-structured interviews with the participants categorisations, reflecting not only the genetic status of the individual before and after the consultation . Thematic analysis of the interview concerned but also the trajectories of past and present familial rela- transcripts demonstrated widespread mismatches between practitio- tions . This means that decisions to test and decisions to disclose test ner perception and patient comprehension . Effective communication procedures/results have to be other-oriented . As far as an individual’s was inhibited by patient, family, practitioner and environmental factors . genetic status is concerned, the ‘carrier’ status of a family member Principal among these were excessive administrative procedures, in- may necessitate a different self-other orientation when compared with terruptions during the consultation, patients’ lack of attention to medical someone’s ‘affected’ and ‘at-risk’ status . terminology, excessive information given in one session, beliefs and In conclusion, we argue that in genetic counselling, both counsellors education level of the patient and/or relatives, patient distress caused and clients have to be other-oriented by ‘decentering the self’ while by bad news, unfulfilled expectations and no availability of treatment. balancing self-other relations by warranting, explicitly, situated differ- We also interviewed 20 medical consultants working in genetics ser- ences and contingencies . The counsellor by seeking `other’ perspec- vices . There was general agreement that genetic counselling in Co- tives becomes other-oriented, which simultaneously makes the client lombia was problematic, and that more training in communication skills other-oriented. Such a stance conflates, following Mead, the ‘self-as- was required at Medical schools . Many physicians did not believe that other’ and ‘self-and-other’ positions . other health professionals should work as genetic counsellors . There was a widespread recognition of limited genetic knowledge in most EP10.17 medical specialities . To develop and translate a set of leaflets for patients and These findings will inform the future development of an effective and families across Europe, that provide information on issues robust genetic counselling service in Colombia . They will also be used related to genetics and genetic testing in the development of the academic curriculum related to basic and C. Lewis1, A. Kent1, H. Skirton2, D. Coviello3; clinical genetics at Colombian Universities . 1Genetic Interest Group, Islington, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Health and Social Work, Plymouth University, United Kingdom, 3Fondazione IRCCS, Os- EP10.15 pedale Maggiore Policlinico,, Milan, Italy. communication of genetic information in families: Funding for a Aim: To develop and translate a set of leaflets for patients and families randomised controlled trial of a genetic counselling intervention. across Europe, that provide information on issues related to genetics M. Aitken1, M. Delatycki1,2, L. Skene3, I. Winship4, S. Donath1, V. Collins1, J. and genetic testing (part of the EuroGentest project) . Hodgson1, S. Metcalfe1, C. Gaff5, J. Halliday1; Leaflet development: A set of 11 patient information leaflets were de- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Bruce Lefroy Cen- veloped on topics related to inheritance patterns and genetic testing . tre for Genetic Health Research, Parkville, Australia, 3Law School University of The themes of the leaflets were decided by a panel of professionals Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 4Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia, and patient group representatives. The content of the leaflets was de- 5Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Australia. veloped with input from patients as well as by building on existing writ- When a person receives a diagnosis of a genetic condition for them- ten patient information. After the first draft the content and layout was selves or for their child, many of their at-risk relatives remain unaware tested out with patients to ensure readability and ensure key topics of this information . This has important health implications, at present were covered. When the content was finalised it was checked by pro- usually in families with single gene disorders, but in future for complex fessionals to ensure accuracy of the text and images . disorders and pharmacogenomics, toxicogenomics and nutrigenom- Leaflet translation (currently underway): First, the content is checked ics . How should important information that will reduce morbidity and with genetic healthcare professionals in each country through a spe- mortality be communicated? cifically designed questionnaire. Adaptations are then made to the text The aim of this study is to investigate whether a genetic counselling in- to ensure it is ‘country specific’. Translators are all bilingual genetic tervention will result in increased access to genetic services by family professionals or PHD students who are recruited through universities members at risk of serious genetic conditions . We have been funded and genetic departments . Translations are cross checked by a sec- to conduct, a randomised controlled trial to assess the effectiveness of ond bilingual genetic professional to ensure their accuracy. Leaflets intense genetic counselling follow-up on the numbers of at-risk rela- are then uploaded onto the EuroGentest website www .eurogentest . tives utilising genetics services . The intervention will be developed us- org/patients to be freely downloaded by professionals and patients . ing appropriate theoretical approaches such as family communication Leaflets are currently avialable in 8 languages, with 12 more to follow. and family systems theory . Clients presenting to a clinical genetic ser- A new set of leaflets which will focus specifically on the psychosocial vice for diagnosis or genetic testing will have the number of at-risk rela- aspects of genetic testing are currently underway . tives recorded . Following randomisation into an intervention or control arm, the number of those at-risk relatives who utilise genetics services EP10.18 will be compared . i say, you hear: What do interpreters say when there are no This multi-disciplinary study will determine whether a genetic counsel- words. ling intervention improves information exchange in families while also M. I. Ross; exploring the issues that arise . The ultimate aim of this study is to pro- Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. vide evidence to enable best practice both nationally and internation- Monash Medical Centre is a busy hospital serving a multicultural popu- ally for the accurate and efficient communication of genetic information lation in excess of one million people . Many clients are young refugees in families for the promotion of their health and well being . and couples keen to have children now they have reached Australian “safety” . EP10.16 All pregnant women are offered serum screening for Down syndrome, mutations of self-other relations in genetic counseling discourse Trisomy 18 and neural tube defects . Women receiving an increased S. Sarangi, A. Clarke; risk for any of these conditions are referred for genetic counselling to Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. discuss their risk, the condition in question, and their choices . Drawing upon the seminal work of George Herbert Mead which under- Interpreters greatly assist our efforts to provide genetic counselling and scores how the ‘self’ is conceptualised as a socially situated reflexive choices to these migrant couples, but it has become clear that there process made possible through the perception of alterity, we propose are times when the clients simply do not understand what the central that the notions of self and other can be understood at a relational level issues under discussion are . This raises concerns that the decisions along three possible configurations - ‘self-as-other’, ‘self-and-other’ made may not have a sound base . Terms such as risk, chance, chro- and ‘self-vs-other’ . The counselling and therapeutic settings, with their mosomes, Down syndrome and spina bifida are a mystery to some. narrative and reflection orientation, give primacy to the `presentation’ In order to improve genetic counselling practise, interviews were con- and `performance’ of the ‘self’, as can be argued from a Goffmanian ducted with hospital interpreters to elicit what is said, especially whenEMPAG Posters  there is not a corresponding word in their given language . Interviews genetic counselling and psychological assessment are fundamental in consisted of standard questions as well as an exploration of gener- this disease . Reasons for the low proportion of secondary cases may ally held beliefs about inheritance, and how decisions are made in the be multiple and should be further investigated in the future . family culture . A review of the questionnaire and the outcomes of these interviews EP10.21 will be discussed . sense making in Predictive Genetic testing of Hereditary cancer. An interview study EP10.19 E. Sumalla1,2, C. Ochoa1, R. Martinez1, C. Yague1, M. Salinas1, I. Blanco1; the genealogical tree is a very important stage in genetic 1Genetic Counseling Unit, L’Hospitalet, Spain, 2Fundació P Gastroenterologia counseling of the families with mentally retarded children Dr. Vilardell, Barcelona, Spain. I. Tomulescu1, H. Vaida2, M. Marian2, G. Roseanu2; Purpose: Mankind involves an active effort to find a purpose in the 1Faculty of Sciences, Oradea, Romania, 2Faculty of Socio-Human Sciences, events that surround us . This construction of meaning is a process Oradea, Romania. that is reinforced with stressful events that may be inconsistent with In humans, some traits are abnormal and they have diverse etiologies . our beliefs about when and why things happen . The aim of this study Certain traits appear isolated in a person and others appear associ- was to evaluate, from a narrative perspective, how biographical factors ated in a diseases called syndromes . may contribute to the formation of different meanings of the genetic To make a pedigree of an individual or a family, it’s a necessity to diagnosis . gather data about the family or individual . We investigated 600 chil- Methods: Three pairs of siblings (n = 6) identified as carriers of a ge- dren hospitalized on period of 2000-2002 in Neuropsychiatric Infantile netic defect were evaluated using semi-structured interview designed Section of Neurology and Psychiatry Clinical Hospital from Oradea . to identify vital changes associated with the process of genetic coun- Results and discussions seling . Three independent researchers conducted content analysis In 600 children that were examined, 397 presented different levels of and identified significant differences between each pair of interviews mental deficiency. We made family investigations and genealogical by consensus . tree . Results: In pair of siblings A, the presence of other stressful events More than 65% of children with mental deficiency have one or more minimize the potential harmful of the genetic diagnosis experienced by affected relatives in family . The relatives may be affected by congeni- one of the brothers; in pair B, the relationship with a very affected close tal abnormalities and/ or mental diseases . The incidences of affected relative encourages active coping problem with one of the members; relatives are important in groups with mild and moderate mental de- and in C, the concept of brotherhood and sacrifice allow one of the ficiency. In the group with severe mental deficiency, the incidence of sisters assume their genetic alteration as an opportunity to increase affected relatives is lower . their family privacy . This result may be an argument for the hypothesis that genetic factors Conclusions: Despite sharing diagnosis, family history of cancer and are very important in the inheritance of mental deficiency. It seems genetic counseling process, the narratives of the siblings presented that, elementary, severe mental deficiency appears because of genes significant differences between them. The use of different frameworks and chromosomes disorders, and secondary because of dominant of interpretation according to the biography of each subject provides or recessive inheritance . The data about family are systematized in the genetic diagnosis of sense and different consequences . pedigree or genealogical tree of the family . Analysing the pedigree of a family, we can say that some traits are inherited or not . Also, we can EP10.22 anticipate some normal or abnormal traits of individuals of the next Delivering genetic counselling via telehealth: practitioner‘s generation . experience of a virtual consultation E. M. Zilliacus1,2, B. Meiser1,3, E. A. Lobb4,5, J. Kirk6, A. Spigelman7, K. Barlow- EP10.20 Stewart8, L. Warwick9, K. Tucker10; Psychological and familiar impact of genetic diagnisis in 1Psychosocial Research Group, Randwick, Australia, 2School of Psychiatry, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy University of New South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 3Prince of Wales Clinical M. Fernández-Prieto1, M. J. Sobrido1,2, B. Quintáns3,2, F. Barros1,2, J. L. Cas- School, University of New South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 4Medical Psychol- tro1, J. Pardo4, A. Carracedo1,2,5; ogy Research Unit, Sydney, Australia, 5WA Centre for Cancer & Palliative Care, 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Perth, Australia, 6Familial Cancer Service, Westmead, Australia, 7Hunter Family Spain, 2Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Cancer Service, Newcastle, Australia, 8Centre for Genetic Education, Royal ISCIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Hospital Clínico de Santiago-SER- North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, Australia, 9ACT Genetic Service, Woden, GAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Servicio de Neurología-Hospital Clínico Australia, 10Department of Medical Oncology, Randwick, Australia. de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 5Grupo de Me- Telehealth, or videoconferencing, is an evolving field in general and dicina Xenómica-USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. cancer genetics . The aim of this study was to qualitatively explore cli- Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a late-onset, slowly nicians’ perspectives and experiences of delivering telehealth genetic progressive muscular disease . Inheritance is autosomal dominant; counselling . Semi-structured interviews were conducted with geneti- penetrance is full, age-dependent . Symptoms are paresis of extra- cists and genetic counsellors . The interviews explored experience, ocular eye muscules, dysphagia and limb weakness . Because it is not satisfaction, aims of the service, advantages and disadvantages of considered a very disabling disorder and molecular diagnosis is simple the technology, and roles within the consultation . RESULTS: Fifteen - making it easily accessible to almost any laboratory- testing may be practitioners participated . They reported that telegenetics increased requested without much concern about psychological and social as- staff efficiency and accessibility to outreach clinics. The geneticists pects . Psychological and familiar impact of this diagnosis has not been presented as the consulting specialist, delivering medical information tackled . Out of 76 patients with suspected OPMD seen in our unit, 45 and screening advice and depended more on the genetic counsellor to (29 families) were positive . In families referred for genetic counselling assess non-verbal behaviour and subtle emotional cues from the cli- we carried out a psychological evaluation with a semi-structured in- ent . Consultations were described as being more formal, and possibly depth interview analyzing motivations, attitude and anxiety . We found less open to emotional expression than face-to- face consultations . In- an average of 1 .8 secondary cases (symptomatic or asymptomatic) per teractions on-screen were moderated by the physical positioning of the index case . 82 % of predictive analyses were positive . We received no genetic counsellor and client . When the counsellor was positioned “off requests for antenatal diagnosis . Twelve months after genetic testing screen”, a medically modelled dyadic interaction occurred and non- another psychological exam was done using HAD and a semi-struc- verbal cues between the counsellor, the geneticist and the client were tured in-depth interview to assess personal and familiar impact of the obscured . When positioned “on screen”, counsellors reported they of- diagnosis. Although molecular confirmation of OPMD did generally not fered a higher level of psychosocial support before, during and after cause serious distortion in psychological aspects or in the familiar core, the telehealth session . some aspects of family life were indeed modified. Even if not perceived Practitioners were highly satisfied with telegenetics but acknowledged as a severe disease in their relatives, for many individuals the possibil- the trade off involved in the geneticist not being physically present . ity of a predictive diagnosis caused significant stress. A protocol for The technology is efficient and offers sufficient resolution to attend toEMPAG Posters  most patients’ psychosocial needs. Findings highlight the benefits of genetic counselling consultations may be unhelpful . co-facilitation between geneticists and genetic counsellor when each has clearly defined complementary roles. EP11. Strategies to facilitate decision EP10.23 making in genetics Explaining X-linked inheritance: the importance of the personal drawing EP11.1 T. Gale1, S. Pasalodos-Sanchez2, L. Kerzin-Storrar1, R. Macleod1; the impact of a BRCA support-information group on the choice 1Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genetics Research Group, CMMC for a preventive mastectomy is limited NHS Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Not- K. M. Landsbergen; tingham Regional Clinical Genetics Service, NUH NHS Trust, Nottingham, Department of Human Genetics. From the Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Nijmegen, United Kingdom. The Netherlands. An explanation of the mechanism of inheritance is a key component of Introduction: Important aims of a BRCA group are assimilation of being many genetic consultations . However, no evidence base exists for this BRCA1/2 carrier, and professional guidance in choosing prophylactic significant area of practice. mastectomy or breast cancer surveillance . We present the results of a process study, involving twenty-one in- Aim: To determine whether attending a BRCA group influences the dividuals with a family history of an X-linked condition . Their genetic choice for surveillance or prophylactic mastectomy . counselling consultations were videotaped and participants were then Patients and methods: 196 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers were included visited at home by the researcher . Adapting techniques of Interper- of who 89 participated in a BRCA group . Preference for prophylactic sonal Process Recall, the section of videotape featuring the explana- mastectomy was registered after mutation carriership was revealed, tion of inheritance was played back to participants . Their responses thus before first attendance of the group. and reflections were elicited and recorded on audiotape. In a separate Results: Characteristics of patients, who did or did not participate in a arm of the study, the counsellors were shown the videotape and were BRCA group, did not show any difference in demographic variables, similarly interviewed by a second researcher about their experience . age at breast cancer diagnosis, menopausal status or family cancer The patients felt that a personalised diagram, drawn by the counsellor history . Preference for preventive mastectomy or surveillance was not during the consultation, conveyed X-linked inheritance in a visual and significantly different in participators and non participators, being 31/89 engaging way, allowing them to conceptualise risk figures. Its step- (35%) and 27/107 (25%) respectively (p=0 .13) . wise construction facilitated slower assimilation of information, allowed After a median observation period of 2 years (range 1-9 years) the room for questions and assisted with retention of the information . The percentage of women actually performing preventive mastectomy was diagram’s individualised nature allowed patients to contextualise their significantly higher in participators than in non-participators of a BRCA family history such that personally relevant questions could be an- group, 45% and 29% respectively (p=0 .02) . However, in the group swered . Importantly, this did not appear to require patients to first un- with prior preference for mastectomy who did and did not participate derstand complicated genetic concepts such as the biological basis of in a BRCA group, prophylactic mastectomy was performed in 90% genes or chromosomes . and 55%, respectively (p=0 .003), in the group with prior preference Counsellors too reflected on the construction of a drawing during the for surveillance these percentages were 19% and 20% respectively consultation; which they felt helped them to both pace and individu- (p=0 .09) . alise the explanation . Conclusion: The impact of a BRCA support group on the choice for This presentation will elaborate on patient and counsellor reflections prophylactic mastectomy is limited, and is determined by the woman’s on this key aspect of the genetic counselling consultation . preference prior to the establishment of a BRCA mutation . EP10.24 EP11.2 Explaining X-linked inheritance: the importance of the Development of a tailored, online decision aid on screening counsellor-counselee relationship options for unaffected men with a family history of prostate S. Pasalodos-Sanchez1, T. Gale2, G. Hall2, L. Kerzin-Storrar2, R. Macleod2; cancer 1Nottingham Regional Clinical Genetic Service, NUH NHS Trust, City Campus, C. Wakefield1,2, B. Meiser1,2, K. Watts1, A. Barratt3, M. Patel3, G. Mann4, E. Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2Regional Genetics Service and Medical Genet- Lobb5,6, K. Howard3, C. Gaff7, J. Ramsay8; ics Research Group, CMMC NHS Trust and University of Manchester, Man- 1Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 2University of New South chester, United Kingdom. Wales, Sydney, Australia, 3University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4University Previous research has highlighted that the quality of the relationship of Sydney, Westmead, Australia, 5Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Aus- between genetic counsellor and counselee can impact on a success- tralia, 6Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia, 7Genetic Health Services of ful outcome of genetic counselling . Many studies have focused on the Victoria, Parkville, Australia, 8Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, Australia. counselee’s perspective . We report on a process study involving 2 ex- PURPOSE: Men at increased risk for prostate cancer on the basis perienced genetic counsellors, as part of a triangulated study looking of family history are confronted with difficult decisions regarding the at how X-linked inheritance is explained in the genetic clinic . Follow- management of that risk . The information that needs to be conveyed ing 10 clinic consultations, the genetic counsellors and the researcher is complex, and men often have difficulty accurately weighing up the (SP-S) watched the relevant sections of the video together, and coun- costs and benefits of screening tests such as prostate specific antigen sellor comments were audiotaped and transcribed . (PSA) screening . The counsellors recognised a favoured sequence for explaining X- METHODS: This study has two stages: (i) to develop and pilot-test an linked inheritance, whilst holding a goal of tailoring the explanation . online, tailored decision aid for unaffected men with a family history of This was made difficult where rapport was less well established be- prostate cancer to inform them about their risk management options; cause of lack of verbal/non-verbal cues from the patient or whether and (ii) to compare in a randomised trial the efficacy of the decision it was the first contact. Where the counsellors felt a good rapport had aid to that of a comparison website amongst men at increased risk of been achieved, they felt better able to take account of age/educational developing prostate cancer on the basis of family history . background/need for information in order to personalise the explana- RESULTS: The early prototypes of the online decision aid were devel- tion more effectively . oped using an iterative process involving a working party comprised of In a separate arm of the study, counselees also expressed the impor- experts and a consumer representative . It provides information on the tance of the relationship in giving them confidence- both in themselves genetics of hereditary prostate cancer, personal and family risk of de- to ask questions for clarification- and in the counsellor’s ability to help veloping prostate cancer; putative protective factors; screening tests them achieve an understanding . and efficacy and side-effects of treatment options. Pilot-testing with It is noteworthy that both counsellors and counselees reflected on approximately 20 unaffected relatives of men diagnosed with prostate counselling dynamics during the part of the consultation, which would cancer is currently underway, and results will be reported from the pilot be thought of us primarily educative .This paper will present further testing phase . evidence that a division between education and counselling goals in CONCLUSION: A decision aid seems particularly suitable to provideEMPAG Posters  this group of men with decision support, and we anticipate that men crises, such as test results or beginning of symptoms . will report better understanding of different risk management strate- gies and increased consumer satisfaction and will be more involved EP12.3 in decision-making . susceptibility to type 2 diabetes: perceptions and family communication regarding inheritance and primary prevention EP12. Family dynamics and genetic S. C. M. van Esch1,2, F. J. Snoek1,2, M. C. Cornel3,2; 1VU University medical center, dept. of Medical Psychology, Amsterdam, The conditions Netherlands, 2VU University medical center, EMGO Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3VU University medical center, dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amster- EP12.1 dam, The Netherlands. Perceived impact of BRCA1/2 testing on familial relationships Type 2 diabetes is a multi factorial disease, which means diabetes and association with psychological distress onset is triggered by interaction of (multiple) genes and environmen- M. Dorval, K. Bouchard, E. Maunsell, S. Camden, J. Simard; tal factors . Family history may serve as a good predictor of diabetes Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. risk . People at risk can delay or possibly prevent diabetes by following Objectives: This study describes the perceived impact of BRCA1/2 a healthy lifestyle . We wonder whether this information is known by testing on relationships with first degree relatives. It also assesses patients and whether they (are able or willing to) share it with their whether experiencing a negative impact on relationships is associated relatives . with psychological distress and whether a positive impact is protective 544 People diagnosed with type 2 diabetes filled in a questionnaire. against distress . It appears in most families talking about diabetes is not taboo . Most Methods: A total of 636 French-Canadian women from 236 families, respondents indicate that ‘sometimes’ diabetes is discussed; mostly who underwent BRCA1/2 testing in the context of the INHERIT BRCAs initiated by the patients themselves . Subjects include mainly diabetes program between August 1998 and July 2004, were enrolled . Among related problems; less developing or preventing diabetes onset . them, 44% had already had cancer; 131 women were found to be mu- Approximately half of the respondents knew about the inheritable char- tation carriers, 172 non-carriers, and 333 had an inconclusive result . acter of diabetes; half of the group prefers more information provided Questionnaires completed at pre-test and then at 1, 12, and 36 months by professionals . A majority agrees on the potential role of patients post-disclosure were used to assess the perceived impact of testing on informing their family; half of the group actually intends to do so . They family relationships and psychological distress . indicated they knew what, how, and whom to tell . Approximately half of Results: Three years post-disclosure, 11% of women perceived that the respondents believes patients should be coached by health profes- testing has a positive impact on their familial relationship compared to sionals . In the presentation, relations between demographic variables only 3% who perceived that the impact was negative . Among mutation (including ethnicity), diabetes related factors (including illness percep- carriers, these proportions reach 16% and 7%, respectively . After con- tions and family history), knowledge on inheritance and primary pre- trolling for a range of socio-demographic, medical, and psychosocial vention, and family communication will be outlined . factors, experiencing a negative impact on relationships with a first- In our opinion, the results may contribute to more targeted and ef- degree relative was significantly associated with long-term distress fective health promotion strategies in diabetes prevention programs . (p=0 .04) . However, the perception that genetic testing had a positive However, we experienced quite different reactions, mostly in non-re- impact on relationships was not protective against distress . sponders, discussing health issues in relation to family matters . Conclusions: Although the perception that genetic testing had a nega- tive impact on family relationships is associated with long-term dis- EP13. Living with genetic disease tress, this is quite infrequent . More research is needed to better un- derstand how the impact of BRCA1/2 testing on family dynamics may EP13.1 affect individuals’ quality of life . The long-term information and support needs of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers EP12.2 V. L. Hunt1, R. Iredale2; social intervention in the context of presymptomatic testing for 1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Institute of late-onset neurological disorders Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. N. Oliveira, J. Pinto-Basto, J. Sequeiros; Genetic testing for inherited breast/ovarian cancer can have far reach- IBMC, Porto, Portugal. ing implications, both for the individual and their family . Research to These diseases have several social and psychological implications date has mainly focused on the short-term impact of testing . The aims (structural, processing, cognitive, emotional changes) . Social interven- of this study were to explore the long-term impact of being identified tion should be based in the systemic concept: good balance between as a BRCA1/2 mutation carrier, investigate the information and support psychodynamics demands of illness and family dynamics and their needs of this group and explore best how cancer genetics services can resources is determinant for the adaptation process and confrontation meet these needs . with the illness . Data was gathered using semi-structured interviews with women who In our protocol of presymptomatic testing, the social worker assesses had undergone genetic testing in Wales and had received a mutation two groups of risk factors: (1) vulnerability centred on the subject (the positive result . The interview transcripts were thematically analysed to genetic risk, personality resources, cognitive resources, etc .); and (2) gain insight into participant’s thoughts and experiences . vulnerability connected with inadequacy of the environment (familial For these women their ‘genetic journey’ did not end upon receipt of structure, separation or death of a parent, chronic disease, economical their test results. The findings suggest that BRCA mutation carriers fragility/poverty, social isolation, etc .) . may have specific needs for information and support that extend be- Social Intervention is carried out through (1) exchanges holding emo- yond the genetic testing process and that these needs may vary over tional positive attitudes; (2) (formal or informal) counselling, allowing time. A number of real or perceived barriers were identified which pre- the establishment of interactions that have the aim of sharing informa- vented participants from accessing support and information . Partici- tion on the disease; (3) material or instrumental support; (4) technical pants made valuable suggestions as to how cancer genetics services support or of services; and (5) access to new contacts . In terms of could address these issues . social intervention, several people have also been helped with waiv- It is likely that no single intervention will be effective in addressing ers for fees in health care (exemption from fees, medication, technical the needs of this heterogeneous group . Further large scale research aids) (23); in the process of their incapacity retirement (10), profes- is needed to investigate how best to target resources to meet client sional conversion or changes (5), in the process for fiscal (IRS) ben- needs . This study explores the views of this group, highlighting issues efits (3), and help finding a nursing home, continued care unit or care that are important to them. The findings emphasise the fact that long- at home (6) . term user involvement is essential in the planning and optimising of Social intervention, in presymptomatic testing for late-onset, so far in- service provision . curable, neurological diseases, has the aim to help the persons at-risk and their family to keep balance and functioning, when confronted withEMPAG Posters 0 EP13.2 ings of the clinic are enacted by the participants, including patients, Decision making dilemmas for E-cadherin mutation carriers: A family members, carers, and researchers . This work will be used to in- family case study form later stages of the PhD, which will include interviews with patients S. C. Downing; and clinical teams and the examination of an archive of HD patient Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United records from the 1970’sto the present day . Kingdom. Current clinical practice emphasises genetic, biological, cognitive and This case study presents two siblings, whose health beliefs, career and physical measurement . These are areas associated with neuroscien- family responsibility had a strong influence on how they perceived their tific research programmes, and patient recruitment is crucial in order risk, management choices and decisions . Both were carriers of an E- to provide large data sets for possible future clinical trials . These data cadherin (CDH1) mutation and chose to manage their risks differently . sets will be kept indefinitely and provide material for international col- Gastric cancer affects 15 per 100,000 people in the UK and around 3% laborative research . However, for patients and families, research in- arise from a clearly identified inherited gastric cancer predisposition. volvement is not always the focus . Rather, they view participation as a One third of families with a strong history of diffuse gastric cancer have privileged medical appointment and a way of getting answers to their germ line mutations in the E-cadherin gene . Mutation carriers have a own situations . They hope for effective treatment via research (stem 70-80% life time risk of developing gastric cancer with associated poor cells) and participation may provide one strategy for coping with the outcome, they also have an increased risk of lobular breast cancer effects of the disease . The research environment and relationships and colon cancer . Predictive testing is available for individuals where with researchers at repeated clinic visits also provides familiarity and a a familial mutation has been identified. A positive result provides chal- social aspect to the whole process, in effect, a nice day out . lenging decisions regarding personal risk management with the option of endoscopic screening or prophylactic gastrectomy . Screening is un- EP13.5 proven and there is concern that early cancer may be missed since it Consensus document on best care in HD: a training/educational is submucosal . The alternative option of surgery carries a high morbid- program for italian neurologists ity with life long adaptations required; limited data exists on the out- G. Jacopini1, P. Zinzi1, A. R. Bentivoglio2, M. Frontali3; come for prophylactic gastrectomy . One sibling opted for preventative 1ISTC/National Research Council, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurologia Università surgery, the other endoscopy screening . Counselling issues included: Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Policlinico “A.Gemelli”, Rome, Italy, 3INMM/National career changes, family dynamics, psychosocial aspects, coping with Research Council, Rome, Italy. major surgery, and quality of life . Management of cancer risk is a per- Huntington’s disease is a rare, complex, hereditary disorder, charac- sonal issue, risk management options should be explored in depth to terized by motor as well as psychiatric symptoms; very often, neurolo- enable the individual to make fully informed decisions . gists are unable to handle these patients, lacking guidelines about the most appropriate way of care for them . In July 2007, upon request EP13.3 of the Italian Association for Huntington’s Chorea (A .I .C .H-Rome and Quality of life in adults with familial adenomatous polyposis A .I .C .H-Milan), our research group organized a multidisciplinary panel (FAP) of experts with the main task of providing recommendations for the K. Fritzell1, J. Björk1, M. Arman2, R. Hultcrantz1, L. Wettergren2; best care in HD . The panel produced a “consensus document” with rec- 1The Swedish Polyposis Registry, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Neuro- ommendations which address HD patients and families’ main needs, biology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. combining together scientific information and long lasting clinical ex- Background: FAP is a disease which among other symptoms is mani- perience . The document covers multiple aspects: making the diagno- fested as multiple polyposis with adenomas in the large intestine, rec- sis and communicating it, therapeutic management and paramedical tum and duodenum . These adenomas are very likely to turn cancerous treatments, nutrition and dietary supplements, genetic risk and genetic over time . The disease is inherited autosomal dominant . Surgery is testing protocol, co-morbidity, palliative and end-of-life care, non medi- the only treatment that can prevent colorectal cancer and prophylactic cal support, indications for referral . surgery is performed on all patients . Preoperative symptoms are rare, The document, written in a synthetic style, contains practical recom- but a large number of patients report functional impairments after sur- mendations aimed at minimize inappropriate care and introducing re- gery . search findings into clinical practice of neurologists not familiar with Aim: The aim of the study was to describe how adult patients with FAP HD issues . The document will be printed (10 .000 copies) and, start- perceive that the disease has affected their life . ing May 2008, first introduced in the course of three main educational Method: Adult patients (≥20 years) attending the outpatient clinic at events (in Northern, Central and Southern Italy) for neurologists . Then The Swedish Polyposis Registry were invited to participate in focus the document will be delivered to 3,500 neurologists working both in group interviews (n=43) . Three focus group interviews were conduct- public health care settings and in the private field. In the future we plan ed . Data was analysed by means of content analysis . to assess the impact of the document through meaningful and measur- Results: The content analysis revealed nine themes: Worries and con- able outcomes . cerns, Social life, Choice of career and education, Risk of giving the disease to the children, Changed food and toilet habits, Experiences EP13.6 of endoscopic examinations, Relationships to health care providers, Living with a person with Huntington‘s disease Stories about hospital stay at their first surgery, Knowledge of FAP. A. J. A. G. Van Tongerloo, A. M. J. J. De Paepe; Conclusion: The study has highlighted several issues of concerns re- University Hospital Gent, Gent, Belgium. lated to FAP . Worries about getting worse due to the disease were ex- Introduction: Huntington’s disease, an autosomal dominant neurode- pressed by many of the participants but not anyone mentioned cancer generative disorder, is characterized by a triad of progressive motor, as a threat for future health . Due to the heredity of the disease, having cognitive and emotional symptoms . In 1994, predictive testing through own children or not was a deep and complex question and the discus- the direct DNA test became available . The psychological impact of car- sion gave an impression of a need to defend one’s standpoint . riership on the testee and his/her partner has been extensively evalu- ated and reviewed . Few studies however, have been conducted to EP13.4 explore how living with a person with the disease affects the healthy Participation in Huntington‘s disease research:hoping, coping partner’s daily life . and a nice day out Materials and Methods: In January 2008, a qualitative study was set J. Needs; up, in which partners of persons with HD are questioned through a Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. semi-structured interview . Topics that are questioned are: coping with This poster is based on an ongoing PhD examining Huntington’s dis- the partner’s symptoms, the symptoms that are the most difficult to ease (HD) as a case study of how the development of genetic technol- deal with, the changes in personal life of the healthy partner, and the ogies and identification of human genetic mutations, affect the work of future perspectives for the healthy partners . Furthermore, participants the clinic and the lives of patients . Ethnographic data from neurological are asked about their feelings towards their partner, and about com- research clinics (n=11) will be used to explore the current nature and munication on the disease with the affected partner, with their children structure of clinical work itself, and will illustrate how different mean- and with significant others.EMPAG Posters  Results: Preliminary results of this study, which is still ongoing, will be ular focus will be placed on potential thematic differences between presented . It is anticipated from our clinical experience that emotional/ cancer groups and genders . These data will inform the development character changes of the partner are most difficult to cope with, since of a survey instrument, which we aim to administer on an international the partner often becomes a “different” person to live with . Changes in scale through collaborations with the Association for Multiple Endo- personal life include mainly changes in the role model in the partner crine Neoplasia Disorders (AMEND) and the VHL Family Alliance . relationship . Healthy partners often experience the daily care and the material consequences of Huntington’s disease as a major burden for EP13.9 the future . managing relationship needs while living with chronic genetic illness EP13.7 F. Pearce; Psychosocial aspects of living with Long Qt syndrome. A Genetic Health, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. qualitative study The special care requirements of children, who progressively become J. Andersen1,2, N. Oyen1,3, C. Bjorvatn1,3, E. Gjengedal1; physically and intellectually disabled due to metabolic illness, can be 1Department of Public Health and Primary Health Care, University of Bergen, emotionally and physically overwhelming . Bergen, Norway, 2Norwegian Porphyria Center, Haukeland University Hospital, All family relationships are under pressure in these circumstances . At Bergen, Norway, 3Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Hauke- the same time, people discover capabilities and strengths that would land University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. rarely be known about or used, under more normal situations . Background: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a genetic disorder char- Often, the sick child’s primary care-giver (usually their mother) has to acterized by prolongation of the QT interval on the electrocardiogram, make choices from several competing needs at the one time . How potentially leading to life-threatening arrhythmias and increased risk of are these choices made? On what basis are they prioritised? A great sudden death . In Norway LQTS patients and their families are offered number of relationships fail in these circumstances, however others diagnostic or predictive genetic testing . Norwegian legislation states are awe inspiring . that genetic counseling is mandatory in connection with genetic testing This presentation will include case material that demonstrates how of healthy individuals . some couples cope and how others feel forced to ‘give up’ . Purpose: The purpose of this qualitative study was to - Investigate the psychosocial aspects of living with LQTS EP14. Other relevant psychological and - Describe LQTS patients’ experiences with healthcare services . Material and methods: In-depth interviews with seven Norwegian social topics in genetics adults tested for long QT genetic mutations, was conducted . Four par- ticipants had an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD). EP14.01 Results: Participants experienced worries and limitations in daily life mental representations of pregnant women with advanced and it was a general wish among them to be able to talk to someone maternal age (AmA) who undergo amniocentesis: a unique with the same condition . Their main concern was not for their own dynamic process health but for their children or grandchildren . Having an ICD was ex- A. S. Leonardo1, J. Justo2, I. Cordeiro1; perienced as an additional safety but it could also cause social em- 1Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Faculdade Psicologia e Ciências de barrassment and anxiety . Early and gradually acquired knowledge of Educação, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. the syndrome was reported as an advantage . Healthcare providers’ Non routine medical procedures, such as amniocentesis, have been minimal knowledge of LQTS resulted in uncertainty, misinformation, suggested to have an emotional impact on pregnant women . Anxiety and even wrong advice on treatment . is an obvious consequence, the psychological “suspension” of the Conclusion: Knowledge of the challenges met by this patient group pregnancy might be another one . We propose that the process of ac- is important in order to provide adequate genetic counseling . Further cepting the reality of gestation and the reality of the foetus, expected investigations into the psychosocial aspects of LQTS are desirable . to occur respectively in the first and second trimester, is postponed in AMA women who undergo amniocentesis until after the result comes EP13.8 through . Unmet information and support needs amongst individuals Building mental representations about the foetus is an important part affected by one of two rare cancer syndromes: mEN2A and VHL of the psychological process that takes place during pregnancy . In fact, N. A. Kasparian1,2, A. Rutstein3,2, B. Meiser3,2, J. Koehler4, J. Tyler4, K. Tucker4; some studies have questioned the importance of these representa- 1School of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New South Wales, tions for the quality of the mother-baby relationship/ interaction . Am- Kensington, NSW, Australia, Kensington, Australia, 2Department of Medical niocentesis is thus performed during a crucial period of intense and Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 3Prince of Wales dynamic internal activity . The purpose of this study was to understand Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW, Australia, how does this procedure influence the dynamic process by which AMA Kensington, Australia, 4Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Prince of Wales Hospital, women build representations of the foetus as their “child-to-be” . Randwick, Australia. We applied an adaptation of Interview R to a group of 35 pregnant Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) and von Hippel Lindau AMA women (A) and a control group (NA), before and after amnio- syndrome (VHL) are rare, inherited, early onset cancer syndromes centesis . Before amniocentesis, group A gave “less rich” and “less characterised by the development of tumours in one or more parts of positive” descriptions of their future babies, and characterised them the body . Genetic testing is typically carried out in young children with as “less active” and “quieter” . After the results were known, the only a family history of either condition. Individuals identified as gene carri- difference between the two groups was that NA women continued to ers undergo lifelong surveillance in order to detect tumours at an early describe their future children in a more positive way . stage . Little is known, however, about the psychosocial experiences of These findings suggest that the dynamic process of maternal mental individuals affected by MEN2A or VHL . This study aims to identify the representations is unique in AMA women who undergo amniocente- unmet information and support needs of individuals affected by these sis . rare cancer syndromes. Patients with a confirmed diagnosis of MEN2A or VHL were ascertained via the Hereditary Cancer Clinic at Prince of EP14.02 Wales Hospital, NSW, Australia . A semi-structured individual interview GeneBanc. studying the ethical, legal and social aspects of was developed to assess five broad themes: impact of MEN2A/VHL Biobanking on various life domains such as relationships, education and employ- P. Borry, K. Dierickx; ment; attitudes towards childbearing; coping strategies; family commu- Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Leuven, Belgium. nication about the disease; and unmet information and support needs . Background . The last few years have witnessed an important expan- Interviews with approximately 20 patients and 16 caregivers are cur- sion of collection and processing of human biological samples and of rently underway, with 16 completed patient interviews and 8 completed the related information data . Biobanks are huge repositories of human caregiver interviews . Data will be analysed separately for patients and biological specimens and have a strategic importance for genetic re- caregivers, using qualitative data analysis software, QSR N6. Partic- search, clinical care and future treatments .EMPAG Posters  Objective . GeneBanC is an acronym for the research project Genetic municated about cancer and affected family cohesion and hence the bio- and dataBanking: Confidentiality and protection of data. Towards support available to participants . It also increased their awareness of a European harmonization and policy. This E .U .-funded research proj- their dying trajectory, altering the way they coped with the disease . ect that has been funded by the European Commission and aims to in- This study show that there are complex challenges for health care pro- vestigate the ethical, legal and social issues of three types of biobanks: fessionals when supporting dying patients worried about their family classical banking, population banking and forensic DNA databases . history of cancer . Method . The workload has been split up in various workpackages, studying respectively (a) the issue of privacy and confidentiality in EP14.05 biobanking; (b) the existing regulatory framework of biobanks across translating research into practice: Health care professionals’ the E .U . and the regulation regarding the establishment, management and researchers’ understanding of cancer genetics activities in and functioning of biobanks; (c) forensic genetic databases; (d) gover- the UK nance aspects of biobanks . N. Hallowell1, S. Cooke1, G. Crawford2, M. Parker3, A. Lucassen2; Expected results . It is expected that the results obtained within the dif- 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of South- ferent objectives described above will be of great use for the develop- ampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3University of Oxford, Oxford, United ment of policy oriented recommendations concerning the organisation Kingdom. and management of biobanks . Proposals will be elaborated in order to DNA-testing for hereditary cancers and high risk cancer surveillance reach where appropriate a harmonized regulatory framework across in the UK takes place either as part of research protocols (and thus, the European Union . requires ethical approval) or is offered as an NHS clinical service . The route chosen may depend on a range of factors . This multidisciplinary EP14.03 project investigates healthcare professionals’, patients’ and regulators/ support groups for women carrying a BRCA or BRCA other stakeholders’ understandings of cancer genetics activities within mutation : a first experience. the UK . It looks at how these different groups conceive of research and K. Baudry-Samb1, P. Pujol1, C. Laurent1, I. Coupier1,2; clinical practice, and aims to identify any perceived ambiguities and 1CHU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 2CRLC Val d’Aurelle, Montpel- practical and/or ethical problems that are generated by these activities lier, France. for the different actors . Semi-structured interviews have been carried During consultations we felt that women carrying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 out with healthcare professionals and researchers (HCPs) (n= 40) who mutation had a strong desire to share their experience . We decided to are involved in cancer genetics research and/or provide a clinical can- set up a support group for them . cer genetics service . The interviews suggest that research and clini- The aim of this support group was to give the patients a place where cal practice are perceived as standing in a complex relationship with each individual could be heard, and where experiences and informa- each other . In some cases our respondents made strenuous efforts to tion could be shared . distinguish these activities, while at other points in their interview they 53 women patients were invited by mail, and 8 of them decided to struggled to identify differences between them . The boundary between participate . They all had a personal history of breast and/or ovarian research and clinical practice within cancer genetics, could thus, be cancer . Six had undergone preventive surgery . characterised as ambiguous, flexible, permeable and a permanently We chose a non-directive method, allowing the patients to decide shifting phenomenon . The strategies that healthcare professionals use what topic was to be addressed at each meeting . We met every 1 .5 to distinguish these activities are described . month, during 1 hour, for 7 months (5 meetings) . Meetings were led by a psychologist, a geneticist and a clinical research assistant . The EP14.06 themes addressed were: cancer (family history, isolation, relationships Evaluating the impact of a self-help coping intervention: a study with closed ones, the body image, treatment, surgery, feminity), loss outline of the cARiAD trial. (of self, of a part of one-self, of a loved one), pre-symptom analysis, H. Jones1, C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, K. Brain1, K. Hood3, J. Gray4, A. Murray5; maternity, preventive surgery, and medical questions . 1Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Our goal was met . Indeed, a positive dynamic was present throughout United Kingdom, 2Nursing, Health and Social Care Research Centre; Cardiff the meetings . Most of the themes of concern in this particular patient University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Health Sciences, School of population were addressed . The patients’ feedback was very positive . Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Wales Centre for Health, It allowed some of them who could not talk at home to share their dif- Cardiff, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of ficulties, and others to begin a dialog with their closed ones. Wales, Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom. This year, we started 3 new groups, involving 22 patients, based on Background Around a third of individuals undergoing genetic risk as- Spiegel’s supportive-expressive method . sessment report high levels of distress and are likely to benefit from in- creased psychological support. A self-help leaflet has been developed, EP14.04 based upon coping theory, to help individuals cope with unwanted wor- Dying with a family history of cancer: A phenomenological study ries whilst waiting for genetic information . The intervention encourages A. K. Lillie; individuals to restrict consideration of the issues related to their risk University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. for a set time each day, and to actively distract from intrusive thoughts There has been widespread media coverage about the potential for at all other times . The CARIAD trial is evaluating the psychological an inherited predisposition to cancer in Britain . This study aimed to impact of this intervention . describe how this was affecting care needs of palliative care patients . Study aims 1) To evaluate the short- and longer-term impact of the Data was collected through recorded, semi-structured interviews with intervention on levels of distress at key stages of the assessment twelve patients with advanced cancer . Purposive sampling ensured process 2) To explore the impact of the intervention on emotional re- that participants had been predeceased by at least one first degree sponses and coping . relative with cancer . Data was coded using an iterative approach into Design Recruitment commenced in September 2007 . Over a nine themes that arose from the participants experiences . Van Manen’s month period 1,000 male and female referrals into the Cancer Ge- (1990) schema of existential analysis was then used to identify the netics Service for Wales will be pre-randomised to receive either the relationship between the themes under investigation . coping leaflet or standard care and asked to complete a postal ques- This study showed that patients were dying with concerns about the tionnaire at 3 time points: upon referral, whilst waiting for genetic risk implications of their disease for their families . Concerns for children information (4 weeks post-referral) and one month post-risk . were widespread and existed in patients who did not think that their Outcomes The primary outcome measure is the level of situation-spe- own cancer was associated with an inherited susceptibility, patients cific distress over time, as measured by the Impact of Event Scale. who had been informed that they were not at high risk of familial dis- Secondary outcomes and potential moderators include positive and ease and in patients who had not discussed their anxieties before . negative affect, risk understanding, illness perceptions, and coping . The participants’ experience of dying was affected by previous death The intervention may also be appropriate during other periods of wait- within the family: especially by the deaths of relatives who had died at ing and uncertainty such as undergoing predictive or prenatal genetic a younger age than normal . It changed the way the participants com- testing or awaiting screening outcomes .EMPAG Posters  EP14.07 thought to be affected in the UK, but unfortunately the majority remain Psychosocial and demographic profile of a deaf community in undiagnosed . Effective preventative treatment is available, if untreated the Altai Republic: a pilot study it leads to premature Coronary Heart Disease (CHD) and death . Cas- O. L. Posukh, O. V. Posukh; cade testing using genotyping has recently become available in South Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Wales on a research basis . The study is based on data obtained from self-completion question- The main aims of this study were to explore how patients and their naires designed to evaluate marital status and marriage patterns of family members receive, make sense of and transmit genetic informa- deaf persons, their communication mode, access to education, em- tion and the impact this dynamic process has on perceptions of risk . ployment and information, and their living standard and social status . Face to face semi structured interviews were conducted with seven The participants belonged to the association of deaf and hard-of-hear- patients in whom a clinical diagnosis of FH had been made and who ing people in the Altai Republic (south Siberia, Russia) . had recently undergone genetic testing and received a mutation posi- In recent years total number of the association members varied from tive result . A further seven interviews were conducted with members of 150 to 160 people at the age of 18-85 years with approximately equal their families who had also undergone genetic testing to follow the flow gender ratio . Most of them have congenital or early onset severe-pro- of this genetic risk information . The interview transcripts were themati- found deafness . About two thirds of adult members are married to deaf cally analysed to gain insight into their experiences . partner and almost all the young unmarried people with hearing loss The findings suggest that this genetic information help the patients to tend to prefer deaf partner in future . Deaf participants indicated sign make sense of their condition . Family members reported an open style language as communication mode with other deaf persons, whereas of communication although this process and emotional responses to in communication with hearing people they use lip-reading, writing, genetic risk information were complex . This research highlights some and oral language skills, if any . Their embarrassment in contacts with key issues for future research of this complex dynamic process . hearing people due to mutual misunderstanding leads to preferential contacts with deaf people . Most of participants consider their hearing EP14.10 loss as disability which limits access to education and employment, carriers of a cancer pre-disposition gene: Gaining an insight of and decreases their social status and living standard . their ongoing needs Our molecular-genetic studies revealed deafness caused by Cx26- M. K. Kentwell, R. D’Souza, M. Bogwitz, F. Macrae, G. Lindeman, L. Hodgkin; mutations in not less than 15% of examined members of this asso- Familial Cancer Centre, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia. ciation, and several families with hereditary deafness of yet unknown Research has shown that people who carry a cancer predisposition etiology . gene (gene carriers) value follow up from a Familial Cancer Centre This study has implications for genetic counselling for families with (FCC) after learning of their results . Gene carriers may require ongo- hereditary deafness, and provides insight to deafness prevalence pat- ing support over time, as their needs in adjusting to their genetic status tern in the Altai Republic . may change through the family life cycle . This ongoing support may Work is supported by Russian Foundation for Humanities (07-06- include a discussion of issues around impact and adjustment to the ge- 00765a) . netic test result . From an FCC perspective, communication of genetic information to family members also needs to be explored . EP14.08 The follow up practice at the Royal Melbourne Hospital Familial Can- Psychosocial impacts of the neonatal hearing screening cer Centre has involved a yearly phone call from a Genetic Counsellor R. Heitor1,2, H. Romano3, I. Rouillon1, C. Pol4, N. Loundon1, C. Rebichon1, E. to a gene carrier . This format may not be optimal for many gene car- Garabédian1, F. Denoyelle1, S. Marlin1,2; riers. As the number of gene carriers increase, many FCCs may find 1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Centre de référence des Surdités their increased workload unsustainable . Génétiques, Paris, France, 3Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 4Hôpital du This presentation will summarise a trial of an alternative strategy of Kremlin Bicêtre, APHP, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France. supporting gene carriers over time. In addition, issues identified by the Since February 2005, an experimental program of neonatal screening gene carriers themselves will be described . of the congenital deafness is in process in France . Our purpose is: - to estimate the psychological impacts of the screen- EP14.11 ing; - to measure the risk of creating an anxiety in the parents and thus comparison of experiences between italian and other European to hinder the development of the attachment mother / child links, which Genetic Nurses set up in the very early neonatal period; by the study of the false posi- M. Regele1, M. Gabaldo2, F. Benedicenti1, F. Stanzial1, C. Castellan1; tive families (hearing children with pathologic automatic ABRs) . 1Genetic Counseling Service of the Province of Bolzano/Bozen, Bolzano/ A questionnaire was realized, and sent by mail to families, accompa- Bozen, Italy, 2Section of Biology and Genetics, Dpt.of Mother and Child and of nied with a letter explaining the reasons of our research. The first part Biology-Genetics, University of Verona, Italy. of the questionnaire concerns the information which was given to the The professional figure of the Genetic Nurse (GN) is well defined in parents before the screening, the result obtained at the test and the some European and extra-European Nations . In these countries there information which followed this result . The second part of the question- are formal courses of studies, which allow the students to graduate naire focuses in the way back at home looking forward to the consulta- to GN . tion with the ENT, in which the hearing defect will be confirmed or not. In Italy there isn’t either a formal acknowledgement of the figure of the The third part of the questionnaire concerns the feelings of the parents GN, nor does exist a specific education for non-medical personal work- at the time of the ENT consultation, the information given to them, ing in clinical genetic institutes . and the impact of the final diagnosis. Then the last part is about the Nevertheless we knew that some people, scattered among Italy and general feelings of the parents as regards the neonatal screening of generally without knowing of the existence of other colleagues sharing the deafness and finally the impact of this screening on their relations the same mansions, were working in the field of clinical genetics. with their baby . With the aim of creating a national net of GNs and of promoting the This work allows us to give some recommendations to improve this official situation of this figure after specific learning programmes, we screening in the future . made the first census of the Italian GNs. After phone contact with the directors of the centers for clinical genet- EP14.09 ics, we submitted a questionnaire to the people working as GNs and Exploring the impact of genetic testing for Familial analyzed the results . Hypercholesterolaemia: a family perspective. The activities of the GNs in other countries were taken from literature M. S. Watson1, D. Townsend2, I. McDowell2, K. Featherstone3; and through direct contact with Dr . Heather Skirton . 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Our data showed marked heterogeneity of duties of the GNs in Italy but Biochemistry, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3CESAGEN/ School of Nursing & Mid- the majority of the mansions matches that of the foreign colleagues . wifery, Cardiff, United Kingdom. The Italian GNs feel in need of a specific course of studies to prepare Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- them to a highly specialized work, which should be acknowledged by der with a prevalence of 1 in 500, approximately 110,000 people are the national health system .EMPAG Posters  EP14.12 4Melbourne University, Melbourne, Australia, 5Melbourne University, Melbourne, the role of the specialist midwife in Fetal medicine Units. Austria. F. Pancetti1, S. Boxall2, C. Bravi3, A. Kustermann3, P. Simi1, I. Cetin3, D. A. Background: Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) is a genetic condition (47,XXY) Coviello3; affecting males and resulting in a spectrum of clinical features, ranging 1Dipartimento di Ostetricia e Ginecologia, AOU Pisana, Pisa, Italy, 2Fetal Medi- from infertility, androgen deficiency and breast development to vary- cine Unit, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3Fondazione ing levels of cognitive, social, behavioural and learning difficulties. The IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, prevalence has been estimated to be 1:650, yet up to 70% of males Italy. remain undiagnosed. Early identification has been advocated for many The role of the midwife in fetal medicine unit in UK is quite well de- years, but population-based genetic screening for KS has never been fined. Some specific actions are: advocate and support for women; explored . provision of information about the nature of the abnormality (both writ- Aim: To identify the potential risks and benefits that could arise from ten and verbal) for women and other health professionals; counselling implementing population-based genetic screening for KS at different women about their choices regarding the pregnancy, and preparing ages and stages of development . women for either termination of pregnancy or continuing with a baby Method: A framework was developed to assess the medical (hormone, who has abnormalities; led clinics for antenatal counselling and fol- therapeutic interventions), psychological (self-esteem, relationships) low up after TOP and bereavement care; communication with other and ethical (autonomy, associated stigma) implications of genetic health professionals to ensure continuity of care for women . In Italy screening for KS in four hypothetical age-dependent scenarios - new- the role of specialist midwife is still quite heterogeneous, depending born, infancy, primary school entry and high school entry - chosen as on the presence or not of a well defined Fetal Medicine Units. We providing opportunistic circumstances in which an individual might be present a collaborative effort to share experience between UK and evaluated . The outcomes have been considered in relation to diag- Italian midwife in defining the appropriate skill required as advanced nosis in adulthood and the most common scenario of lifelong non-di- communication skills; counselling training; specialist knowledge about agnosis. Evidence of potential risks and benefits associated with KS prenatal diagnosis; highly developed analytic and judgemental skills; diagnosis was collected by analysis of the existing literature . planning and organisational skills; technically adept; leadership skills; Results: Our analysis indicates that while there is information on avail- IT literate; support for self- emotional and psychological . able medical, educational and psychological interventions, there has The aim of this collaborative work is to define a general framework that been no consideration of the impact of age of diagnosis and the re- describe the role of the specialist midwife in fetal medicine in order to lated timing of interventions on psychosocial and other quality of life establish a model that can be applied internationally . outcomes . The work of the specialist midwife in Fetal Medicine is challenging and Conclusion: More research is needed to fill these evidential gaps and rewarding, and offers scope for providing excellence in clinical care for inform decisions regarding population-based genetic screening for pregnant women and their families . KS . EP14.13 EP14.15 collecting data of HD patients for the Euro-HD Registry: an Genetic counselling training and supervision in a second uptodate from Rome sites language: is it different? P. Zinzi1, A. Fasano2, A. Guidubaldi2, T. Ialongo2, G. Loria2, F. Soleti2, A. R. R. D. Vanneste, J. Fitzpatrick, L. Russell; Bentivoglio2, S. Romano1,3, M. Spadaro1,4, G. Jacopini1, M. Frontali4; McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. 1Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, National Research Council, Purpose: Live supervision is a key component of the training of genetic Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, UCSC, Rome, Italy, 3UOC Neurology counsellors . However, the ways in which training and supervision differ Azienda Ospedaliera Sant’Andrea, Rome, Italy, 4Institute of Neurobiology and for students and supervisors when these activities occur in a second Molecular Medicine, CNR, Rome, Italy. language have not yet been explored . The Euro-HD Network is aimed at providing a platform for profession- Method: A questionnaire was distributed to members of the CAGC and als and people affected by HD and their relatives in order to facilitate NSGC using the online survey provider, www .surveymonkey .com® . collaboration throughout Europe . The core of the study is the Registry, Data were analyzed using a consensual qualitative method modified a systematic collection of clinical research data of HD patients, of mu- from Hill et al . (1997) . tation carriers and of individuals who are part of HD families . Results: Supervisors find it difficult to assess students’ psychosocial Two study sites participate to Euro-HD network in Rome: one is at counselling skills in the second language, and feel personal discomfort the Consiglio Nazionale Ricerche (C .N .R .) and is based on the long in having an incomplete understanding of session content . Students, in lasting cooperation between two main institutes of public research, the turn, describe decreased competence when counselling in their second Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies (I .S .T .C/CNR) and language, and a greater focus on the medical aspects than on the psy- the Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine (I .N .M .M/CNR); chosocial dimensions . Interestingly, students whose second language the other one is at the Neurology Department of the Università Cat- is French (mainly Canadian) describe more negative experiences and tolica del Sacro Cuore (U .C .S .C .) Both sites are involved in running an more difficulties in certain areas, such as building rapport with patients, outpatient clinic for HD patients started in 1989 as a common research than do students who counsel in Spanish (mainly American) . This may project and which has assumed, since 1994, the characteristic of a reflect differences in patient expectations for receiving service in their multidisciplinary clinic . The individuals followed at the clinic are 312: native tongue in Canada compared to the US . The language of train- 65% are symptomatic patients, 20% are subjects at risk (pre-test neu- ing, whether it is the student’s first or second, was described as having rological examination), 15% are asymptomatic gene carriers (post-test a major impact on counselling abilities and comfort level in the second follow-up) . language . Overall, however, the use of second languages in training For the Euro-HD project, from Sept 2004 to Dec . 2007 we have com- seems to have a positive impact for both students and supervisors, pleted and entered into the Registry the data collection of 75 patients leading to increased satisfaction in providing linguistically and cultural- (37 Males and 38 Females): 69 symptomatic patients and 6 asymp- ly-centered patient care. The implications of these findings for genetic tomatic gene carriers . For further 15 patients we are now completing counselling training will be discussed . the last forms and their data will be entered quite soon . Data analysis and comments on different aspects of data collection EP14.16 will be reported . “Asking for oncogenetic counseling”: evaluation of psychological aspects, need for information and perceived risk EP14.14 E. Razzaboni, D. Turchetti, D. Fabbro, E. Pompilii, A. Petracca, C. Graziano, A. The risks & benefits of screening for Klinefelter syndrome: A Wischmeijer, M. Seri, G. Romeo; critical analysis Operative Unit of Medical Genetic, Bologna, Italy. A. S. Herlihy1,2,3, J. Halliday1,4, R. I. McLachlan2,3, M. Cock3, L. Gillam1,5; The amount of clients seeking oncogenetic counselling (OGC) is rap- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Monash Uni- idly growing up . Understanding communicational aspect and clients’ versity, Melbourne, Australia, 3Andrology Australia, Melbourne, Australia, styles of information seeking, together with personality, is fundamentalEMPAG Posters  to optimize counseling service . We necessitate to analyze psychoso- ing for women at significantly increased risk of familial ovarian cancer. cial features to fit counseling process to client personality and needs. Phase 2 of the study involves annual transvaginal ultrasound scan To reach this goal, since 2004 we have evaluated needs for informa- (TVS) of the ovaries and 4-monthly CA125 blood tests with further tion, motivations and psychosocial characteristics of individuals asking tests prompted by rising CA125 or abnormal TVS . for OGC because of their familial history of common cancers (breast, Method: PsyFOCS is a prospective cohort study which aims to deter- colon, thyroid, etc.). 110 counselees fulfilled a questionnaire before mine the psychological effects of ovarian cancer screening . Around receiving OGC assessing: sociodemographic features, health locus of 66% of women invited to PsyFOCS returned pre-screening baseline control, monitoring/blunting, general self efficacy, motivations, emo- questionnaires . tional state and perceived risk . 76 were affected by cancer and 34 Results: Baseline analyses (N=991) showed that clinical levels of were unaffected . Cancer risk was assessed either with genetic testing depression and anxiety were reported by 2 .63% (n=26) and 14 .63% or with validated probabilistic models . Our results have showed that (n=145) of women respectively . However, over a third (n=369, 37 .24%) counselees have: no clinical psychological distress, high level of self were moderately or highly distressed about their ovarian cancer risk efficacy but not a specific style of information seeking. They feel at high according to the Impact of Event Scale (IES). There were no significant risk for cancer running in the family and they strongly want information associations between IES distress and prior ovarian TVS (p= .50) or about surveillance and prevention actions . Perceived risk is related to the number (p= .95) or reported stressfulness (p= .56) of repeat ovarian some psychological variables (coping and mood) and in unaffected cancer screening in the past . However, highly distressed women were people it is not related to cancer risk estimated . We can conclude that, significantly younger than those reporting moderate or low distress individual seeking OGC have adaptive psychological resources that let (p<.001) and there was a significant association between distress and them cope with familial cancer risk, and that evaluating psychological past ovarian cancer screening recall (p< .05) . profile has several implications into clinical practice, because psycho- Conclusion: The results suggest that although most women reported logical variables significantly influence risk perception. low levels of distress prior to UK FOCSS screening, younger women and those recalled for repeat testing may experience greater distress . EP14.17 triangulation of methods: a novel approach to investigating EP14.19 valued outcomes from using clinical genetics services Mental and psychomotor development of 2-year-old PGD/PGS M. McAllister1, K. Payne2, R. MacLeod3, D. Donnai1, L. Davies2; twins compared to icsi twins 1Nowgen (A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare) & Medical Genetics Research J. Nekkebroeck1, M. Bonduelle2, S. Desmyttere2, I. Ponjaert-Kristoffersen1; Group, The University of Manchester, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United 1Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Kingdom, 2Nowgen (A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare) & Health Economics Introduction: Embryo biopsy is a invasive procedure applied in ART Research at Manchester, School of Community-based Medicine, The University for diagnostic reasons in Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Medical Genetics Research or to increase pregnancy rate in Preimplantation Genetic screening Group, The University of Manchester, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United (PGS) . The objective of this ongoing study is to investigate mental and Kingdom. psychomotor developmental outcomes in 2-year-old twins born after The patient benefits from using clinical genetics services are hard to PGD/PGS and Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI) . measure, and there is little consensus about appropriate outcome Materials and Method: PGD/ PGS (n = 32) and ICSI (n = 32) children measures . This paper describes a programme of research that aimed were recruited from the registry of the Centre for Medical Genetics (UZ to work towards a core set of outcome measures suitable for evaluat- Brussel) . The obtained response rates were 97% and 94% respec- ing clinical genetics services . The approach involved 4 types of tri- tively . All twins were assessed around age 2 and were matched for angulation (method, investigator, discipline and data) . Three methods gender, educational level of the mother, birthorder and mothertongue . were used: There were no significant differences between the 2 conception for (1) A systematic review of the literature identified the validated out- these demographics . come measures (30 genetics-specific and 37 generic) used, or devel- Mental and Psychomotor development of the 2 groups of study partici- oped, to evaluate clinical genetics services . pants was assessed using the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (2) A Delphi survey, aimed at identifying the degree of consensus (BSID-II-NL) . Data on interval level were analysed using ANOVA’s and about the relevance of existing outcome measures, was completed by a significance level of 0.05 was accepted throughout. a panel of 115 genetics clinicians and 72 patients of clinical genetics Results: Scores on the Mental Scale revealed no differences between services . At least 75% of the panel agreed that the following outcome the 2 groups (F (2, 62) = 0 .09, p = 0 .764) . Scores on the Motor Scale domains were useful: knowledge of the genetic condition, decision- neither showed any differences between the PGD/PGS, ICSI and NC making, perceived personal control, risk perception, satisfaction, meet- twins (F (2, 54) = 1 .16, p = 0 .286) . ing of expectations, coping, accuracy of diagnosis and quality of life . Conclusion: PGD/PGS twins show similar mental and psychomotor (3) Qualitative research (7 focus groups and 19 interviews) with pa- developmental outcomes at age 2, as measured with the BSID-II-NL, tients of clinical genetics services, patient representatives and genet- in comparison to twins conceived after ICSI . In order to provide more ics health professionals explored the outcomes valued by those stake- solid reassurance twin children should also be compared to their natu- holders, and resulted in construction of a model of empowerment . rally conceived counterparts . Data triangulation clarified that the qualitative findings support many of those from the Delphi, but identified some additional valued outcome EP14.20 domains that are not captured by available outcome measures, such should skin color matter in the Decision to Offer Preconception as empowerment of other relatives and future generations . In conclu- Genetic screening? sion, triangulation is a useful approach to investigate complex areas, V. L. Bonham1, S. Knerr1, A. O. Odunlami2; such as outcome measurement . 1National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States. EP14.18 Objective: To investigate the influence of U.S. physicians’ perceptions Psychological evaluation of familial ovarian cancer screening of patient race and ethnicity on their decisions to offer preconception (PsyFOcs): study update and baseline psychological data genetic screening . D. Lancastle1, K. Brain1, L. Fraser2, U. Menon2, A. Rosenthal2, I. Jacobs2, J. Methods: Primary care physicians (N=1,035) were surveyed to study, Mackay2, R. Iredale1, C. Phelps1, M. Rogers1, J. Austoker3, C. Bankhead3, A. among other aims, their decisions to offer preconception screening Clements3, E. Watson4; for genetic conditions and the influence of patient skin color and other 1School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Gynaecological Oncology, In- characteristics on these decisions . Physicians were randomly assigned stitute for Women’s Health, UCL, London, United Kingdom, 3Primary Care Re- to view a vignette with a picture of either a “Black” or “White patient . search Education Group, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4School of Health and Social Results: 978 physicians answered questions on the vignette of a pa- Care, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom. tient considering pregnancy; her race, ethnicity and ancestry were not Purpose: The UK Familial Ovarian Cancer Screening Study (UK FO- described . Respondents who viewed the “Black” patient were more CSS) aims to determine the effectiveness of ovarian cancer screen- likely to offer any genetic screening than those who viewed the “White”EMPAG Posters  patient (35% vs . 26%, p< .001) . Screening for sickle cell disease was history questionnaire developed by the author for parents of children offered more often by physicians presented with the “Black” patient with an undiagnosed genetic syndrome (Wessex Family History Ques- (78% vs. 7%, p<.0001) and screening for cystic fibrosis was offered tionnaire, WFHQ) can replace a family history gathering appointment more often by physicians presented with the “White ” patient (49% vs . with a Genetic Counsellor and reduce the number of appointments 26%, p< .0001) . Physicians who viewed the “Black” patient rated race provided . Previous family history questionnaires were evaluated and as more important to their decision to offer screening than those who the following criteria were utilised to evaluate the WFHQ: response viewed the “White” patient (76% vs . 49%, p< .0001) . rate, degree of omitted data and reliability . Conclusion: As we move beyond screening for single gene disorders The WFHQ was piloted in a multiphase approach . Seven parents com- to screening for multiple gene variants that predict risk for common pleted the WFHQ and an evaluation questionnaire and the data as- complex diseases, a greater understanding of the appropriate use sessed and compared to the data collected through the face-to-face of phenotypic characteristics including skin color and the social con- clinic . structs of race and ethnicity in decisions to offer genetic services, in- Telephone interviews revealed that the WFHQ was seen as a useful cluding preconception genetic carrier screening is needed . preparatory tool . However parents valued the personal interaction of the clinic appointment, during which Genetic Counsellors were able to EP14.21 clarify family history details and provide reassurance . the emotional experience of termination of pregnancy (tOP): The WFHQ clearly enhanced the obtainment of a family history in differences between women and men clinic . However, the use of the WFHQ alone may fail to reduce service A. S. Leonardo, F. Sousa, I. Cordeiro; demands, as Genetic Counsellors are likely to have to clarify family Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. history details or seek additional details . Further research is required Looking at our experience of seven years supporting couples who go to explore alternative methods of service delivery such as collecting through TOP, we propose there is a difference in the way women and family history data via telephone in order to accommodate rising refer- men go through the emotional process underlying this experience, ral rates . from beginning to end . Once the couple has made the decision to terminate the pregnancy, EP14.23 the medical procedure should take place within a short period, because What increase the Vulnerability in children and teenagers with the interval between the decision and TOP is of intense discomfort . We Disability in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil draw from these women and men own words . Some women said they A. S. N. Marinho1, F. G. Cavalcante2,3; could no longer stand at the mirror and see their growing belly . Men 1CIAD/FUNLAR-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Universidade Veiga de Almeida, recalled no longer touching their spouse’s belly . Other women said it Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3CLAVES/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. was shocking to feel the foetus’ movements while waiting for TOP . This qualitative and quantitative research investigated the scenario of At the time of TOP, women are confronted with a question: should I see violence against children and teenagers with disability due to genetic the foetus? Men, on the other hand, know for sure they would choose conditions, congenital anomalies and related conditions assisted by not to see the foetus because, otherwise, its image would be recorded Deinstitutionalization and Social Rehabilitation Based in Community and they want to forget this experience as soon as possible . Program and two Rehabilitation’s institution from Francisco de Paula After TOP, women and men usually have different timings when con- Municipal Foundation (2005-2007) . It aimed to make a situational di- sidering another pregnancy . Women take longer to mourn the foetus agnosis of the problem, investigate the kind of violence disabled chil- and men are faster to overcome the fear of another loss . dren and teenagers encounter and, discuss the prevention strategies . Understanding the emotional process of TOP makes professionals The study associated 84 case-studies, using a triangulation method more able to demystify this painful experience at the eyes of the cou- of case-discussions with team work, reflexive groups with families, in- ples . Studying and accepting differences between women and men terview leaderships and participant-observation and, quasi-statistical going through TOP, helps psychologists minimise the impact of these approach (Becker, 2000) . The sample of 33 cases was picked through couples’ loss and work with them to find a future project. analysis of the study’s protocol considering the variables of most inter- ests to the research . It was observed that family negligence is the most EP14.22 recurrent form of violence; there is a dominion of the male sex case in can a family history questionnaire for children with an the minor age and female in the age of 24 years; 88% of the children undiagnosed genetic syndrome replace a face-to-face and teenagers with disability in situations of violence investigated live appointment with a genetic counsellor? in Favelas, in houses that lack basic infra-structure . Most families have B. J. Dell1, G. Westwood2, C. Phelps3; income inferior to two brazilian minimum wages; there are situations 1School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Clinical Genetics Ser- where the family is solely sustained by the governmental benefit re- vice, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, ceived by the disabled child (50%) . The social isolation of the families, United Kingdom. the absence of the public power, the social impact of the drug traffic Increasing service demands mean that genetics services need to and the recurrent basic human rights violation are aggravating factors identify alternative ways of collecting family history information other to the violence risk of those who already have vulnerability due to the than through face-to-face clinics . This study explored whether a family disability condition .