EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)27:870–1041 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0408-3 MEETING ABSTRACTS Abstracts from the 51st European Society of Human Genetics Conference: Electronic Posters ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2019 June 16–19, 2018, Fiera Milano Congressi, Milan Italy Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was reviewedandapprovedbytheESHGScientificProgrammeCommittee,whichheldfullresponsibilityfortheabstractselections. DisclosureInformation:Inordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing financial interests. :,;)(0987654321 :,;)(0987654321 ContributionsofuptoEUR10000.-(TenthousandEuros,orequivalentvalueinkind)peryearpercompanyareconsidered "Modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered "Significant". E-P01 Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics then compared this data to de novo cases where research based PO studies were completed (N=57) in NY. E-P01.01 Results: MFSIQ (66.4) for familial deletions was Parent of origin in familial 22q11.2 deletions impacts full statistically lower (p=.01) than for de novo deletions scale intelligence quotient scores (N=399, MFSIQ=76.2). MFSIQ for children with mater- nally inherited deletions (63.7) was statistically lower D.E.McGinn1,2,M.Unolt3,4,T.B.Crowley1,B.S.Emanuel1,5, (p=.03) than for paternally inherited deletions (72.0). As E. H.Zackai1,5,E. Moss1,B. Morrow6,B.Nowakowska7,J. compared with the NY cohort where the MFSIQ for Vermeesch8,A.Swillen8, D.M.McDonald-McGinn1,5 maternaldeletions(N=37,MFSIQ=73.41)wasnodifferent (p=0.67) than paternal deletions (N=20, MFSIQ=75.2). 1The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, Conclusions: Our findings confirm the association of United States, 2Davidson College, Davidson, NC, United lower FSIQ scores in familial versus de novo 22q11.2 States, 3La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 4Ospedale Bambino Gesu, deletions. We also observed the novel association of lower Rome,Italy,5PerelmanSchoolofMedicineattheUniversityof MFSIQ scores in maternally v. paternally inherited familial Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6Albert deletions in contrast to de novo deletions where no Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, difference was observed based on PO. Thus, a maternally 7InstituteofMotherandChild,Warsaw,Poland,8KULeuven, inherited familial deletion is a significant risk factor for Leuven, Belgium poorer cognitive outcome. Confounding factors could include maternal comorbidities, mitochondrial effects, Background: Familial 22q11.2 deletions are thought to epigenetics, assortative mating, socioeconomics, grand- have a negative impact on mean Full Scale IQ scores parental engagement, etc. to explain this finding. Regard- (MFSIQ) in affected offspring, however, parent of origin less, this data serves as an important adjunct to traditional (PO) effect has not been examined. genetic counseling for women with 22q11.2DS in the Methods: We compared MFSIQ on children of affected prenatal and preconception setting. parents from Philadelphia (N=26) and Leuven (N=26), D.E. McGinn: None. M. Unolt: None. T.B. Crowley: assessed using the age appropriate Wechsler Intelligence None.B.S.Emanuel:None.E.H.Zackai:None.E.Moss: Scale, in those with familial v. de novo deletions and None. B. Morrow: None. B. Nowakowska: None. J. maternally v. paternally inherited familial deletions. We Vermeesch: None. A. Swillen: None. D.M. McDonald-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 871 McGinn: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, psychiatric disorders related to TX, and fosters their early symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Natera. prevention and eventually also therapy. Support E-P01.02 00064203 and CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. Reevaluation of ADAM12 as efficient marker for X M.Maceksr.:None.D.Springer:None.H.Klučková: chromosome trisomy prenatal biochemical screening for None.R.Vlk:None.I.pálová:None.D.Chudoba:None. improvingcareofassociatedclinicallyimportantdisorders D.Novotná:None.L.Dvořáková:None.M.Simandlová: of postnatal development None. M. Turnovec: None. H. Cuckle: None. M.Maceksr.1,D.Springer2,H. Klučková1,R. Vlk3, I.pálová1, E-P01.03 D.Chudoba1,D.Novotná1,L.Dvořáková1,M.Simandlová1,M. Cytogenetic abnormalities in amniocytes and fibroblasts of Turnovec1,H.Cuckle4 abortion material diagnosed in the Laboratory of Medical Genetics - Varna for a 10 year period 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, M.Tsvetkova1,2,M.Stoyanova1, M.Levkova1, T.Ruseva1,V. Prague,CzechRepublic,2IntituteofMedicalBiochemistryand Miteva1, L.Angelova1 LaboratoryDiagnosticsoftheGeneralUniversityHospitaland of the First Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, 1Medical University Varna, Varna, Bulgaria, 2University Czech Republic, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gyneacology, Hospital St. Marina, Varna, Bulgaria 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Columbia Introduction: Amniocentesis is the most widely used University, New York, NY, United States method of prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis for its high sen- sitivity though the risk from the manipulation. Data show Introduction: ADAM12 assuresbioavailibility of IGF-1/IGF- that50%ofallclinicallyrecognizedpregnanciesaredueto 2forgrowth,differentiationandneurogenesisandisexpressed aneuploidy and 5% - structural chromosomal in the trophoblast. Trisomy X (TX) is the most common abnormalities (SCA). chromosomalabnormality(est.1:1000females)withavariable Materials and Methods: Cytogenetic study was per- a phenotype, commonly associated with renal/urogenital formed in 721 samples of amniotic fluid and 19 from abnormalities, developmental delay, depression, autism, schi- fibroblasts. Karyotype was analyzed on GTG-banded zophreniaandcerebralcortexhypo-/hyperplasia.Inthisregard, metaphases on cultures of amniocytes and fibroblasts, we have retrospectively validated this biomarker in prenatal according to the standard protocol. aneuploidy screening in a representative Czech cohort. Results: Overall abnormality rate in amniocytes was Material and Methods: ADAM12-S serum levels were 4,32%, mainly with high maternal biochemical risk. These measuredin1534frozenmaternalserabyDelfiaADAM12 were trisomy 21 (2,2%), trisomy 18 (0,6%), -chromosome research kit (Perkin Elmer) using time-resolved fluoroim- numerical and SCA 3 (0,4%); 1 (0,14%) with unbalanced munoassay (within 9th-18th weeks of gestation) at karyotype; 1 (0,14%) - a carrier of two different transloca- percentile level distribution <5, 6-10, 11-25, 25-49, 50, tions. SCA were identified in 5 (0,7%) cases indicated for 51-75 and 76-100. We assessed screening efficacy of familial rearrangements: 2 balanced translocations, 2 autosomal (70) and heterochromosomal (30) aneuploidies. inversions and 1 derivative chromosome, due to three way Results and discussion: Levels of ADAM12 in all translocation in the father. Ultrasound data on aneuploidy percentile categories were increasing by 15 ng/ml/day enabled the detection of 1 fetus (0,14%) with combined (p<0.000001). Detection rates in category <25th percentile numerical and structural karyotype of paternal origin. for T21 was 46.67% (45 cases), for T18 57.14% (7), T13 The pathology In the fibroblasts was 36,8%: trisomy 18, 100% (7), triploidy 100% (10), TX 87% (8), monosomy X mosaic translocation 21, one trisomy 11, 13 and 16 and 12.5% (8) and monosomy X mosaic 16.66% (6). mosaic trisomy 2. Conclusions: Although ADAM12 does not satisfactorily Conclusion: Nowadays amniocentesis is still a feasible detectT21,itissensitiveforthedetectionofT13,triploidyand tool for detecting structural chromosomal aberrations in TX. Decreased ADAM12 levels could be due to defective X 1,4%, which NIPT would fail to diagnose. Analyzing the chromosomeinactivation,asindependentlysuggestedbyXIST results of amniocentesis helps us to determine prenatal overexpression associated with psychiatric disorders and TX. detection rate of chromosomal aberrations and proper Significantly decreased ADAM12 levels are associated with genetic counseling of pregnant women. The pathology placental dysfunction and impaired CNS differentiation. Only found in this study of fibroblasts confirms that most of the ADAM12 enables prenatal screening of developmental and early abortions are due to aneuploidy.872 J.delPicchia M. Tsvetkova: None. M. Stoyanova: None. M. E-P01.06 Levkova: None. T. Ruseva: None. V. Miteva: None. L. Genetic variation in CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A is Angelova: None. associated with nicotine dependence and response to varenicline treatment E-P01.04 Molecular dissection of fetal anomalies by using array C. Cameli1,M. Viggiano1,E.Bacchelli1,M.De Paola2, G. CGH analysis - the opportunities and challenges Giucastro3,M.M.Cainazzo2,L.A.Pini2,M.Zoli4,E.Maestrini1 I.Dimova1,V. Peicheva2,P. Chaveeva3,V. Stratieva3,M. 1Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Yankova4,K.Kamenarova2,D.Markov5,A. Shterev3,V. Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Djonov6, R.Kaneva2 AOU – Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy, 3ASL Parma -Dipartimento Salute Mentale/Dipendenze Patologiche, 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Parma, Italy, 4Department of Biomedical, Metabolical and Medicine Center, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 3SAGBAL "Dr Shterev", Sofia, Bulgaria, 4MBAL Serdika, Modena, Italy Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Medical Center Markoff, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland Introduction: The role of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) in nicotine dependence (ND) is well established; Background:Thesystematicreviewoftheliteratureforthe CHRNA7,encodingtheα7subunit,hasastilluncertainrole use of array CGH in prenatal diagnostics provides with in ND, although it is implicated in a wide range of neu- evidence for the significantly higher sensitivity of this ropsychiatric conditions. CHRFAM7A, a hybrid gene con- method in the elucidation of high risk pregnancies, espe- tainingapartialduplicationofCHRNA7,hasbeenshownto cially for structural fetal anomalies. In this study, we eval- modulateα7nAChRfunction.Theaimofthisstudywasto uated the diagnostic rate of array CGH analysis in cases of investigate the role of CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A genetic disturbed fetal development and high reproductive risk in variants in ND and to test the hypothesis that α7 nAChR the family. variationmaymodulatetheefficacyofvareniclinetreatment Materials and Methods: We applied G4449 SurePrint in smoking cessation. G3 Hmn CGH 4x44K Oligo microarray (Agilent Technol- Methods: We assessed CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A copy ogies) with an average resolution of 150 Kbp, in 30 fetal number, CHRFAM7A exon 6 Δ2bp polymorphism, and samples with the mentioned indications. sequence variants in the CHRNA7 proximal promoter in an Results: In 14 samples (47%) we detected pathogenic Italian sample of 408 treatment-seeking smokers. We structural genomic aberrations: deletions of 7q21.3, conducted case-control and quantitative association ana- 10q26.3, 22q11.21, 1p36.22, 4p16.3, 17p13.3, 6q27, lysesusingtwosmokingmeasures(cigarettesperday,CPD, 1q21.1, 15q11.2; duplications of 18p, 22q11.1, 22q11.21 and Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence, FTND). or chromothripsis. All deletions/duplications were asso- Next, driven by the hypothesis that varenicline may exert ciated with known disease syndromes. In 8 of the cases some of its therapeutic effects through activation of α7 (27%) variants of unknown significance (VOUS) were nAChRs, we restricted the analysis to a subgroup of detected: deletion of 17q21.31 and duplications of 142 smokers who received varenicline treatment. 18p11.23, 22q12.3, 6p25.1, 11p15.5, 16p13.3, 1q12, Results: The CHRNA7 promoter variant 9q34.3. rs28531779 showed association with both smoking quanti- Conclusion: The array CGH diagnostics in prenatal tative measures (FNTD p=0.027, CPD p=0.012). More- settings is quite challenging and requires much more over, in the varenicline-treated subgroup we observed focused result, based on the data on known pathogenic association of CHRFAM7A copy number with six months aberrations and syndromes; our results showed deletions as smoking abstinence (p=0.035). the most prevalent pathogenic aberrations. It is extremely Conclusions: Our study points to a possible role of important to collect data for VOUS and match them to genetic variation in CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A in tobacco specific fetal markers, in order to make the feasible use of addiction mechanisms and response to varenicline Fetal-Genomic database. treatment. Acknowledgment: SNSF grant No IZ73Z0_152454. Funding: Supported by Italian Ministry of Health I. Dimova: None. V. Peicheva: None. P. Chaveeva: (RF2009-1549619) and by University of Bologna None. V. Stratieva: None. M. Yankova: None. K. (RFO2011-2014). Kamenarova: None. D. Markov: None. A. Shterev: C. Cameli: None. M. Viggiano: None. E. Bacchelli: None. V. Djonov: None. R. Kaneva: None. None. M. De Paola: None. G. Giucastro: None. M.M.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 873 Cainazzo: None. L.A. Pini: None. M. Zoli: None. E. E-P01.08 Maestrini: None. Fetus with partial trisomy 4 and t(2;16) due to maternal complex rearrangement involving three chromosomes: a E-P01.07 case report The cytogenetic study in male infertility B. Albuz1,G.O.Çetin1, M.Öztürk1,V. Caner1,C. N.Semerci S.V.Racovita1,M.Sprincean2,E.Halabudenco3,A.Misina3,T. Gündüz2,G.Bağcı1 Samoilenco3,R.Gutuleac1,E.Chesov1,N.Revenco2,V.Mosin1, V. Mosin1 1Medical School of Pamukkale University, Department of medicalgenetics,Denizli,Turkey,2MedicalSchoolofYıldırım 1State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. Beyazıt University, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Testemitanu”, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 2State Turkey University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. Testemitanu”, InstituteofMotherandChild,Chisinau,Moldova,Republicof, Introduction: Complex chromosome rearrangements 3Instutute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic (CCRs)arestructuralchromosomeanomaliesinvolvingtwo of or more chromosomes and more than two breakpoints. These can be balanced rearrangements (BR) which are not Male infertility is one of the most simple examples of causing a chromosomal loss/gain or unbalanced rearrange- complex disorder with a defined genetic background. ments (UR) that result in loss/gain of genes at the break- Geneticfactorsshowabout30%ofcasesofmaleinfertility points. These gene changes can cause fetal anomalies. It is associated with oligosospermia and azoospermia. important that URs canbe de novo or occurringbecause of ThePurpose:wastostudythepecularitiesofcytogenetic BRsofparents.Herewereportafetuswithpartialtrisomy4 polymorphism in male infertility in order to confirm the and t(2;16) due to maternal complex rearrangement. importance of cytogenetic diagnosis prior to assisted ClinicalReport:Acouple,a22-year-oldfemaleanda32- reproductive techniques (ART). year-old male, both in good health, was referred for genetic MaterialandMethods:Agroupof55infertilemenwere counselling following an abnormal fetalsonogram. This was investigated during genetic counseling in the Center for the couple’s second pregnancy following one first trimester Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics between 2015 miscarriage. They were non consanguineous parents. In the and2017,havingthefollowingselectioncriteria:morethan familyhistory,mother’sparentshadanex-preterminfant.An one year infertility in the couple and / or sperm analysis: ultrasound study performed at 26 weeks’ gestation revealed azoospermia and severe oligospermia. Karyotyping was craniosynostosis and anencephaly. At this time, the patient performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes according to was counselled about the high risk of a fetal chromosome standard methods G. abnormality. Karyotype and multiprobe FISH analyse of the Results:Chromosomeabnormalityhasbeendetectedin8 cord blood sample was performed and 47,XY,+der(4)del(4) men with infertile problems.The most common chromo- (q13.2?).ish t(2;16)(q33;q22)(wcp16+;wcp2+),add(4) (?; some disorder diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome was q13.2?)(wcp4+) wasdetected. Parental karyotyping revealed homogeneousformortrisomy47,XXY(4cases),followed a chromosomally normalfather and the mother wascarrying by mosaic form (47 XXY/46, XY: 1 case), and variants of 46,XX,t(2;16) (q33;q22),ins(2;4)(q31?;q21qter?).ish t(2;16) structural abnormalities of autosomal chromosomes (47, (q33;q22)(wcp16+;wcp2+),ins(2;4)(q31?;q21?)(wcp4+). XXY,inv(5):1case).Onepatientwasdiagnosedwith46,X The pregnancy was terminated. del (Y)(q1123-qter) and another patient with 46XY,t(8;7) Conclusion: Although CCRs are rare, they are often (8qter::7q336-qter). associatedwithmultiplecongenitalabnormalities,recurrent Conclusions: In the context of the introduction of spontaneous abortions and infertility. Therefore, genetic assisted reproduction techniques, the male partner's cyto- counselling for CCR carriers is very important and can be genetic evaluation is necessary for diagnosis of male offered before and after pregnancy. References:McGowan- infertility, treatment and provides genetic counseling, Jordan J, Simons A, Schmid M. ISCN 2016. including all information on the individual type of B. Albuz: None. G.O. Çetin: None. M. Öztürk: None. chromosomeanomaly/polymorphism,itsclinicalrelevance, V. Caner: None. C.N. Semerci Gündüz: None. G. possible inheritance, prenatal diagnostics. Bağcı: None. S.V. Racovita: None. M. Sprincean: None. E. Halabu- denco: None. A. Misina: None. T. Samoilenco: None. R. E-P01.10 Gutuleac:None.E.Chesov:None.N.Revenco:None.V. Detecting a triploid embryo while doing PGD for a cystic Mosin: None. V. Mosin: None. fibrosis carrier woman874 J.delPicchia S. Sabeghi,Y.Keshvar, K.Fatemi, Z.Sharifi,A. Bandehi referred for genetic counseling because of positive first- Sarhadi, T. Shirzad,H.Bagherian, S.Zeinali, M.H. S.Aref trimesterscreening.Herpreviouspregnancy endedbecause of GEU. Prenatal diagnosis was recommended and mother zeinalis lab, tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of underwent CVS at 13 weeks of gestation. QF PCR from CVS for aneuploidy of chromosomes 13, 18 and 21 was Introduction: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is suspicious for trisomy 18, but centromeric FISH revealed an option for couples with a risk of transmitting a genetic chromosome 18 disomy. Ultrasound screening of the fetus disease, to prevent birth of children affected with mono- didn´t show any abnormalities. Cytogenetic analysis genic disorders. Other usages ofPGDaresexselectionand showed karyotype 46,XY,i(18)(q10)[8]/46,XY[2]. This HLAtyping.Chromosomalaneuploidiesarealsodetectable result was confirmed with FISH and QF PCR examination. in molecular PGD. Itwasrecommendedtoverifytheresultfromamnioticfluid. Materials and Methods: A family with a 14 year’s old Amniocentesis was performed in the 17th week of preg- childaffectedwithcysticfibrosisreferredtoourlaboratory. nancy. The karyotype in cultured amniotic fluid cells BloodsamplescollectedandDNAwasextracted.Mutation appeared normal, whereas Array CGH examination identi- detection carried out using Sanger sequencing. Linkage fied a 5,4-Mb terminal deletion of chr.18p. Parental kar- analysisperformedtotracedefectiveallelesusingmultiplex yotypes were normal. The mother was informed about the short tandem repeats (STRs). Aneuploidy STR markers result: de Grouchy syndrome. The mother was informed were checked for the family to illustrate each person’s aboutthepossibilityofpregnancytermination.Shedecided profile.Fertilizationcarriedoutatinvitrofertilization(IVF) to continue with the pregnancy. The boy was delivered clinic. After 3 days one blastomere removed from each prematurely in 34 weeks of gestation with birth weight embryo. Causative mutation and informative STR markers 1940g. Dysmorphic features at birth were mild. The boy at were investigated for each blastomere using multiplex six months of age had weight 7010g, round face, thin hair, nested PCR. Linkage analysis performed and intended broad base to nose, palpebral fissure upslanted, large ears, embryos were selected and implanted to mother’s uterus. short neck, inguinal hernia. MRI of the brain was normal. Results: CFTR: delF508 was detected inpatient. From 7 Cytogenetic analysis from peripheral blood lymphocytes analyzed blastomeres 5 were unaffected. Haplotype map- showed pathological karyotype 46,XY,del(18)(p11.31), ping illustrated that one of the unaffected blastomeres had Array CGH confirmed the result. Up to now the develop- an extra set of chromosomes inherited from her mother ment of the boy continues to be favourable, but only time whichwas detectable inchromosomes7,13,18,21andX. will tell. Conclusions: PGD is a powerful diagnostic tool for A. Pecková: None. J. Latůvková: None. V. Čejnová: carriercoupleswhodesireahealthychildandwishtoavoid None. V. Harma: None. P. Kajanová: None. R. medicalabortion.Itcanalsobeusedtodetectchromosome Chladová: None. numericalabnormalitiesbeforepregnancy.Resultsobtained from linkage analysis and haplotype mapping in parallel E-P01.12 with direct mutation detection make this method more Rapid,efficient,non-invasivefetalsexdeterminationdirect accurate and reliable. from maternal plasma S.Sabeghi:None.Y.Keshvar:None.K.Fatemi:None. Z.Sharifi:None.A.BandehiSarhadi:None.T.Shirzad: L. K.Steel1,F. McKay1,N.Chandler1,S.Best1,M. Parks2, C. None. H. Bagherian: None. S. Zeinali: None. M.H.S. Sale2,L. Jenkins1 Aref: None. 1North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, E-P01.11 United Kingdom, 2Nonacus Ltd., Birmingham, United Different results from examination of CVS and amniotic Kingdom fluid Objective:ManyEuropeancountriesdeterminefetalsexby A. Pecková1,J. Latůvková1, V.Čejnová1,V.Harma1,P. analysisofcellfreeDNA(cfDNA)extractedfrommaternal Kajanová2, R.Chladová2 plasma, significantly reducing the invasive testing rate for pregnanciesathighriskofX-linkeddisordersorcongenital 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech adrenalhyperplasia.Herewepresentvalidationofamethod Republic, 2Genvia s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic analysing unextracted cfDNA direct from maternal plasma in a diagnostic lab. We present a pregnancy with different results of CVS and Method: Our current protocol involves duplicate cfDNA amniotic fluid examination. A 27-year-old woman was extractions (QIAsymphony SP) from 2ml of double spunAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 875 plasma followed by detection of the SRY and CCR5 genes MTR1(A2756G);folatemetabolism(plasmahomocysteine/ by quantitative real-time PCR (Q/RT-PCR) (Taqman, ABI serum folate levels) and coagulation parameters (activated 7300). We identified 100 stored plasma samples from high partialthromboplastintime(APTT),prothrombintime(PT), risk pregnancies of 7-10 weeks gestation with fetal sex thrombin time (TT), fibrinogen level). We collected data tested previously and clinically confirmed. Up to thirteen about folic acid consumption and life style (including 80ul plasma samples with controls were tested per smoking,diet,coffee,physicalactivity).Statisticalanalyses Cell3™Direct: Fetal Sex Determination kit (Nonacus, done used Pearson's correlation and binary logistic regres- UK)whichdetectstheSRY,TSPY,DAZandCCR5genes sion (SPSS_17.00). by multiplexed Q/RT-PCR. Results: Plasma homocysteine levels significantly corre- Results: Thresholds for classification of male or female lated only with serum folate levels of investigated patients. were established. 89 of the 100 plasmas analysed showed Serum folate levels significantly correlated with additional conclusiveconcordantresultsfirsttime.Thisincludes10of folateconsumptionandcoagulationparameters(APTT,PT, the 13 previously reported inconclusive by our standard TT and fibrinogen levels). Folate deficiency (according protocol and 5 samples below 9 weeks gestation. Of the WHO recommendation 2012) significantly associated with remaining 11 plasmas, these showed concordance with MTHFR(1298CCgenotype),MTR1(2756AGand2756GG repeat testing. genotypes) genes, family history of cardiovascular diseases Conclusion:This first direct from plasma, non-invasive and smoking. Folate excess significantly associated with prenataltesttodeterminefetalsexismoresensitivethanthe MTRR gene (66AA genotype). Fibrinogen levels signifi- standard protocol. Removal of the extraction step reduces cantly depended from MTHFR (C677T) and MTR1 time, consumables and labour costs. The reduced plasma (A2756G) genotypes. volumerequirementallowsforasmallerbloodcollectionor Conclusions: Individual rational vitamins use and for further testing if required. Ongoing validation will optimizingfolateserumlevelscanimproveinpatientswith compare the methods in parallel. reproductive disorders the quality of infertility treatment L.K.Steel:None.F.McKay:None.N.Chandler:None. and reduce the risk of reproductive losses due coagulation S. Best: None. M. Parks: A. Employment (full or part- parameters to normalize. time); Significant; Nonacus. C. Sale: A. Employment (full Z.I. Rossokha: None. S. Kyriachenko: None. N. or part-time); Significant; Nonacus. L. Jenkins: None. Gorovenko: None. E-P01.13 E-P01.14 The relationship between genes related folate metabolism The patient with fragile site on chromosome 16 and four and blood coagulation parameters in Ukrainian couples missed abortions : a case report with reproductive disorders M.KomnenićRadovanović1,B.Petrovic1,M.Dencic-Fekete2,J. Z. I.Rossokha1,2,S. Kyriachenko1,2,N.Gorovenko2 Jovanovic2,V. Djordjevic2,G.Cuturilo3,4,B. Dimitrijevic3,A. Miletic3,J. RumlStojanovic3,M.Radovanovic5,O.Kontic- 1StateInstitution“Reference-centreformoleculardiagnosticof Vucinic1,4 Public Health Ministry of Ukraine”, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2State Institution«GeneticandRegenerativeMedicineoftheNational 1Clinic for gynecology and obstretrics, Clinical centre of Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine», Kyiv, Ukraine Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinic for hematology, Clinical centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3University Children's Introduction: Folate metabolism disturbance (hyperhomo- Hospital,Belgrade,Serbia,4FacultyofMedicine,Universityof cysteinemia, folate deficiency or excess) and adverse folate Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Clinic for urology, Clinical genetic variants remain significant risk factors for repro- centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia ductive disorders. Preventive folate consumption by cou- ples, pregnant women and anticoagulants treatment in Introduction:Wereportacaseof31-year-oldwomanwho clinicalcasesprovidedbymanynationalguidelines.Butthe had four missed abortions. In first two missed abortions relationship between these components (when genetically geneticanalysis from aborted material wasnotdone,butin determined thrombophilic disturbances started) in couples third one karyotypic analysis revealed trisomy of chromo- with reproductive disorders has not been studied enough. some 16 (20 mitosis). In fourth missed abortion the same MaterialsandMethods:170couples(female/male)with karyotypic abnormalitywasdetectedagain, with thefragile reproductive disorders (primary infertility/early pregnancy site on the long arm of two chromosomes 16 (fra(16)(q22) loss)examined.Therewereinvestigatedfolaterelatedgenes [10]). Genetic counceling of the couple confirmed no pre- polymorphism:MTHFR(C677T;A1298C),MTRR(A66G), vious missed abortion in their families.876 J.delPicchia Material and Methods: After analysis of constitutional IGF2, FGF2, or both, up to 24 days. The expression levels karyotypes of the partners, we found abnormalities of of GC markers were analysed by qPCR. chromosome16inthekaryotypeofthewoman:deletionof The expression of FSHR increases while AMHR level 16q22wasfoundintwomitosiswhilefragilesiteofoneof does not significantly change during the first four days of the chromosome 16 was seen in 5 mitoses. The rest of 42 culture but start to decrease after that. The expression of mitoses analysed were normal. The karyotype was LHR and CYP19A1 decreases during time of cell culture. described as follow: 46,XX,del(16)(q22)[3]/46,XX,fra(16) CYP19A1 is expressed very highly at the starting point but (q22)[5]/46,XX[42]. Fluorescent in situ hybridization starts decreasing rapidly in cell culture. After four days the (FISH) method with the probe for 16q22 (Abbott, Vysis, expression drops about 2-5 folds. CBFB BreakApart probe) showed deletion of the 5’ region Currently, this cell culture protocol could be used for oftheCBFBgeneinallofthenuclei/metaphasesanalysed. short termGC culturing.Forlong term experiments adding In addition, array-CGH analysis performed in the woman additional hormones like FSH is currently being tested to showed no aberration in 16q22 region, while the next see if that might help to maintain GC identity. generation sequencing analysis has not been started yet. K. Hensen: None. M. Pook: None. A. Sikut: None. T. Conclusion: To exclude any possibility of trisomy of Maimets: None. A. Salumets: None. A. Kurg: None. chromosome 16 in further pregnancies, we suggested in vitro fertilization (IVF) followed by preimplantation E-P01.17 geneticscreeningofembryos(PGD).Thefragilesiteof16q Prenatal diagnosis of hypospadias and issues isconsideredtobeanormalvariationinhumanpopulation, but its role in possible missed abortions still have to be A. Kondo1,M.Morine1,C. Fukano1, D.Nakaoku1,M. completely clarified. Yamasaki1,K. Takahashi2,K. Hinokio1, S.Izumi1, K.Maeda1 M. Komnenić Radovanović: None. B. Petrovic: None. M. Dencic-Fekete: None. J. Jovanovic: None. V. 1Shikoku Medical Center for Children and Adults, Kagawa, Djordjevic: None. G. Cuturilo: None. B. Dimitrijevic: Japan, 2Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, None. A. Miletic: None. J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M. Japan Radovanovic: None. O. Kontic-Vucinic: None. Introduction: Urinary tract abnormalities are frequently E-P01.15 detected during obstetrical ultrasonography. However, Novel serum-free culture conditions for growing primary hypospadiasisoftenmissedonprenatalUS,despiteitbeing human granulosa cells the most common congenital defect of the male external genitalia. The prenatal recognition of hypospadias is K.Hensen1,M.Pook1,A.Sikut2,T.Maimets1,A.Salumets3,A. important because it will alert the physician to order kar- Kurg1 yotyping and to look for any possible associated dys- morphic syndromes. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Materials and Methods: 16 patients neonatally diag- Tartu, Estonia, 2Women's Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, nosed hypospadias between 2007 and 2017 were analysed Tartu, Estonia, 3The Competence Center on Health retrospectively based on obstetrics/neonatal chart and Technologies, Tartu, Estonia ultrasound data. Results: Regarding the type of hypospadias, 15/16 were During folliculogenesis the oocyte is surrounded by gran- distalhypospadiasandonlyonecasewasdiagnosedasmid- ulosa cells (GCs), that are crucial to its development and shaft hypospadias. We did not have severe type of maturation. The oocyte is not capable of some metabolic hypospadias during 10 years. In total, 8/16 (50%) cases processes and needs nutritional support from granulosa werediagnosedprenatallywithultrasoundexamination.All cells. They provide the oocyte with growth factors, hor- the case prenatally diagnosed had other findings such as mones, and cytokines. Long-term culturing and testing of FGR, CHD. There were two cases diagnosed as syndromic primary granulosa cells would help to reveal granulosa- conditionneonatallysuchasATR-XsyndromeandNoonan related fertility problems. There is still need for more effi- syndrome and three other syndromic conditions were still cient and defined conditions for studying these cells. Our on the genomic analysis. aim was to develop serum-free culture conditions which Conclusion: Some reported that severe type of hypospa- would support long-term cultivation of primary dias could be easier to pick up at prenatal ultrasound granulosa cells. examination, however out prenatally diagnosed case were Primary luteinized human GCs were cultivated in serum- allmild type.Itismostimportantthatwehavetobeaware free growth media containing either no growth factors, thatthosepatientsmighthaveothercomplicatedconditionsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 877 and look carefully as neonates as well. In Japan, most of E-P01.19 pregnant women want to know the fetus’ s sex, however A rare case in literature: isochromosome Xq in Klinefelter prenatal ultrasound scans should include a study of the syndrome genitalsand shouldnotonly be usedfor sexdetermination. A. Kondo: None. M. Morine: None. C. Fukano: None. L. Simsek1, A.G.Zamani1,H.H. Taskapu2,M.S. Yildirim1 D. Nakaoku: None. M. Yamasaki: None. K. Takahashi: None. K. Hinokio: None. S. Izumi: None. K. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Maeda: None. NecmettinErbakanUniversity,Konya,Turkey,2Departmentof Urology, Meram Medical Faculty,Necmettin Erbakan E-P01.18 University, Konya, Turkey Evaluation of Clinical, Cytogenetic and Molecular Parameters in SRY-positive 46,XX Testicular Disorder of Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome(KS), affecting 1 in 500 Sex Development: Presentation of Nine Cases to 1,000 newborn males, is the most common sex chromo- some aneuploidy among males with primary hypogonadism. O.S.Akar, G.Ogur,U.Abur,R. Asci,E. Altundag,H.S. Isochromosome Xq on the other hand, is a rare variant of Aymelek, M.K. Alpaslan, S.Gunes Klinefelter syndrome, accounting approximately 0.3% of all KS and associated with normal height and androgenization ONDOKUZ MAYIS UNIVERSITY MEDICAL FACULTY, compared to classical KS. Here we present another case of SAMSUN, Turkey isochromosome Xq variant of KS with similar clinical and cytogenetic findings with the few cases reported before. Introduction: 46,XX testicular disorder of sex develop- Materials and Methods: 25 years old male patient ment (tDSD) is a rare condition with an incidence of 1/ referredtoourclinicwithcomplaintofinfertility.Heisson 20,000 male newborn. Patients have 46,XX karyotype, yet of a consanguineous couple who are first cousins and there they have male external genitalia and male identity. They wasnofamilyhistoryofreproductivedifficulty.Inphysical have hypogonadism, gynecomastia and azoospermia. examination synophrys, prominent ear and small testicles Majority of patients have SRY gene translocated to Xp or noted. His height, weight and secondary sexual character- anautosome.Uptillnowmorethan250patientshavebeen isticswerewithinnormalrange.Thepatient’sspermiogram reported. Here we present 9 more cases. showed azoospermia and scrotal USG revealed testicular Methods: Clinical and laboratory findings (hormone atrophy with heterogenity in paranchyma. profile, sperm analyses) cytogenetics, FISH (SRY-CEPX) Results: Karyotype analysis using G-banding resulted as and Y microdeletion analysis were studied; genetic results 47,X,i(X)(q10),YandShortTandemRepeat(STR)analysis were correlated with clinical and laboratory parameters. showed no deletion in AZF and SRY loci of interest. Results: Mean height was below the mean height of Conclusion: Although dozens of isochromosome Xq normalTurkishmen(166.7cmversus174.3cm);meanage variant of KS can be found in literature, it is our duty to andweightwasnormal.Allcaseshadadecreasedtesticular expand our knowledge about this syndrome as far as volume, all had male phenotype. All patients had possible and emphasize importance of karyotyping for hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and azoospermia. 6/9 patients with reproductive diffuculty who may not have all patientshadadecreasedpubicandaxillaryhair.3/9patients features of a well-known syndrome. hadgynecomastia.6of9patientshad46,XX,3patientshad L. Simsek: None. A.G. Zamani: None. H.H. Taskapu: YtoXtranslocation.InFISHanalysisSRYgenehavebeen None. M.S. Yildirim: None. located on Xp. Y microdeletion analysis revealed that AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd regions were deleted but E-P01.20 SRY was present in all patients. MAGEL2intheprenatalsetting:Beyondfetalakinesiaand Conclusion: All of our patients had a SRY component. arthrogryposis All had azoospermia, gonadotropine levels were high in all of them. All cases presented with male external genitalia G.D'Amours1,2,F. Rossignol1,2,F. Rypens3,4,S. Naudion5, A. and hypogonadism in contrast to SRY(-) tDSD which Trimouille5,E.Lasseaux5,J.L. Michaud1,6,J. Soucy1,6,M. presents mostly with ambiguous genitalia. Azoospermia Delrue1,4,6 was suggested to be the result of AZFa,b,c and d region deletions. 1Service de Génétique médicale, CHU Sainte-Justine, O.S. Akar: None. G. Ogur: None. U. Abur: None. R. Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Faculté de Médecine, Université de Asci:None.E.Altundag:None.H.S.Aymelek:None.M. Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Département de K. Alpaslan: None. S. Gunes: None. Radiologie, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montréal, QC, Canada,878 J.delPicchia 4Centre Intégré de Diagnostic Prénatal, CHU Sainte-Justine, Introduction: Detection of a mosaic small marker chro- Montréal,QC,Canada,5ServicedeGénétiquemédicale,CHU mosome (SMC) represents a diagnostic challenge for pre- Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 6Département de Pédiatrie, natal diagnosis. Their clinical relevance depends on factors Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada suchassize,geneticcontent,anddistributionofmosaicism. Herein, we present a case of low-level mosaic SMC char- Introduction: Truncating mutation on the paternal allele of acterized by arrayCGH allowing to evaluate and discard MAGEL2 is associated with Schaaf-Yang syndrome. The UPD, and to perform a more accurate genetic counselling. phenotype of affected individuals ranges from lethal arthro- PatientandResults:A38yearsoldwomanwasreferred gryposis multiplex to mild intellectual disability or autism for prenatal diagnosis because of maternal anxiety. spectrum disorder. Approximately 30 cases have been Karyotype of amniotic fluid cells showed a “de novo” reported to date, but data on prenatal phenotype are scarce. SMC in 20% of metaphases analyzed, from two indepen- Methods: We performed a file review of six patients dent culture flasks. C-band staining was performed; the (including three from the same family, and two siblings) results suggested that the small marker chromosome was diagnosed after birth with Schaaf-Yang syndrome at our not composed only of heterochromatin. The CytoSure™ centers in a clinical setting, compiled prenatal and Constitutional v3 8x60k (Oxford Gene Technology, UK) molecular data, and reviewed the literature. was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The Results: Prenatal findings in our patients include fetal sample was analyzed as a patient once and as a control akinesia (2/6), pyelectasis (2/6), increased nuchal translu- twice in order to distinguish between a real copy number cency (1/4), intra-uterine growth retardation (1/6), contrac- variationfromanartifact.Theresultswerecompatiblewith tures (1/6), and cerebral anomalies (1/6). All were severely a 5.4 Mb dose increase from the 7p12.1p11.2 band. affected after birth with progressive contractures and Fluorescence "in situ" hybridization (FISH) with a cen- developmental delay. Two had severe hydronephrosis, tromeric chromosome 7 probe was performed. Three while another had renal failure. Molecular analyses hybridization signals were detected in 9.5% of the nuclei identified truncating variants in MAGEL2: c.1762C>T, analyzed and the origin of the marker chromosome was c.3043C>T, and c.1996dupC. We reviewed data on 33 confirmed as derived from chromosome 7. UPD(7) was cases reported between 2009 and 2017, including 10 with excluded. prenatal manifestations. Prenatal features include fetal Conclusions: - ArrayCGH is a powerful tool to akinesia (7/10), contractures (4/10), and polyhydramnios characterize SMCs regarding size and genes even in low- (3/10). In addition, two children without reported prenatal level mosaics. features were small for gestational age. - The appropriate use of conventional and molecular Conclusions: Although Schaaf-Yang syndrome can cytogenetic techniques can be determinant for more present prenatally, the features may be mild or absent. accurate SMC/phenotype correlation improving the genetic Fetal akinesia, contractures, and polyhydramnios are counselling. recurrent, but are absent in more than 50% of cases. The B.Mendez:None.E.Lloveras:None.A.Borrell:None. syndrome should be considered when fetal akinesia or M. Augé: None. C. de la Iglesia: None. D. Fernández: contractures are associated with growth retardation, pye- None. M. Herrero: None. J. Mendoza: None. C. lectasis or oligohydramnios. Pérez: None. G. D'Amours: None. F. Rossignol: None. F. Rypens: None. S. Naudion: None. A. Trimouille: None. E. E-P01.25 Lasseaux: None. J.L. Michaud: None. J. Soucy: None. Minor ultrasonographic findings with major fetal M. Delrue: None. chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis E-P01.24 A.G.Pavel1,2,A.Ursuleanu3,L.Dimos1,A.Tutulan-Cunita1,D. ArrayCGHusefulnessidentifyingalow-levelmosaicsmall Stambouli1 marker chromosome detected at prenatal diagnosis 1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, B. Mendez1,E. Lloveras1,A.Borrell2,M.Augé1,C.dela 2Stefan S. Nicolau Institute of Virology, The Romanian Iglesia1,D.Fernández1,M.Herrero1,J.Mendoza1, C.Pérez1 Academy, Bucharest, Romania, 3Dr. I. Cantacuzino Hospital, Bucharest, Romania 11Departament de Genètica. Laboratori Central Barcelona. SYNLABInternationalGroup,Barcelona,Spain,Espluguesde Introduction:Sonographicmarkershavebeenshowntobe Llobregat, Spain, 2BCNatal-Hospital clinic Barcelona, effective in screening for aneuploid conditions; moreover, Barcelona, Spain ultrasonographyisanon-invasive,risk-freemethodthatcanAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 879 be used throughout pregnancy, at relatively low costs. As Preeclampsia is a severe gestational complication char- many of the chromosomal syndromes have similar sono- acterized by new onset of high blood pressure and protei- graphic findings, a definitive diagnosis cannot be deter- nuria after 20 weeks of gestation. It is one of the leading mined based on ultrasound alone, usually requiring follow- hypertensive disorders in pregnant women, affecting 2 to up genetic investigations. 8% of pregnancies worldwide. Recently, endocrine gland- Prenatal diagnosis of chromosome abnormalities through derivedvascularendothelialgrowthfactor(EG-VEGF)was theanalysisofamniocytesorchorionicvillussamplesisthe regarded as a critical factor for embryo implantation and standard of prenatal care. The application of chromosomal placental development. Micro-RNA 200 family, including microarray analysis in routine chromosomal analysis has miR-200a, -200b, -200c, -141- and -429, were highly rapidly and substantially increased the diagnostic yield in expressed in human placenta and maternal circulation dur- clinical cytogenetics. ing pregnancy. Both EG-VEGF and miR-200 family have Materials and Methods: We selected three prenatal been shown to be associated with several pregnancy com- cases with minor ultrasound findings and major structural plications, including abnormal embryo implantation, chromosomal abnormalities. Molecular karyotyping analy- intrauterine fetal growth restriction, preterm birth and pre- sis was performed with either oligo or SNP-based eclampsia.Besides,miR-200familywaspredictedtotarget microarrays developed for the detection of copy-number on5’UTRofEG-VEGF.Inordertoinvestigatetherolesof alterations: microdeletions, microduplications, aneuploidy miR-200 family and EG-VEGF in preeclampsia, we ana- and unbalanced translocations. lyzed these miRNAs and EG-VEGF expression in the Results: Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed pregnant women of healthy control (n=55) and pre- abnormal results for each of the three mentioned cases that eclampsia (n=33). The expression level of miR-141 and are summarized in the table. miR-200a in preeclamptic women was significantly higher in maternal blood (p <0.05), while EG-VEGF was sig- Case Sonographicfindings Genomicmicroarrayresult nificant lower in the maternal blood and placenta of pre- eclamptic women (p <0.05). Further, we verified miR-141 1 Unilateralmulticystic arr[GRCh37]17q12 and -200a were target on 5’UTR region of EG-VEGF and dysplastickidney (34817422_36168104)x1 affect the migration and invasion ability of trophoblast 2 Unilateralclubfoot arr[GRCh37]17p11.2 (HTR-8/SVneo). The results suggest miR-141 and -200a (16657318_20433723)x3 target on EG-VEGF and inhibit trophoblast migration and 3 Ventriculomegaly arr[GRCh37]1q42.2q44 invasion, and may therefore predispose to develop pre- (233141951_249205158) x3,13q33.2q34 eclampsia in human early pregnancy. (106642740_115107733)x1 M. Su: None. E-P01.27 Conclusions: Identification of any fetal malformation Association of oxidative stress-related genes with should alert the sonographer for further investigation. miscarriage Ultrasonographic markers may hint to genetic imbalances associated with severe consequences after birth. Our cases E. Mashkina,K. Kovalenko, A.Bukreeva highlight the need of further invasive tests and genetic analysis, as that many rare microdeletion/microduplication Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian syndromes can be present even with a normal sonographic Federation exam. Therefore, the invasive testing remains the gold standardforprenataldiagnosisofchromosomalsyndromes. Introduction: 15% of all human pregnancies end in mis- A.G. Pavel: None. A. Ursuleanu: None. L. Dimos: carriagebefore12weeksofgestation.Oxidativestressmay None. A. Tutulan-Cunita: None. D. Stambouli: None. playaveryimportantroleinthemiscarriagewithunknown etiology. This study was conducted to investigate the E-P01.26 association of polymorphisms in oxidative stress-related MicroRNA-200regulatedtrophoblastinvasionbytargeting genes with miscarriage. EG-VEGF in preeclampsia Materials and Methods: A total of 127 women with miscarriage and 138 controls were genotyped for SOD1 M.Su rs4998557, SOD2 rs4880, CAT rs1001179, GPX4 (rs713041), EDN1 rs5370 and NOS3 rs2070744. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng- Results:Aprotectiveeffect ofSOD1rs4998557-Gallele Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan on spontaneous abortion was shown in individual SNP880 J.delPicchia analysis: P=0.03, OR = 0.49, 95% CI 0.26-0.93. It was aberrations were detected using MLPA or QF-PCR. Using established that the genotype AsnAsn EDN1 rs5370 was MLPA, trisomies of all chromosomes except of chromo- associated with an increased risk of missed abortion in the some 1 and 19 were diagnosed and the most common first trimester (OR 6.7, 95% CI 1.3-34.2). The multi-factor trisomies were of chromosome 16, while for QF-PCR the dimensionality reduction approach revealed gene-gene mostcommonaberrationwasmonosomyX.Similarlyasin interactions for NOS3, GPX4 and EDN1 genes on previously described studies, average age of women with spontaneous abortion. Cumulative gene risk score analysis trisomic pregnancy was significantly higher than in women demonstrated that genotype LysLys198 EDN1 /-786TT with euploid pregnancy (35.73 vs 33.63 p<0.005) and the NOS3 / 718CC GPX4 was associated with spontaneous differenceinmaternalageforeuploidfoetusesandfoetuses abortion (P=0.003, OR = 4.28, 95% CI 1.63-11.2). The with X monosomy was insignificant (32.73 vs 33.63, p= missed abortion was associated with interaction of GPX4, 0.31). Interestingly, frequency of triploidy in aborted NOS3 and SOD2 genes. Cumulative gene risk score foetuses seemed to decrease with maternal age (average analysis demonstrated that more than three risk alleles in age 31.23 vs 33.63, p<0.05). Meiotic error in egg is a the genes GPX4 (rs713041-T), NOS3 (rs2070744-C), leading genetic cause of trisomy, however still little is SOD2 (rs4880-Val) were associated with missed abortion known about the molecular basis of aneuploidies related to (P = 0.038, OR = 4.23, 95% CI 1.2-15.1). maternal age. Conclusion: Gene-gene interactions of oxidative stress K. Bernatowicz: None. I. Łaczmańska: None. J. related genes are able of modulating of miscarriage risk. Zimowski: None. M. Sąsiadek: None. M. Bednarska- This study was supported by the federal assignment № Makaruk: None. K. Piotrowski: None. S. Zajączek: 6.6762.2017 from Russian Ministry of Science and None. J. Gronwald: None. Education. E. Mashkina: None. K. Kovalenko: None. A. E-P01.31 Bukreeva: None. ResultsofprospectivestudyofutilisationofTrisomytestin noninvasive prenatal testing for trisomies of chromosomes E-P01.28 21, 18 and 13 The incidence of particular types of chromosomal numerical aberrations in miscarriages is associated with M.Sekelska1,2,L. Valentinova1,2, A.Izsakova1,2,M. maternal age Harsanyova1,Z. Kuchova1,R. Lukackova1,D.Landlova1,M. Hyblova3,J.Budis3,T. Szemes3,P. Krizan1,4, G.Minarik1,2 K. Bernatowicz1,I. Łaczmańska2,J.Zimowski3, M.Sąsiadek2, M.Bednarska-Makaruk3,K. Piotrowski4,S. Zajączek1,J. 1Medirex Inc., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Trisomy test Ltd., Gronwald1 Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Nemocnicna Inc., Bratislava, Slovakia 1DepartmentofGeneticsandPathology,PomeranianMedical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Genetics Department, Wroclaw Introduction: Noninvasive prenatal testing of most com- Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, 3Department of mon trisomies, based on analysis of circulating DNA from Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warszawa, blood of pregnant women, becomes an important part of Poland, 4Diagen Prediag Prenatal & Cytogenetic Unit, prenatal screening. Szczecin, Poland Aim: Aim of the work was prospective study of utilisation of Trisomy test for noninvasive prenatal testing Itiscommonlyknownthattheriskofgivingbirthtoachild (NIPT)ofthemost common trisomies ofchromosomes21, with trisomy 13, 18 and 21 increases rapidly with the 18 and 13. maternal age. The relationship between advanced maternal MaterialsandMethods:FromSeptember2015tillApril ageandincidenceofDownsyndromewasinitiallyreported 2017, 4109 samples of pregnant women were analyzed more than 75 years ago. On the other hand it has been using Trisomy test. For high risk samples detection whole proven that maternal agehasnoimpacton theincidenceof genome low coverage scan was used in association with monosomy X in liveborns. home-made bioinformatic pipeline and our own biostatis- Inthisstudy579unselectedproductsofconceptionswere tical approach. analysed using commercially available kits for chromo- Results:Of4109analysedsamples3847werereportedas somes13,15,16,18,21,22,XandY(QF-PCR)andforall euploid and 76 as trisomic. After analysis of the first blood chromosomes (MLPA)In contrast to QF-PCR, MLPA is sample, 184 cases were found to be nonreportable, after unable to detect 69,XXX triploidy. Overall 170 different second blood sample analysis only 42 samples were still trisomies, 38 monosomies X, 40 triploidies and 8 double unreportable, so no call rate of the test was 1%. AmongAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 881 trisomic samples 55 samples were reported as high risk for toward a phenotype of decidual M2 macrophage; also, trisomy 21, 15 samples as high risk for trisomy 18 and NLRP7 expressed in the decidualized endometrial stromal 6 samples as high risk for trisomy 13. Two false negatives cells induced by MPA. NLRP7 has a well-studied role in (1xT21and1xT18)andtwofalsepositives(1xT21and1x regulating immune responses. Therefore, this study aimed T13)wererecordedinthewholecohort.Totalsensitivityof to examine whether NLRP7 plays a role in decidual mac- the method used for detection of all three trisomes was rophage differentiation. 97.37%. Total specificity of the method was 99.95%. MaterialsandMethods:Wedetectedtheexpressionsof Conclusions: Trisomy test performance based on calcu- M1-cell markers (IL-1β, TNF-α, and iNOS) and M2-cell lations of its sensitivity, specificity and no call rate is fully markers(IL-10,IDO,andMRC)respectivelyinLPS/IFN-γ comparable with other commercial tests used in NIPT and IL-4/IL-13 inducing the PMA primed THP-1 cell line, worldwide. which was either siNLRP7 knockdown expressed or LV- M.Sekelska:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; NLRP7 overexpressed. We also examined the subtypes of Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employment (full or part-time); the decidual macrophages by immunofluorescence staining Significant; Medirex Inc. L. Valentinova: A. Employment in paraffin embedded the first-trimester endometrium. (full or part-time); Modest; Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employ- Results: The expressions of M1-cell markers are ment (full or part-time); Significant; Medirex Inc. A. significantlylowerinLV-NLRP7overexpressedandhigher Izsakova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; in siNLRP7 knockdown expressed THP-1 cell line. The Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employment (full or part-time); expressions of M2-cell markers slightly increase and Significant;MedirexInc.M.Harsanyova:A.Employment decrease in LV-NLRP7 overexpressed and siNLRP7 (full or part-time); Significant; Medirex Inc. Z. Kuchova: knockdown expressed THP-1 cell line, respectively. A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Medirex NLRP7 expresses in IL-10+ CD68+ M2 macrophage of Inc. R. Lukackova: A. Employment (full or part-time); the first-trimester endometrium. Significant; Medirex Inc. D. Landlova: A. Employment Conclusions: We suggest that NLRP7 suppressed the (full or part-time); Significant; Medirex Inc. M. Hyblova: differentiation of M1 macrophages in deciduae. However, A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Geneton NLRP7 was necessary but not sufficient for decidual M2 Ltd. J. Budis: A. Employment (full or part-time); macrophages differentiation. This research was supported Significant; Geneton Ltd. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full from MOST of Taiwan (103-2314-B-006-079-MY3). or part-time); Significant; Geneton Ltd. P. Krizan: A. Y. Li: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Nemocnicna Inc.. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Medirex grants already received); Significant; MOST, Taiwan. J. Inc. G. Minarik: A. Employment (full or part-time); Huang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Modest; Trisomy test Ltd.. A. Employment (full or part- MOST, Taiwan. Y. Huang: A. Employment (full or part- time); Significant; Medirex Inc.. time);Modest;MOST,Taiwan.P.Kuo:B.ResearchGrant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and E-P01.32 pending grants as well as grants already received); NLRP7 affects the differentiation of human decidual Significant; MOST, Taiwan. macrophages E-P01.33 Y. Li1, J.Huang2,Y. Huang2,P. Kuo2 Increase of selected single chromosome aneuploidies in embryos of older mothers 1Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chung-Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 2Department of Obstetrics and E. Linhartova,V. Becvarova,J.Horacek, H.Pekova, R. Gynecology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Mansfeldova,V.Sucha,M.Spacirova,P.Sidova,L.Hnykova,J. Tainan, Taiwan Starkova, M.Koudova,M. Trkova Introduction: The decidual M2 macrophage plays a vital Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic role in the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. It is different from the abundant M1 macrophages existing in Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A) on deciduaeofspontaneousabortions.However,itisunknown day-5 embryos by VeriSeq PGS Kit is routinely used in what the molecular regulator of decidual macrophage dif- Gennetsince2016.In2017trophectodermbiopsiesof2767 ferentiation is. In our published studies: MPA (Medrox- embryos in 939 IVF cycles were performed with 98% yprogesterone acetate; a progesterone analog with an anti- examinationsuccessrate; 2631examinedembryos. Overall inflammatory property) drove macrophages differentiating 1295 euploid embryos (49%) were recommended for the882 J.delPicchia embryotransfer and 190 mosaic embryos (7%) were con- unambiguously determined by direct MLPA SMN1 testing. sulted with clinical geneticist. Five age groups were estab- Male partner has typical heterozygous SMN1 exon 7del lished for the evaluation of the maternal age-dependent genotype as well as his parents. His affected sister is aneuploidy frequency: I.<29 (mean age 26.8), II. 30-34 homozygous. Female partner and her brother are hetero- (32.6),III.35-39(37.4),IV.40-44(41.6)andV.>45(46.8). zygotesofSMN1exon7del,buttheirbothparentshavetwo The embryos of the oocyte donors were used as a control SMN1 copies. group VI. (24.9). Unsurprisingly, the aneuploidy frequency Weassumedthatoneofparentsoffemalepartnerisfalse- in the age groups III, IV and V compared to the control negative carrier – has SMN1 duplication/deletion. By group VI was significantly higher (t-test, α level 5%), with combination results of MLPA analysis and comparing significant growth of the incidence of the aneuploid haplotypesofallrelativesoffemale´sfamilyweconclusion embryos from group I to V (P=0.05). The relevant age- that mother of female partner is heterozygous for SMN1 dependent increase of single chromosome aneuploidy per deletion with SMN1 duplication in cis. embryo was found in monosomies 15, 16, 21, 22 and tri- The linkage analysis is available for families with not somies16,19,21,22.Thelinearcorrelationwasfoundonly sufficiently informative results of direct testing. This for chromosome 15 monosomy (P<0.05). The groups I to method may be used for the confirmation of results from III had the exponential increase of single chromosome carrier screening or for PGT-M preparation as aneuploidy for chromosomes 16, 19 and 22. When com- mentioned above. pared to the frequency of the aneuploidies in the sponta- I. Soldatova: None. M. Sekowská: None. L. Reismül- neousabortion,thefrequent16,19and22trisomiesand15, lerová: None. K. Veselá: None. J. Diblík: None. M. 16 and 22 monosomies are likely lethal for the embryos. Bittóová: None. M. Koudová: None. D. Stejskal: None. Our results provide important clues for the assessment of the potential risk for the embryotransfer of the mosaic E-P01.36 embryos. Decoding the role of regulatory element polymorphisms in E.Linhartova:None.V.Becvarova:None.J.Horacek: preeclampsia None. H. Pekova: None. R. Mansfeldova: None. V. Sucha: None. M. Spacirova: None. P. Sidova: None. L. E.Trifonova1,2,T.Gabidulina2,V.Serebrova1,V.Stepanov1,A. Hnykova: None. J. Starkova: None. M. Koudova: None. Beliaeva1 M. Trkova: None. 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian E-P01.34 Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Preimplantationgenetictesting(PGT-M)inthefamilywith Russian Federation SMN1 duplication/deletion Preeclampsiaisacommonpregnancy-specificdisorderwith I.Soldatova, M.Sekowská,L. Reismüllerová, K. Veselá, J. unknown etiology. It is the leading cause of maternal and Diblík,M. Bittóová,M.Koudová, D.Stejskal perinatalmorbidityandmortality.Weusedanewapproach to detecting genetic markers of preeclampsia based on a Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine combination of genomic, transcriptomic, and bioinformatic GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic methods.Ourpriorgenome-widetranscriptionalprofilingof placental tissue led to a novel set of 63 preeclampsia can- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by didate genes (differentially expressed genes, (Fold Change muscle weakness and atrophy resulting from progressive >1.5,FDR<0.1)).Inthisreport,wepresentstudyontherole degeneration and loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord of variability in these genes in the genetic susceptibility to and the brain stem. SMA is caused in more than 95% preeclampsia. We analyzed 48 regulatory single nucleotide casesbyrecessivemutationintheSMN1generesultingin polymorphisms (rSNPs) in 23 genes (ANKRD37, BCL6, deficiency of SMN (survival motor neuron) protein. BHLHE40, CEBPA, CCSAP, CORO2A, ENG, GPT2, Approximately95-98%ofSMApatientslackbothcopies GSTA3, HK2, INHA, KRT19, LEP, LHB, NDRG1, PLIN2, of SMN1 exon 7. About 3% of carriers have SMN1 PPP1R12C, RDH13, SASH1, SIGLEC6, SYDE1, duplication in cis associated with SMN1 deletion on TMEM136 and ZNF175) in 519 patients with preeclampsia homologous chromosome. SMN1 duplication/deletion in and 718 women with uncomplicated pregnancies from ciscannotbedetectedbyMLPAcommonlyusedatcarrier Russian, Buryat and Yakut populations using MassArray screening. iPLEX (Sequenom). We have detected significant associa- WepresentthecaseofSMN1exon7delcarriercouplein tions for preeclampsia with eleven rSNPs in PLIN2, which risk haplotype suitable for PGT-M may not be BHLHE40, RDH13, SYDE1 and ZNF175 genes in RussianAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 883 and Buryat population. In Yakut population, only three L. Strieskova: None. J. Gazdarica: None. J. Budis: genes (NDRG1, CORO2A, SASH1) were associated with None. M. Harsanyova: None. T. Szemes: None. increased risk of preeclampsia. rSNP in PPP1R12C genes was associated with preeclampsia in Buryat population E-P01.38 only. This results demonstrate a significant role rSNP of preimplantation genetic testing for carriers of balanced placental tissue genes in susceptibility to preeclampsia in chromosomal rearrangements differentethnicgroupsofRussia.Integrativetranscriptome- basedapproachproveditsefficiencyandmaybeappliedto O.Yacuts,J.Tsukerman, A.Zhabinskaya, A. Alekseeva, S. detecting new potential genetic markers of preeclampsia, Volokhanovitch, O.Tishkevich which reduces missing heritability. This work was sup- portedbytheRussianFoundationforBasicResearch(grant Centre of assisted reproduction «Embryo», Minsk, Belarus №18-44-700007). E. Trifonova: None. T. Gabidulina: None. V. Sereb- Introduction: Structural chromosome abnormalities may rova: None. V. Stepanov: None. A. Beliaeva: None. be associated with infertility, multiple miscarriage and delivery of chromosomally unbalanced offspring. Pre- E-P01.37 implantation genetic testing for structural rearrangements Analysis of genes associated with preeclampsia for (PGT-SR) was used to select embryos without chromoso- purposes of the disease prognosis mal imbalance for transfer. MaterialsandMethods:Weconducted13cyclesofIVF L.Strieskova1,2,J.Gazdarica1,2,J.Budis2,3,4,M.Harsanyova1,2, +PGT-SR. A-CGH (Illumina 24Sure+) was used to detect T. Szemes2,3,1,5 structural rearrangements of chromosomes and whole chromosome aneuploidies. 1FacultyofNaturalSciences,ComeniusUniversity,Bratislava, Results: PGT-SR was performed for 48 blastocysts. In 6 Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Slovak centre cycles for robertsonian translocation carriers 28 blastocysts of scientific and technical information, Bratislava, Slovakia, were obtained, 13 from them had normal/balanced chromo- 4Faculty of Mathematics, Physics, and Informatics, Comenius some number (46,4%). After 4 embryo transfers 3 patients University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Medirex a.s., Bratislava, achieved pregnancy. The first pregnancy resulted in delivery Slovakia of a healthy child and 2 pregnancies are prolonging. In 5 cyclesforreciprocaltranslocationcarriers14blastocystswere Introduction: Preeclampsia is a serious and poorly under- obtained, 2 from them (from different patients) had normal/ stood complication of pregnancy and remains one of the balanced chromosome number (14,3%). After 2 embryo leading cause of maternal and perinatal mortality and transfers both patients became pregnant. In 2 cycles for morbidity.Itisamulti-systemicdisorderusuallyrecognised inversion carriers we obtained 6 blastocysts, in both cases bynew-onsetofhypertensionandproteinuriainthesecond there was one blastocyst with normal/balanced chromosome halfofpregnancy.Althoughtheetiologyofpreeclampsiais number (33,3%). One patient has ongoing pregnancy, the not elucidated yet, the placenta plays an important role in other one is waiting for embryo transfer. the pathogenesis. There are many genes and biochemical Conclusions: Transfer of embryos without chromosomal markers closely associated with placental functionwhichis imbalances is important factor for successful implantation, associated with preeclampsia. pregnancy and delivery a healthy baby. IVF+ PGT-SR is Materials and Methods: Low coverage whole genome effective method for carriers of balanced chromosomal sequencing data obtained in NIPT test from pregnant rearrangements that can be used for the earliest prevention women was mined for identification of candidate genes of hereditary pathology. mostly associated with preeclampsia. Maternal polymorph- O. Yacuts: None. J. Tsukerman: None. A. Zhabins- isms were identified and verified by Sanger sequencing. kaya: None. A. Alekseeva: None. S. Volokhanovitch: Results:Wewereabletodetermineallelicfrequenciesof None. O. Tishkevich: None. preeclampsia associated SNVs specifically in our popula- tion. In addition, we verified selected polymorphisms E-P01.40 associated with preeclampsia by conventional Sanger Resultsofkaryotypeanalysisof7975pregnanciesprenataly sequencing after suggesting specific average values. identified with amniocentesis in Turkey Conclusion:Populationstudyconfirmedourassumptions that using next generation sequencing and Sanger sequen- A.Pazarbasi1,O.Demirhan1,H.U.Luleyap1,S.Kocaturk-Sel1, cing may, at least partially, extend the possibilities of D.Alptekin1,M.B.Yilmaz1,S.N.Ilgaz1,L.Ozpak1,I.N.Uslu1, diagnostics in the field of preeclampsia. G.Ay1,S. Buyukkurt2884 J.delPicchia 1Cukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Kędzior1,A. Kucińska-Chahwan2,A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, 2Cukurova University, T. Roszkowski2,M.Dębska3,N.Bezniakow1, A.Barczyk1,P. Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Kretowicz3,P.Własienko1, K.Jakubów-Durska1, E.Obersztyn1, Gynecology, Adana, Turkey B. A.Nowakowska1 Introduction: Amniocentesis is a very crucial diagnostic 1InstituteofMotherandChild,Warsaw,Poland,2IDepartment procedure for preventing the birth of genetically defective ofObstetricsandGynecology,MedicalCentreofPostgraduate fetuses in order to decrease the prevalence of genetic dis- Education (CMKP), Warsaw, Poland, 3II Department of eases in populations. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Centre of Postgraduate Materials and Methods: A retrospective review of our Education (CMKP), Warsaw, Poland amniocentesisdatabasefortheperiodfromJanuary2000to February 2018 was carried out. The karyotyping of 7975 Congenitalheartdefectsoccurin8-10outof1000liveborn fetuses was carried out in Department of Medical Biology newborns and are one of the most common causes of their from the samples of amniotic fluids which were sent from death. In fetuses, congenital heart defects are found 3-5 Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics of Balcali times more often. Currently, Array Comparative Genomic Hospital. A standart nomenclature has been developed to Hybridization (array CGH) is recommended by the Amer- describe each of types of abnormality found in human ican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists as a first chromosomes. line test in the prenatal diagnosis of fetuses with sono- Results: A total of 7975 amniocentesis specimens were graphic abnormalities especially cardiac defects. processedduringthestudyperiod.545fetuses(6.83%)had We present the results of oligonucleotide array applica- various chromosomal abnormalities. 56.33% of abnormal tion in a cohort of 353 prenatal cases with the fetal cardiac karyotypes (307 cases) were numerical and 41.46% (226 abnormalities, detected by ultrasound scan. In all cases cases) were structural. Both numerical and structural amniocentesis was performed at 12-24 weeks of gestation. chromosomal aberrations were observed in 12 cases DNA was extracted from amniotic fluid and trophoblast. (2.20%). The ratios were as: trisomy 21 (46.90%), trisomy Array CGH was performed using 60K microarrays 8x60K 18 (18.24%), monosomy X (10.42%), trisomy 13 (6.84%), from Oxford Gene Technology (CytoSure ISCA, v2 Triploidy (5.21%),Klinefelter Syndrome (3.58%),Trisomy and v3). X (1.30%), XYY Syndrome (0.97%), and the others in all The most commonly found (56%) are aneuploidy: numerical abnormalities. The frequent structural abnormal- chromosomal trisomy 21, 18, 13 and Turner syndrome. In ities were as: 46,XX/XY,inv(9)(p11;q12)/(p11;q13) cases with aneuploidy, the most common heart malforma- (33.18%), 46,XX/XY,1qh(+)(10.17%), 46,XY,Yqh(-) tions are atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD), ventricular (5.30%), 46,XX/XY,16qh(+)(4.86%), 46,XX/XY,9qh(+) septal defect (VSD), tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), atrial septal (4.42%) and 46,XY,Yqh(+) (4.98%). Balanced and unba- defect(ASD)andhypoplasticleftheartsyndrome,(HLHS). lanced translocations, deletions and duplications were also Heart defects are a characteristic phenotypic feature in found in less ratio. commonmicrodeletion/microduplicationsyndromes(34%), Conclusions: According to the literature and our results, for example in the cases with deletion syndrome 22q11.2 advanced maternal age is the main cause of fetal the most commonly defects are TOF, VSD and aortic chromosomal abnormalities. Fetal chromosomal abnorm- coarctation (CAT). Rare aberrations accounted for 10% of ality ratio that we found was 6.83%. This ratio emphasize all abnormal results. the importance of prenatal diagnosis. Prenatal array-CGH is the only method permitting to the A. Pazarbasi: None. O. Demirhan: None. H.U. identification of all unbalanced aberrations (number and Luleyap: None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None. D. Alptekin: structure) with a much higher resolution than the currently None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. S.N. Ilgaz: None. L. Ozpak: applied traditional assessment techniques karyotype. None. I.N. Uslu: None. G. Ay: None. S. K. Sobecka: None. M. Bartnik-Głaska: None. M. Buyukkurt: None. Smyk: None. I. Plaskota: None. J. Castañeda: None. B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. J. Bernaciak: None. M. E-P01.41 Kędzior: None. A. Kucińska-Chahwan: None. A. Kut- Prenatal diagnosis of foetuses with cardiac sonographic kowska-Kaźmierczak: None. T. Roszkowski: None. M. abnormalitiesbyarraycomparativegenomichybridization Dębska: None. N. Bezniakow: None. A. Barczyk: None. P. Kretowicz: None. P. Własienko: None. K. Jakubów- K. Sobecka1,M.Bartnik-Głaska1,M.Smyk1,I.Plaskota1,J. Durska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. B.A. Castañeda1,B.Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik1,J. Bernaciak1,M. Nowakowska: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 885 E-P01.42 L.D.Espeche1,V.Chiauzzi2,I.Ferder2,M.Arrar3,A.P.Solari1, Detection of chromosomal anomalies from South of C. D.Bruque1,M. Delea1,S. Belli4,C. S.Fernández1,N.D. Turkey: QF PCR versus cytogenetic Buzzalino1,E. H.Charreau2,L. B.Dain1 S. Kocaturk-Sel1,A. Pazarbasi1,B. Yilmaz1,U.Luleyap1,O. 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica- ANLIS, Ciudad Demirhan1,D.Alptekin1,S.Ilgaz1,L.Ozpak1,N.Uslu1,G.Ay1, AutónomadeBuenosAires,Argentina,2InstitutodeBiologíay S. Buyukkurt2 Medicina Experimental (IByME)-CONICET, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Instituto de Química- 1University of Cukurova Faculty of Medicine, Department of Física de los Materiales, Medio Ambiente y Energía, Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, 2University of Cukurova CONICET, and Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Analítica y Química Física, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Gynecology, Adana, Turkey Naturales,UniversidaddeBuenosAires,CiudadAutónomade Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4División de Endocrinología, Introduction: In the early 1990s, FISH and, more Hospital de Agudos Carlos G. Durand, Ciudad Autónoma de recently, QF-PCR entered to the field of prenatal diag- Buenos Aires, Argentina nosis, to overcome the need of fetal cell culturing, hence to allow rapid diagnosis of some selected chromosomal Introduction: the premutation state of FMR1 (Fragile X anomalies. Rapid QF-PCR analysis for the common tri- Mental Retardation 1) has been associated with primary somies13, 18, and 21 and sexchromosome aneuploidy is ovarian insufficiency (POI), and is the most common now offered in many centers to women, who undergo knowngeneticcausefor46,XXpatients.Nevertheless,very invasive prenataldiagnosisby amniocentesis or chorionic few studies have analyzed its frequency in Latin American villus sampling. This is usually performed in addition populations. to the subsequent full chromosome analysis of Additionally, a relationship between alleles carrying a cultured cells. cryptic microdeletion in the 5’UTR of FMR2 and the onset Materials and Methods: The karyotyping and QF-PCR of POI has only been studied in one population. Our aim were carried out to amniotic fluids of 1380 fetuses from was to analyze the incidence of FMR1 premutations and January 2013 to January 2018. The diagnosis of common putative microdeletions in exon 1 of FMR2 in a cohort of chromosomal numerical and structural anomalies were Argentinean women with POI. routinely performed by standard cytogenetic techniques. MaterialsandMethods:westudied133patientsand84 The QF-PCR amplifications were performed using trisomy controls. Fluorescent PCR was performed, and the FMR2 detectionkit.Theresultsfrombothmethodswerecompared exon 1 was further sequenced in samples presenting less in terms of structural anomalies. than 11 repeats. Results:Inourretrospectivestudy,wedetected135cases Results: we found the frequency of FMR1 premutations with numerical (48/135) and structural (87/135) anomalies. to be 6.7% and 2.9% for familial and sporadic patients, The various types of structural anomalies were found with respectively. Among controls, 1/84 women presented a conventional cytogenetic methods in 87 cases, who, premutation. In addition, although we did not find however, were found normal with QF-PCR. No false microdeletions in FMR2, we observed a change (T >C) aneuploidic results were observed by QF-PCR method and adjacent to the repeats in two sisters with POI. Given the twomethodsareinaccordancewitheachother.Discussion: repetitive nature of the sequence involved, we could not Aneuploidic QF-PCR results were validated with cytoge- ascertain whether this represents a single nucleotide neticanalysestocompletethediagnosis.TheQF-PCRisan polymorphism (SNP) or a deletion. easierandafastertest,ithasalimitationofnottobeableto Conclusion:arelationshipbetweenFMR2andPOIcould scanfullkaryotype.Inconclusion,QF-PCRandcytogenetic not be established for our population. methods are important prenatal tests that completes This research was supported by grants from the Agencia each other. Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica S.Kocaturk-Sel:None.A.Pazarbasi:None.B.Yilmaz: (ANPCYT, grant number PICT-00208), from the Admin- None. U. Luleyap: None. O. Demirhan: None. D. istración Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud Alptekin: None. S. Ilgaz: None. L. Ozpak: None. N. (FOCANLIS) and from Fundación Roemmers. Uslu: None. G. Ay: None. S. Buyukkurt: None. L.D. Espeche: None. V. Chiauzzi: None. I. Ferder: None. M. Arrar: None. A.P. Solari: None. C.D. Bruque: E-P01.43 None. M. Delea: None. S. Belli: None. C.S. Fernández: Distribution of FMR1 and FMR2 repeats in Argentinean None.N.D.Buzzalino:None.E.H.Charreau:None.L.B. patients with primary ovarian insufficiency Dain: None.886 J.delPicchia E-P01.45 1Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia, Association analysis of HLA-G (rs41557518) and VEGF-A 2Institute of Nuclear Sciencies 'Vinca, Belgrade, Serbia (rs2010963) polymorphisms with recurrent miscarriages Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is a heterogeneous condi- V. Kalotra1,2,G.Singh1,3, V.Sharma3,I.Sharma3, M.Lall2, I. tion affecting up to 5% of women of reproductive age. Verma2,S. Sharma3, A.Kaur1 Proper formation of placenta is necessary for successful pregnancyoutcome.IthasbeenpostulatedthatFXIIIV34L 1DepartmentofHumanGenetics,GuruNanakDevUniversity, and PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphisms can interfere with fibri- Amritsar, India, 2Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, nolysis and fibrin cross-linking, and thus contribute to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, India, 3Shri Mata pregnancy loss. Here we examined the prevalence of Vaishno Devi University, Katra, India aforementioned polymorphisims among women with his- tory of recurrent miscarriages and fertile controls. Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is defined as the loss of 2 or Thestudyincluded70womenwithhistoryofatleasttwo more clinical pregnancies and affects 15-20% of couples. early pregnancy losses (before 20th gestation week) and 30 Nearly 50% RM cases remain idiopathic. A successful fertile controls with no miscarriages. We investigated pregnancy requires coordinated interaction of several com- polymorphisim inFXIII(V34L)andPAI-1(4G/5G)genes ponents between mother and fetus. It has been postulated using reverse PCR Vienna lab CVD StrippAssays. thatabnormalmaternalandfetalexpressionofgeneswhich Our results showed no statistically significant difference are associated with immunity, angiogenesis and apoptosis in prevalence of FXIII and PAI-1 gene polymorphisms may be contributing to cases of recurrent miscarriages. between two tested groups. However, relative risk for PRL VascularEndothelialGrowthFactor-A(VEGF-A)proteinis among women heterozygous for FXIII V34L was 2.81 anantiapoptotic,mitogenicandmajorangiogenicfactorand times increased (CI 95%, p 0.02). Using stepwise logistic aprimeregulatorofendothelialcellproliferation.Itplaysan regression analysis we showed that combined presence of essential role in physiological vasculogenesis and vascular high risk genotypes for FXIII and PAI-1 increases relative permeability. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G gene is a risk for RPL 13.98 times (CI 95%, p 0.04). non-classical HLA class Ib gene and favours maternal FXIII V34L polymorphism leads to change in fibrin acceptance of the semi-allogenic fetus by modulating the structure making it more resistant to fibrinolysis. In maternal immune system during pregnancy. The present combination with decreased fybrinolitic activity of PAI-1 study determines the association of HLA-G (rs41557518) 4G variant it can lead to improper formation of placenta. and VEGF-A (rs2010963) polymorphisms in 100 RM Therefore,compoundheterozygotsforFXIIV34LandPAI- women who had experienced at least two or more con- 1 4G can have increased risk for RPL. secutive miscarriages, their 100 male partners and 100 I. Joksic: None. G. Joksic: None. healthy control females who had at least one healthy live bornandnomiscarriage.Thegenotypingwasperformedby E-P01.47 using AGENA MassARRAY. The variants showed dis- SinglenucleotidepolymorphismsofvitaminDreceptorand tribution following Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.05). recurrent miscarriage The variant rs41557518 showed a significant association (p<0.05) for recurrent miscarriages when compared A. Bariić1,N.Pereza1, S.Ostojić1,A. Hodić2,B. Peterlin2 between RM women and control women. Further investi- gations with increased sample size may provide conclusive 1Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, 2Clinical Institute of resultsabouttheassociationofthesevariantswithrecurrent Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia miscarriages. The financial assistance to Vishali Kalotra (DST/INSPIREFellowship/2013/889)fromGovt.ofIndia Introduction:Recurrentmiscarriage(RM)isareproductive is duly acknowledged. disorder defined as the loss of two or more pregnancies V.Kalotra:None.G.Singh:None.V.Sharma:None.I. from the time of conception until 22 weeks of gestation. Sharma: None. M. Lall: None. I. Verma: None. S. Despite the fact that several mechanisms have been pre- Sharma: None. A. Kaur: None. viously described for the pathogenesis of RM, causes of approximately 50% remain unknown. Recent studies indi- E-P01.46 cate association of vitamin D with adverse pregnancy out- IncreasedriskforrecurrentpregnancylossinFXIIIV34L come, including RM. The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a and PAI-1 4G/5G compound heterozigots crucialmediatorofthepleiotropiccellulareffectsofvitamin Danditsfunctionisinfluencedbyseveralsinglenucleotide I.Joksic1,G.Joksic2 polymorphisms (SNPs). The main objective of the presentAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 887 study was to assess whether three different VDR SNPs are ceaserean section with severe intrauterine growth retarda- associated with the risk of RM in Slovenian women. tion, dysmorphic facial features, hypoplasia of the corpus Materials and Methods: A case - control study was callosum and bilateral polycystic kidney disease diagnosed designed to examine the potential association of VDR within prenatal period. Our report describes the prenatal polymorphisms (FokI rs222857, Cdx2 rs115688, Taq1 case with a ring chromosome 4 abnormality with Wolf rs731236) with RM. A total of 149 women with a history Hirschorn Syndrome completely characterized by array- of≥3spontaneousmiscarriagesofunknownaetiologywere CGH which provided complementary data for prenatal included in the study. The control group consisted of 149 diagnosis and genetic counseling of this syndrome. age-matched, healthy women with at least two live births. P. Tasdemir: None. N.D. Gultekin: None. F. Ercan: Genotyping was performed using PCR-RFLP methods. None. F.H. Yilmaz: None. A. Acar: None. H. Results: No statistically significant differences were Altunhan: None. found in thedistribution ofgenotype and allele frequencies ofeitherSNPbetweenpatientsandcontrolsorpatientswith E-P01.49 primary and secondary RM. Moreover, we found no Co-occurrence of two rare disorders in a non- association between abovementioned SNPs and RM under consanguineous family dominant, recessive and codominant genetic models. Conclusions: Our results suggest that VDR gene M.Atanasoska1,R.Vazharova1,2,S.Andonova3,L.Balabanski1, polymorphisms are not a genetic marker for RM in R. Raynova3,I. Bradinova3,A. Savov3,D.Toncheva1,4 Slovenian women. Research grant numbers: 16.06.2.1.02, 13.06.1.3.32 1Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov A.Bariić:None.N.Pereza: None.S.Ostojić:None.A. MD”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia University St Kliment Ohridski, Hodić: None. B. Peterlin: None. FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofBiology,Medicalgenetics and Microbiology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Genetic E-P01.48 Laboratory, UHOG “Maichin dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, Prenatal diagnosis of ring chromosome 4 and Wolf- 4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,MedicalUniversityofSofia, Hirschorn syndrome with bilateral polycystic kidney Sofia, Bulgaria disease Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and Alport P. TASDEMIR1,N.D.Gultekin2,F. Ercan3,F. H.Yilmaz2,A. syndrome are rare genetic conditions characterized with Acar3,H.Altunhan2 different symptoms and outcomes. Here we present a rare case withco-occurrence of these two unrelated disorders in 1Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty, one family. The family came to our attention because of Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey, 2Necmettin SMA diagnosed in their first child. A heterozygous variant Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty, Department of COL4A5:c.4228C>T (p.Arg1410Cys), associated with Pediatrics. Division of Neonatology, Konya, Turkey, Alport syndrome, was found accidentally in the mother 3Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty, through NGS. The family has several further pregnancies Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Division of with different outcomes: two miscarriages, one healthy girl Perinatology, Konya, Turkey bornafter prenataldiagnosis andone terminated pregnancy with SMA. Ring chromosomes are unusual abnormalities that are MaterialsandMethods:TheCVSsamplefromthesixth observed in prenatal diagnosis. A 34-year-old patient present pregnancy with a male fetus was first examined for referred for amniocentesis due to abnormal maternal serum deletion of exons 7 and 8 of the SMN1 gene by RFLP screeningresultinthe16thweekofpregnancy.Cytogenetic analysis. Еxon 46 of COL4A5 was investigated then in the analysis of cultured amniyotic fluid cells revealed out ring fetus and the mother’s father by targeted amplicon chromosome4.Bothmaternalandpaternalkaryotypeswere sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq system. normal. Terminal deletion was observed in both 4p and 4q Results: Ahomozygousdeletionof exons 7 and 8 ofthe arms of ring chromosome 4 by fluorescence in situ hybri- SMN1 gene was not detected. The grandfather and male dization (FISH). Also deletion was observed in the Wolf- fetus were found to be hemizygous carriers of the variant Hirschorn Syndrome (WHS) critical region of ring chro- COL4A5:c.4228C>T. mosome4 byan additional FISHstudy. These results were Conclusion: The X-linked recessive form of Alport confirmed by means of microarray analysis showing term- syndrome is progressive but characterized with large inaldeletionson4p16.3(8412Mb)and4q35.2(5361Mb). clinical heterogeneity and variable age of onset in affected A girl infant born at 36-week gestational age through males. Despite unilateral hearing loss, arterial hypertonia888 J.delPicchia andvisualproblems, adiagnosis ofAlport syndromeisnot whichinturncouldaffectthehormonalaxisresponsiblefor established in the grandfather. Difficult ethical questions spermatogenesis leading to a defective maturation of concerning the decision about this pregnancy outcome and spermatozoa. the health of the unborn child are raised in this rare case L. Stocchi: None. E. Giardina: None. L. Varriale: with co-occurrence of two rare disorders. None.A.Sechi:None.A.Vagnini:None.G.Parri:None. M. Atanasoska: None. R. Vazharova: None. S. M. Valentini: None. M. Capalbo: None. Andonova: None. L. Balabanski: None. R. Raynova: None. I. Bradinova: None. A. Savov: None. D. E-P01.51 Toncheva: None. A supernumerary ring chromosome 18 in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot E-P01.50 Can tangier disease cause male infertility? A case report J.B. Gaillard1,A.Schneider1,J. Puechberty2,P. Blanchet2,C. and an overview on genetic causes of male infertility & Wells2,F. Fuchs3, T.Guignard1,F. Pellestor1, V.Gatinois1 hormonal axis involved 1Génétique Chromosomique, CHU, Montpellier, France, L.Stocchi1,E.Giardina2,L.Varriale1,A.Sechi3,A.Vagnini1,G. 2Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 3Centre Parri1,M.Valentini1,M.Capalbo1 Pluridisciplinaire de Diagnostic Prénatal, CHU, Montpellier, France 1Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedali Riuniti Marche Nord, Pesaro, Italy, 2Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS-Univ. Tor Vergata, In prenatal diagnosis, small Supernumerary Marker Chro- Rome, Italy, 3Regional Center for Rare Diseases Academic mosomes (sSMC) occur in 0.072%. We report here a fetus Hospita, Udine, Italy with a sSMC, identified as a ring chromosome 18, asso- ciated with a cardiac defect. Introduction: Tangier disease is an autosomal recessive Patient: We present a 36-year old pregnant patient who disorder caused by mutations in the ABCA1 gene and was referred to the Center for Prenatal Diagnosis at characterized by the accumulation of cholesteryl ester in Montpellier University Hospital for a ventricular septal various tissues and a near absence of high-density lipo- defect, conotruncal type, consistent with a diagnosis of protein. The subject in this investigation was a 36-year-old tetralogy of Fallot, revealed on 32 weeks’ gestation man with Tangier disease and with a severe oligoastheno- ultrasound screening. teratozoospermia diagnosis. Testosterone is the sex hor- Results: Rapid interphase screening performed on 133 mone necessary for spermatogenesis and cholesterol is its uncultured amniocytes showed 58 nuclei with 3 signals for precursor; hence, we hypothesized that the characteristic centromere 18 probe (D18Z1). Surprisingly the karyotype cholesterol deficiency in Tangier disease patients could showed a mosaic ring chromosome 18, dicentric in some compromise their fertility. The aim of the study was to metaphases, objectived by additional FISH analysis with therefore to determine if there is an association between D18Z1 probeConsequently, the chromosomal formula was Tangier disease and male infertility. established as follows:47,XX,+r(18)(p11.22q11.2)[19/20]/ Materials and Methods: After excluding viral, infec- 46,XX[1/20].ish r(18)(wcp18+,D18Z1+)[11/49]/r(18) tious, genetic and anatomical causes of the subject’s (wcp18+,D18Z1++)[3/49]Array-CGH analysis was per- oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, we performed a hormonal formed to precise chromosomal content. It revealed the analysis to verify our hypothesis. presence of a 5.9-Mb duplication at chromosomal region Results: The patient was found to be negative for 18p11.22p11.21 and a second one of 5.8-Mb at chromo- frequentbacteriaandviruses.Thesubjectshowedanormal somal region 18q11.1q11.2 encompassing the entire gene, male karyotype and tested negative for Yq microdeletions GATA6. Mutations in GATA6 are described in cases of andCysticFibrosisTransmembraneConductanceRegulator tetralogyofFallotandsomeauthorsarguethatGATA6gain gene mutations. A complete urological examination was can be observed in patients with conotruncal defect, performed, and primary hypogonadism was also excluded. suggesting a phenotype-gene dosage relationship. Conversely,hormonalanalysesshowedthatthesubjecthad Conclusion: To date, only five cases of supernumerary a high level of follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing ring chromosome 18 have been reported with a wide hormone, low total testosterone and a significant decline in phenotypicrangeduetovariationsingeneticcontent.Inour inhibin B. case, we identified GATA6 as a good candidate gene to Conclusion: We believe that the abnormally low explain cardiac defect. We suggest that molecular char- cholesterol levels typically found in subjects with Tangier acterization of sSMC may help genetic counseling and a disease may result in a reduced testosterone production better understanding of chromosomal imbalances.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 889 J.B. Gaillard: None. A. Schneider: None. J. Puechb- S. CHAMAYOU, M.Sicali,D.Lombardo,E. Maniscalchi,C. erty:None.P.Blanchet:None.C.Wells:None.F.Fuchs: Alecci, A. Guglielmino None. T. Guignard: None. F. Pellestor: None. V. Gatinois: None. Unità di Medicina della Riproduzione, SANT'AGATA LI BATTIATI (CT), Italy E-P01.53 Family case of Turner syndrome in ring X chromosome Introduction:Balancedautosome-gonosometranslocations mosaicism occur in about 1/30,000 live births. In women with a balanced X-autosome translocation, the normal X chromo- N.V. Oparina1,O.Pilyaeva1,S. Kalinenkova1, A.Latypov1,V. someispreferentiallylyonisedandthephenotypeisnormal Chernykh2 but gene silencing may occur on X-autosome translocated chromosome. The phenomenon is unpredictable and has as 1Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institution, Moscow, consequence from premature ovarian failure to major Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, genetic disorders and mental retardation. Moscow, Russian Federation Materials and Methods: The female patient had normal karyotype.Themalepatient hadakaryotypewith balanced Clinicalcase:Wereportafamily(mother,52yearsandtwo translocation 46,Y,t(X;3)(p11.2;p14)mat, and a normal herdaughters-32and25years)withTS.Thepatientshada phenotype. The female patient underwent two cycles of similar phenotype: short stature (mother's height - 140 cm, ovarian stimulation. ICSI was performed on vitrified/ weight-52kg;daughter'sheight-138/140cm,weight-38/ warmed and fresh oocytes. Embryos were biopsied at 39kg),narrowpalate,alow-setandposteriorlyrotatedears, blastocyst stage, on day 5. Chromosomal analysis was short neck, low posterior hair line, shield shaped chest, performed by Next Generation Sequencing. scoliosis, normal intelligence. The mother had menarche at Results: Eleven blastocysts were obtained and biopsied 13 y.o., and menopause at 45 y.o., 5 pregnancies ended 2 from 23 vitrified/warmed and fresh metaphase II oocytes. miscarriages, 1 medical abortion and two 2 births (2 Two embryos were diagnosed 46,XY, two embryos were daughters). They had a regular menstrual cycle. Older diagnosed 46,XX; four embryos were diagnosed daughter was infertile because of obstruction of the fallo- 3p14→cen→3qter and monosomy Xp11.2→cen→Xqter, pian tubes, younger daughter was unmarried. from 2:2 segregation and adjacent-2 disjunction. Three Materials and Methods: Chromosome analysis was embryos were diagnosed aneuploid [45,X0;45,XY,del done on peripheral blood lymphocytes. FISH analysis with (2);46,XY,del(8)(qter →q22.1)]. We knew that the two the DNA probes (DXZ1, KAL Xp22.3) was performed on 46,XX embryos inherited the balanced translocation from peripheral blood lymphocytes and buccal smear cells. At the father and the two 46,XY embryos had a normal least 100 cells were analyzed for each FISH analysis. karyotype. Because the phenotype of balanced translocated Results: Mosaic ring (X)(p22.3q28).ish (DXZ1+,KAL femaleembryoscouldnotbepredicted,thecoupleaskedto +) was detected in mother and her daughters. The patients have a 46,XY embryo transferred. Clinical pregnancy was presented 45,X/46,Xr(X) mosaicism with similar propor- obtained. tions of cells containing the r(X) in the lymphocytes and Conclusions: Proposing PGD-SR for gonosome- buccalsmearcells:8%and26%(mother),9%and40%and autosome reciprocal translocation implies the risk to 11%and47%(daughters,32and25y.o.),respectively.The exclude balanced translocated female embryos with a proportion of the cell lines with and with no ring X normal phenotype for transfer because the early and late chromosome is between tissues in the same TS patient. normal development at post-natal stage cannot predicted There is a positive correlation between age and percentage based on by the only chromosomal analysis. (%)ofr(X)inepitheliacells.Thereisnosimilarcorrelation S. Chamayou: None. M. Sicali: None. D. Lombardo: for mosaicism in the lymphocytes. None. E. Maniscalchi: None. C. Alecci: None. A. N.V. Oparina: None. O. Pilyaeva: None. S. Kalinen- Guglielmino: None. kova: None. A. Latypov: None. V. Chernykh: None. E-P01.56 E-P01.55 Prevalence of Y microdeletions in Turkish azoospermia or Whichembryoshouldbetransferredafterpreimplantation oligospermia patients geneticdiagnosis(PGD)forX-3reciprocaltranslocationin male patient? Y.Karaca1,A.Durmaz1,A.Aykut1,E.Karaca1,B.Durmaz1,E. Pariltay1,H.Akin1,H.Onay1,O.Cogulu1,F. Ozkinay2890 J.delPicchia 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Introduction: The lack of the entire AZFc region has long Genetics, İzmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, been shown to cause azoospermia or severe oligozoos- Department of Medical Genetics; Ege University Faculty of permia, however, it is still arguable to what extent AZFc Medicine, Department of Pediatric Genetics, İzmir, Turkey microrearrangements contribute to impaired spermatogen- esis. The aim of our study was to investigate the potential Infertiliy is considered to be a reproductive system disease. risk AZFc microrearrangements may deliver to spermato- It is estimated to affect 15% of couples worldwide. Male genesis and to ascertain the possible association of Y- factorscontributingtoinfertiliymakesuparound40-50%of haplogroups with distinct AZFc microrearrangements and the cases. Y chromosome infertiliy makes up 5-10% of the spermatogenic impairment. cases with azoospermia or severe oligospermia. Y chro- Materials/methods: A total of 486 men were examined, mosome infertiliy is caused by the deletions azoospermia mainly Macedonians and Albanians, among which 338 factor (AZF) region located in proximal Yq. wereazoospermic/oligozoospermicand148normozoosper- Purpose of this study is to determine the frequencies of mic. The AZFc microrearrangements were analyzed with AZFa, AZFb or AZFc deletions among the males with STS and SFV markers, QF-PCR and MLPA analysis. azoospermia or oligospermia referred to our laboratory for Additionally, we determined the Y-haplogroups of all further evaluation between 2009-2018. subjects using direct SNP typing and indirect prediction Our study consisted of 1926 male patients with with Y-STR markers. azoospermia or oligospermia. We used ChromoQuant® Results: We observed two microdeletions: gr/gr and b2/ AZF kit to detect the deletions. For AZFa sY86 and sY84, b3, three microduplications: b2/b4, gr/gr, b2/b3 and one for AZFb sY127 and sY134, for AZFc sY160, sY254 and complex rearrangement gr/gr del.+ b2/b4 dupl. Our results sY255 markers were utilized. did not show a statistical association of impaired sperma- Among1926numberofpatients,116(6.2%)ofthemhad togenesis with microrearrangements, however a significant at least one of AZFa, AZFb or AZFc deletions. The most correlation of specific rearrangements with distinct hap- common AZF deletion was AZFc deletion which was logroups was observed. The b2/b4 and gr/gr duplications detected in 50.8% (n=59) of the patients. The others were were statistically associated with HgR1a (p=7.27x10-13 AZFb+c in 16.3% (n=19), AZFa+b+c in 15.5% (n=18), and p=0.0026 respectively), whereas the b2/b3 deletions AZFain11.2%(n=13)andAZFbin6%(n=7)ofpatients, were detected almost exclusively in HgE (p=0.0051), respectively. implying that the Y-chromosome background confers Percentage of Y microdeletions might be higher in more susceptibility to AZFc microrearrangements. Subgroup select and homogeneous populations. It is hopeful that analysisbasedonethnicityrevealed asignificant difference majorityofAZFdeletionswereAZFcmicrodeletionsinour betweenthefrequencyofMacedonianandAlbanianHgR1a study,sincemaleswithAZFcdeletionshaveanoppurtunity b2/b4 duplication carriers (p=0.0315). for fertility via TESE. Conclusion: These results are specific to a population of Y. Karaca: None. A. Durmaz: None. A. Aykut: None. Macedonians and Albanians, thus due to the perceived E. Karaca: None. B. Durmaz: None. E. Pariltay: None. “regionality” of Y-chromosome microrearrangemets and H. Akin: None. H. Onay: None. O. Cogulu: None. F. haplogroupsthisstudyfurtheraddstothebodyofliterature. Ozkinay: None. M.Kuzmanovska:None.P.Noveski:None.M.Terzic: None. T. Plaseski: None. K. Kubelka-Sabit: None. V. E-P01.57 Filipovski: None. S. Lazarevski: None. E. Sukarova Y-chromosome haplogroup architecture confers Stefanovska: None. D. Plaseska-Karanfilska: None. susceptibility to AZFc microrearrangements M.Kuzmanovska1,P. Noveski1,M.Terzic1, T.Plaseski2,K. E-P02 Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain) Kubelka-Sabit3, V.Filipovski3,S.Lazarevski3, E.Sukarova Stefanovska1, D.Plaseska-Karanfilska1 E-P02.01 Spectrum of clinical phenotypes associated with PAX6 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology missense mutations “Georgi D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, T.A.Vasilyeva1,V.V.Kadyshev1,A.A.Voskresenskaya2,O.A. 2Clinic ofEndocrinology andMetabolic Disorders, Facultyof Shagina1,A. V. Marakhonov1,R. A. Zinchenko1,3; Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,3ClinicalHospital“AcibademSistina”,Skopje,Macedonia, 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian The Former Yugoslav Republic of Federation, 2Cheboksary branch of S. Fyodorov EyeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 891 Microsurgery Federal State Institution, Cheboksary, Russian E-P02.03 Federation, 3Pirogov Russian National Research Medical A novel founder mutation in the ABCA4 gene found in University, Moscow, Russian Federation Bukharian Jewish population, causing cone-rod dystrophy Introduction: Mutations of the PAX6 gene cause several A. Bar-Shira1,R. Goldstein1,T. Naiman1,S. Simchoni1,Y. phenotypes characterized by complex of ocular mal- Yaron1,2,A. Orr-Urtreger1,2,S.Ben-Shachar1,2 formations varying in expressivity and combination. The most part of loss-of-function (LoF) mutations causes 1TelAvivSouraskyMedicalCenter,TelAviv,Israel,2TelAviv aniridia (absence of the iris among other signs) or closely University, Tel Aviv, Israel related phenotypes, while the majority of missense mutationscouldleadtoseveralotherconditions.Tomake Introduction: Cone-rod dystrophy is a group of eye dis- steps towards investigation of phenotype-genotype cor- orders that affect the light sensitive cells of the retina with relations, the clinical picture of 6 patients with different prevalence of 1 in 30,000-40,000 individuals. By mid- missense mutations in the PAX6 gene is analyzed. adulthood most individuals are legally blind. The ABCA4 MaterialsandMethods:AcohortofpatientswithPAX6 gene encodes an ATP-binding cassette transporter found missense mutations underwent ophthalmological examina- exclusively in the retina's photoreceptors. Biallelic Muta- tion and molecular diagnosis. tions in ABCA4 gene cause cone-rod dystrophy. Results: Two mutations cause aniridia phenotype, three Materials and Methods: We have performed exome others result in closely related phenotypes. A single sequencinginanindividualofJewishBukharianoriginand missense is associated with iris damage different from afamilyhistoryresemblesautosomalrecessivewithpseudo aniridia (see Table). A carrier of the mutation also has dominant trait. We performed a segregation study for the retinal glial layer atrophy, macula hypoplasia, abnormal disease causing variant and screened this variant in retinal pigment epithelium structure, nystagmus and Bukharian Jewish population. achromatopsia. Results: A 20 year old male, currently blind with a Conclusions: A significant variety of clinical picture clinical diagnosis of cone-rod of consanguineous Jews of might be partially explained by different etiopathogenetic Bukharian family was referred for a genetic counseling. mechanisms related to the location and peculiarities of Family history includes maternal great-uncle and daughter affected amino-acid residue. Functional consequences of withaclinicalpicturesimilartotheprobed.Thepatientwas missense mutations are to be tested by at least in vitro foundtohaveanovelhomozygousmutationc.5059delAin analysis. This work is partially supported by RFBR grant the ABCA4 gene, leading to a premature stop codon and 17-04-00475. lack of functioning protein. The parents and a sister were heterozygous carriers for the familial mutation. The c.5059delA mutation was found in 5 individuals out of PhenotypesofPAX6missensemutations 169 Bukharian Jewish unrelated individuals, giving an Mutations Phenotypes estimated carrier frequency of 1:34. p.(G51R) Irishypoplasia,cataract,opticnervehypoplasia Conclusions: The prevalence of cone-rod dystrophy due tothisfoundermutationinBukharianJewsisexpectedtobe p.(G7R) Partialaniridia,cataract,keratopathy,foveahypoplasia, nystagmus about1:4600.Itisyetunclearwhetherthisspecificmutation p.(Q47R) Partialaniridia,keratopathy,foveaandopticnerve causes exclusively cone-rod dystrophy or includes the hypoplasia,nystagmus spectrum of retinal disorders caused by other ABCA4 p.(K55T) Completeaniridia,cataract,keratopathy,foveahypoplasia, mutations. nystagmus A. Bar-Shira: None. R. Goldstein: None. T. Naiman: p.(G72S) Irishypoplasia,anteriorsynechiae,nystagmus,retinalglial None. S. Simchoni: None. Y. Yaron: None. A. Orr- layeratrophy,maculahypoplasia,abnormalretinal Urtreger: None. S. Ben-Shachar: None. pigmentepitheliumstructure,achromatopsia p.(S119R) Completeaniridia,nystagmus,cataract,foveahypoplasia E-P02.05 A novel SCN9A splicing mutation in a compound T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.A. heterozygous patient with congenital insensitivity to pain Voskresenskaya: None. O.A. Shagina: None. A.V. and hyposmia Marakhonov: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None. M.Marchi1,V. Provitera2,M.Nolano2,3, M.Romano4,S. Maccora5,I.D'Amato1,E. Salvi1,6,M.Gerrits7,L. Santoro3,G. Lauria1,8892 J.delPicchia 1Neuroalgology Unit, IRCCS Foundation “Carlo Besta” P.Majdalani1,2,S.Biton1,V.Pinsk3,Z.Shorer4,A.Broides3,R. Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Neurology Department, Defrin5,R. Zarivach6,D.Landau7, Z.Rudich8,R. Parvari1,2 Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, IRCCS Telese Terme, Benevento,Italy, 3DepartmentofNeurosciences, Reproductive 1The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology Sciences and Odontostomatology, University Federico II, & Genetics; Faculty of Health Sciences (A.B.), Ben-Gurion Naples, Italy, 4Department of Neurology, AOOR Villa Sofia UniversityoftheNegev,BeerSheva,Israel,2NationalInstitute Cervello, Palermo, Italy, 5IRCCS "Bonino-Pulejo", Messina, of Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of the Italy, 6Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Pediatric Outpatient Clinic, Milan,Italy,7ClinicalGeneticsandDepartmentofNeurology, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben-Gurion university of Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 4Pediatric Neurology Unit, Netherlands,8DepartmentofBiomedicalandClinicalSciences Sorokauniversitymedicalcenter,Ben-Gurionuniversityofthe "Luigi Sacco", University of Milan, Milan, Italy Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 5Department of Physical Therapy, School of Allied Health Professions. Sackler Faculty of Congenital insensitivity to pain (OMIM 243000) is a rare Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the absence University,Tel-Aviv,Israel,6DepartmentofLifeSciences,The ofpainperceptionandhyposmiaoranosmia.Differentloss Faculty of Natural Sciences and The Ilse Katz Institute for of function mutations in SCN9A gene (NM_002977.3), Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben-Gurion University of encodingthesodiumchannelNav1.7,havebeenassociated the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 7NICU, Soroka university with this condition. medical center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer A 10-year-old girl with clinical evidences of CIP Sheva, Israel, 8Department of Anesthesiology, Soroka underwent the genetic analysis of SCN9A. Blood samples Hospital, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, were collected from the proband, her unaffected twin and Israel both the parents. Genomic DNA was sequenced by next generationsequencing. Transcriptanalysiswere carried out Introduction: Congenital insensitivity to pain is a rare in order to evaluate the mutation consequence on the autosomalrecessivedisease,comprisesabsenceofsensation mRNA splicing. The cDNA was amplified with a specific to noxious stimuli. The aim of this study is to identify and primer set and different size fragments separated and characterizethemutationcausingcongenitalinsensitivityto isolated on agarose gel, then sequenced by Sanger method. pain in two consanguineous Israeli-Bedouin families. We selected two mutations in SCN9A: a missense Materials and Methods: Two patients’ medical records mutation p.Arg896Gln (c.2687G>A), previously described were carefully reviewed. Their first-degree cousin parents by Cox et al. and a splicing variant c.1108-2A>G, not yet and siblings underwent a complete physical examination. reported in public databases. The proband cDNA sequen- Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. cingshowedthedelocalizationoftheacceptorsplice-site46 Chromosomal microarray analysis, exome capture and bp downstream, within the exon 10, inducing a deletion sequencingwereperformed.Datawasanalyzedforquality, which results in a premature stop codon. Co-segregation exome coverage, and exome-wide SNP/InDel. Basic analysis showed that the mother and brother were hetero- bioinformatics analysis was performed using Fabric Geno- zygous carriers of the missense mutation while the father mics to search for variations. was heterozygous for the splicing mutation. Results:Wefound anewmutation inthePRDM12gene The deleterious effect of the missense mutation on the that was shared by both patients of the two families. An sodium channel activity is caused by the alteration of the additional homozygous mutation presented only in one of pore delimiting structure, which is highly conserved in the thepatients,inagenethatexpressesmainlyintheCNSand evolution. The splicing mutation is a truncating mutation plays a role in modulating pain and temperature via the that impairs the expression of Nav1.7 channel functioning, opioidsystem.Themutationleadstodeletionoftwoexons providing the explanation of the phenotype. thus resulting in absence of important domains in the M. Marchi: None. V. Provitera: None. M. Nolano: protein. The mutation didn’t present in 240 control None. M. Romano: None. S. Maccora: None. I. chromosomes in the healthy Bedouin population. D'Amato: None. E. Salvi: None. M. Gerrits: None. L. Conclusion: Here we present a new mutation in the Santoro: None. G. Lauria: None. PRDM12 gene, thus a novel mutation in a gene that plays an important role in pain regulation. Identifying and E-P02.06 characterization of a new mutation in genes that are part A novel human mutation associates with increased pain of the pain mechanisms can lead to developing a new threshold and impaired thermoregulation diagnostic tools, prevention and treatment.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 893 P.Majdalani:None.S.Biton:None.V.Pinsk:None.Z. E-P02.08 Shorer: None. A. Broides: None. R. Defrin: None. R. FGF3genemutationsrelatedtotwosyndromicCongenital Zarivach: None. D. Landau: None. Z. Rudich: None. R. deafnesscases:Congenitaldeafnesswithinnerearagenesis Parvari: None. (Michel aplasia), microtia, and microdontia and Otodental dysplasia E-P02.07 Warsaw syndrome: two further cases A. Türkyılmaz1,B.B. Geçkinli1,E. ArslanAteş2,M.A. Söylemez1,A. I.Güney1,P. Ata1, A.Arman1 F. Faletra1, R.Bottega1,E. Colombo2, F.Sirchia1,A.M. Spinelli1, G.D'Alessandro2,A. Carbone2, F.Fiocchi2, F. 1Marmara University School of Medicine, Department of Guidolin1,P. Gasparini1,3 Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University Pendik Research and Training Hospital, Department of 1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Città della Salute e Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy Introduction: The fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) com- prise a family of signaling molecules that regulate cell Introduction:Warsawsyndromeisanautosomalrecessive proliferation, differentiation, and migration during embry- cohesinopathyduetobiallelicDDX11mutations.Untilnow ogenesis and are essential for appropriate patterning and have been described only seven patients and 7 different formation of the developing inner ear. Congenital deafness mutations. The clinical picture is characterized by: 1) pre withinnerearagenesis,microtia,andmicrodontiaiscaused andpostnatalgrowthretardation;2)severemicrocephaly;3) by biallelic mutations in the FGF3 gene. Otodental dys- mild to moderate intellectual disability; 4) severe sensor- plasia is a syndrome of sensorineural deafness and globo- ineural hearing loss with cochlear malformations; 5) skin dontia, which has been associated with heterozygous pigmentation anomalies; 6) facial dysmorphisms. microdeletions of chromosome 11q13 involving the Case report. We report the case of two sisters (5 yo and FGF3 gene. 3½ yo), born to healthy and non consanguineous parents Materials and Methods: For case one, FGF3 gene who came to our Institute for a bilateral sensorineural sequence analysis using Sanger sequencing method was hearing loss and cochlear hypoplasia. The visit highlighted used whereas array-CGH was performed for case two. hyposomia with values lower than the 3rd percentile from Cases: Case one is a 5 year-old female who was born at theprenatalageandasevereandprogressivemicrocephaly. termbynormaldelivery.Herparentswereconsanguineous. They showed hyperpigmented straeks and hypopigmented (second cousins). She had a long face, with micrognathia, spots enlarging over time, and dysmorphic features: mild microtia, microdontia and preauricular skin tags. Case two bilateral epicanthus, upslanting palpebral fissures, promi- is a one year-old male who was born at term by normal nent nose with small alae nasi, cup ears, micrognathia, and delivery. He had a long face, long philtrum, anteverted bilateral clinodactyly. Moreover, they showed a language nostrils, cupped shaped ears, preauricular skin tags and delay although the IQ tests were for both of them in the single transverse palmar crease on left hand. Percentile normal range. There were no cardiac or abdominal values of all anthropometric measurements were between malformations. Since the cell cultures demonstrated an 10and25inbothcasesandaudiologicexaminationofboth elevated spontaneous and mitomycin C (MMC)-induced cases revealed bilateral sensorineural deafness. chromosomal breakages, and sister chromatid cohesion Results: In case one a novel homozygous c.8T>G (p. defects, a DDX11 gene analysis was carried out, showing Leu3Arg) mutation was found in the FGF3 gene. Case two two novel variants (c.907_920del (p.Lys303Glufs*22) and had heterozygous 11q13.3q13.4 microdeletion (2,804 kbp) c.2507T>C (p.Leu836Pro)) predicted to be likely pathoge- including FGF3 gene. netic according to the ACMG/AMP 2015 guidelines. Conclusions: Our cases have typical clinic features of Conclusion. Our case enlarges the knowledge about the FGF3 related syndromic deafness. These cases have been clinical and molecular data of Warsaw syndrome. Func- reportedtocontributetogenotype-phenotypecorrelationsin tional analysis are now in progress to demonstrate the FGF3 related syndromic deafness. pathogenicity of the mutations. A. Türkyılmaz: None. B.B. Geçkinli: None. E. Arslan F.Faletra:None.R.Bottega:None.E.Colombo:None. Ateş: None. M.A. Söylemez: None. A.I. Güney: None. P. F. Sirchia: None. A.M. Spinelli: None. G.D'Alessandro: Ata: None. A. Arman: None. None. A. Carbone: None. F. Fiocchi: None. F. Guidolin: None. P. Gasparini: None.894 J.delPicchia E-P02.09 E-P02.10 Analysis of GJB2 mutations and the clinical manifestation A retrospective review of a multidisciplinary hearing loss in a large Hungarian cohort clinic: 2015-2017 A.Gal1,N.Kecskemeti1,2,M.Szonyi2,A.Gaborjan2,M.Kustel2, H.Ho1,2, A.Springer1,2,M. F.Hunter1,2 G.M.Milley1, A.Suveges1,A. Kekesi1, A.Illés1, L.Tamas2,A. Szirmai2,M. J.Molnar1 1Monash Genetics, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Background:We establishedamultidisciplinarypaediatric Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Semmelweis genetichearinglossclinicforconsideringgeneticdiagnoses University, Budapest, Hungary in children and offering further genetic testing for a subset. Patients were prescreened for GJB2, microarray, imaging, Introduction: Pathogenic variants of the gap junction beta TFT, CMV and haematuria/proteinuria prior to genetics 2 (GJB2) gene are responsible for about 50% of hereditary assessment.Fundedgenetictestingwasroutinelyofferedin non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL). In this cases where there was a family history, management or study, we report the mutation frequency of GJB2 in 239 pregnancy implications, or patients could self-fund. Hungarian NSHL patients and the phenotype comparison Method: We performed a retrospective review to assess between homozygous / compound heterozygous and rates of genetic testing and diagnosis from 2015-2017. heterozygous cases. Outpatient records were reviewed and data, including Methods: The total coding region of the GJB2 gene was referralsource,ethnicity,familyhistory,inheritancepattern, analyzed with Sanger or NGS sequencing for 239 patients phenotype, genetic testing, and diagnosis were extracted with NSHL and 160 controls. andanalysedforindividualsseenintheclinicduring2015- Results: Homozygous and compound heterozygous 2017. GJB2 mutations were associated with early oneset serious Results: A total of 90 patients were seen, 22 received a NSHL in 28 patients. In 24 patients two deletion or geneticdiagnosisand7alikelygeneticdiagnosis(32%).Of nonsense mutation were present with prelingual NSHL, thesegenepanelorexomesequencingwasperformedin42 while in compound heterozygous cases with the combina- and a genetic diagnosis was confirmed or likely in 17 tion of deletion and missense mutation associated with (40%). Cascade testing was performed in relatives of 17 milder postlingual phenptype. Further 25 cases harbored probands,anddemonstratedthat13caseswereinherited.25 single heterozygous GJB2 mutations associated with later patients had syndromic or likely syndromic causes. oneset, milder NSHL. The most common mutation was the Discussion:Thisreviewreportsonrealworldassessment c.35delG deletion, with 12.6% allele frequency. and selection for genetic testing in hearing loss. Clinical Conclusion: The mutation frequency of GJB2 is lower prioritisation for genetic testing to maximise clinical utility than other European cohort. The most serious cases is appropriate within the public healthcare setting and the associated with homozygous and compound heterozygous application of methods that efficiently optimise outcomes mutations.Inourcohortthehearingimpairment andageof for patients effectively benefit the healthcare system. Our oneset was not altered between in cases with only one diagnosis rate is higher than previously reported similar heterozygous GJB2 mutations and wild type genotype, studies and demonstrates the clinical utility of NGS testing which might be exclude the opportunity of autosomal in a carefully selected subset of patients. dominant inheritance. In early onset, serve to profound H. Ho: None. A. Springer: None. M.F. Hunter: None. hearing loss cases if the GJB2 analysis results only one heterozygousalterationsfurthernextgenerationsequencing E-P02.11 test is highly recommended. This study was supported Allelic diversity of the GJB2 gene in deaf patients and by the Hungarian Brain Research Program (KTIA_13_- ethnically matched controls from Turkic-speaking NAP-A-III/6). populations of South Siberia A. Gal: None. N. Kecskemeti: None. M. Szonyi: None. A. Gaborjan: None. M. Kustel: None. G.M. Milley: M.V. Zytsar1,2,M.S. Bady-Khoo3,E.A. Maslova1,2,V.Y. None.A.Suveges:None.A.Kekesi:None.A.Illés:None. Danilchenko1,2,N.A. Barashkov4,5,I.V. Morozov2,6,A.A. L. Tamas: None. A. Szirmai: None. M.J. Molnar: None. Bondar6,O.L. Posukh1,2 1Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 895 Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Novosibirsk State K. Kamenarova1,C. Chakarova2, K.Koev3,V.Mitev1,S. University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Scientific Bhattacharya4,S.Cherninkova5,R. Kaneva1 Research Institute of Medical-Social Problems and Management of the Republic of Tuva, Kyzyl, Russian 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical Federation, 4Laboratory of Molecular Biology, MK Ammosov ChemistryandBiochemistry,MedicalUniversity-Sofia,Sofia, North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Bulgaria, 2UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Federation, 5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Yakut Kingdom, 3Clinic of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk, Tsaritsa Yoanna - ISUL, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Russian Federation, 6Institute of Chemical Biology and Bulgaria, 4Department of Regeneration and Cell Therapy, Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the Russian Andalusian Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation Centre(CABIMER),Seville,Spain,5DepartmentofNeurology, University Hospital Alexandrovska, Medical University – Mutations in the GJB2 gene have the most contribution to Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria hearing loss development in many populations. Spectrum of the GJB2 mutations and polymorphic variants and their pre- Introduction: Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs), valence are highly population-specific. We analyzed allelic amongwhichcongenitalstationarynightblindness(CSNB) diversity of GJB2 in deaf patients from Turkic-speaking and macular degeneration (MD), encompass a large group indigenous populations of South Siberia (Tuvinians and of clinically and genetically heterogeneous diseases. By Altaians) andin ethnically matched controls. Contribution of usingwholeexomesequencing(WES)weaimedtoidentify GJB2 pathogenic mutations (c.-23+1G>A, p.V37I, p.R75Q, the disease-causing mutation in two large pedigrees with c.235delC, c.299_300delAT, p.W172C) to deafness was IRD: one affected by peripheral dystrophy, such as CSNB, 15.1% in Altaian and 17.5% in Tuvinian deaf patients, and the other with central RD, like MD. according to our estimations. We also evaluated the fre- Materials and Methods: Two large pedigrees with an quencies of known and new polymorphic GJB2 variants (р. autosomal-dominant form of CSNB (Family 1) and MD V27I, р.E114G, p.V153I, p.F192L, p.I203T, c.-23+27G>A, (Family 2) were recruited. WES was then performed in 4 rs5030700, rs3751385, rs9552101, rs117685390, individuals from Family 1and in 2 patients from Family 2. SNP13:20767153C>T)inTuviniansandAltaians.Variantsр. Subsequently, single-nucleotide polymorphism microarray V27I and р.E114G are specific for Asian populations and and linkage analysis were undertaken on both pedigrees. were found in deaf patients and controls. The р.V27I can be Results: Inclusion of rare variants with minor allele detectedasasinglevariationandalsotogetherwithр.E114G frequency (MAF) ≤ 0.5% was performed as an initial while р.E114G is almost never found alone. At present, filtering step. Sequence variants in genes of the olfactory ambiguous association of р.V27I and р.E114G with hearing receptor family and in other polymorphic genes (e.g. loss is widely discussed in literature. We proved cis-config- mucins)wereexcluded for downstream analysessince they uration of р.V27I and р.E114G by pedigree analysis and areunlikelytocauseIRDsaccordingtootherWESstudies. molecular cloning and postulated the presence of allele p. Thereafter, protein coding and splice-site variants were [V27I;E114G] in all cases where р.E114G was found. We filtered and assessed using in silico prediction tools to estimated frequency of p.[V27I;E114G] in Tuvinian and prioritize the remaining variants. We firstly searched for Altaian controls as 4.78% и 8.68%, respectively, which is mutations in IRD-associated genes. As no IRD-causing higher than in deaf patients (3.93% in Tuvinians, 4.73% in mutations were identified in the two pedigrees we Altaians). Thus, our data confirmed coincidence of р.V27I performed linkage analysis using autosomal-dominant and р.E114G in cis-configuration and absence of association pattern of inheritance. Haplotype analysis defined different ofp.[V27I;E114G]withhearingloss.Studywassupportedby genomic intervals co-segregating with the disease pheno- Project #0324-2018-0016 and RFBR grants (#18-34- typeinbothpedigreesandmutationscreeningofpositional 00166_mol-a, #17-29-06016_ofi-m). candidate genes must be done. M.V. Zytsar: None. M.S. Bady-Khoo: None. E.A. Conclusions: Our results suggest that novel IRD-loci Maslova: None. V.Y. Danilchenko: None. N.A. Barash- probably exist since no pathogenic changes were found in kov: None. I.V. Morozov: None. A.A. Bondar: None. O. known IRD-genes. L. Posukh: None. K.Kamenarova:None.C.Chakarova:None.K.Koev: None. V. Mitev: None. S. Bhattacharya: None. S. E-P02.12 Cherninkova: None. R. Kaneva: None. Molecular genetics of autosomal-dominant retinal degenerationintwofamiliessuggestsnovelinheritedretinal disease loci896 J.delPicchia E-P02.13 InstitutfürHumangenetik,UniklinikUlm,Ulm,Germany,Ulm, A novel mutation in SCN9A gene involved in congenital Germany insensitivity to pain Introduction An autosomal recessive syndrome (Jalili M.Arafat1,2,V. Pinsk3,Z. Shorer4,R. Parvari1,2 syndrome) associating cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) have been reported in litera- 1The shraga segal Department of Microbiology,Immunology ture. Mutations in CNNM4 have been described to cause and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion thisanomaly.Theencodedproteinmayplayaroleinmetal University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2The National ion transport. Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion Materials and Methods: In the present study, a clinical University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Pediatric and genetic investigation was performed in a consangui- Outpatient Clinic, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben- neousfamilyofPakistaniorigin,showingtypicalfeaturesof GurionUniversityoftheNegev,BeerSheva,Israel,4Pediatric Jalilisyndrome.DirectSangersequencingwasperformedin Neurology Unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben- affected and unaffected members of the enrolled family. Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel Results:SangersequencingofCNNM4identifiedanovel missense variant (p.Arg407Leu). The variant is predicted Introduction: Congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) is a damaging by three in silico prediction tools [SIFT: rare condition in which patients have no pain, caused by damaging 0.01; MutationTaster: disease causing; Poly- mutations in Sodium channel protein type 9 subunit alpha Phen-2:probablydamaging1.000)]anditisnotreportedin (SCN9A) which encodes the voltage-gated sodium channel gnomAD. To address the mutational consequences in Nav1.7. structure, mutant Arg407Leu was modelled along with the PatientandMethods:A3yearoldgirlwhosuffersfrom previously reported mutations and deciphered the binding indifference to pain and heat, recurrent episodes of modeofATPwiththeaidofdockinganalysis.Furthermore, unexplained fever and attention deficient disorder. She has molecular dynamics simulations were executed on wild- normal growth and development, normal sweat and has type and mutant CNNM4 to understand the structural and tears after emotional events. She was born to healthy no energeticinformationafter100nsproductionruninaltering consanguineousJewishparentsfromthesamediaspora.The the protein structure, dynamics, and stability. It was mutation was sought by exome sequencing on the DNA of examined the conformational shift of ATP binding site in the patient. Arg407Leu and binding free energy (MM-GBSA) is lower Results:Assuminghomozygosityofarecessivemutation than the wtCNNM4. Additionally, some important hydro- asthelikelycauseofthedisorder,withallelefrequenciesof gen bonds of Arg407Leu mutant are disrupted during the less than 1% in the public databases (ExAc browser, 1000 MD simulations which remained stable in wtCNNM4 GenomesanddbSNP).Weidentifiedahomozygousvariant Conclusion:Thepresentstudy givesanovelinsight into changing an amino acid in the SCN9A gene with high theroleofCNNM4asametaltransporterinvisualfunction bioinformatics predictions for damaging effect. The variant and biomineralization. segregatedasexpectedinthefamilymembersthatincluded N. Wasif: None. 2 unaffected siblings. Conclusions: Our novel identified missense mutation in E-P02.15 SCN9A further expands the spectrum of mutations seen in A case of intragenic PAX2 duplication as a novel cause of thisgeneinassociationwithcongenitalinsensitivitytopain, renal coloboma syndrome where most missense mutations cause hypersensitivity to pain. Early identification of the mutation provides early J.Gardner1,O.Murch1,D.Laws2, A.Kamath1 preventivecareinstructionstothefamiliesinhandlingthese patients and contributes for further family planning. 1University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, M. Arafat: None. V.Pinsk: None. Z. Shorer: None.R. 2Singleton Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom Parvari: None. Introduction: Renal coloboma syndrome (RCS) involves E-P02.14 renal and optic nerve abnormalities. PAX2 encodes a tran- A Novel Missense Mutation in CNNM4 underlying Jalili scriptional regulator. Biallelic expression of PAX2 prevents Syndrome programmed cell death. Clinical features of RCS corre- spond to tissue-specific expression of PAX2 during early N.Wasif embryonic development.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 897 PAX2 mutations are identified in approximately 50% of known that some orphan genetic diseases being rare in RCS cases and are the only identified genetic cause worldwide populations can be accumulated in small isolate associated with RCS. Also, ten percent of children with populations due to founder effect. We have found 20 cases isolated renal hypodysplasia have PAX2 mutations. Most of progressive post-lingual sensorineural HL (mean age of mutations are missense, nonsense or small deletions/ HL onset 7.22±2.52 years) in indigenous peoples (Yakuts, duplications of a few nucleotides in exons 2, 3 and 4 Evens, Yukaghirs) living in subarctic part of Russia (the whichencodethepaireddomain.FewduplicationsofPAX2 Sakha Republic). In 13 out of 20 families we revealed have been reported and have mainly been whole gene segregationofHLaccordingtoautosomalrecessivetypeof duplications. Large intragenic duplications have not been inheritance. No any pathology of other organs and systems reported in patients with RCS. werefoundinaffectedindividuals.Speechwaspreservedin Case: A five month old boy presented with a history of 70% of affected children. However, only 10% of children renalhypodysplasiaand“morningglory”appearanceofhis were able to finish public school while most of patients optic nerves. He had pre-axial polydactyly and distinctive attended special school for deaf children. Progressive facial features. Karyotype, analysis for 22q11 deletion and bilateral sensorineural HL of variable degree with onset in chromosome breakage studies were all normal. No sequen- thefirstsevenyearsoflifewasrevealedinaffectedchildren cing abnormality of the paired box domain (exons 2,3,4) while in adult patients (over 18 years) profound deafness and octapeptide domain (exon 5) of PAX2 was identified. wasregistered.Noanypathogenicmutationswerefoundin Following a renal transplant at 8 years, Array CGH other genes associated with HL: GJB2, GJB3, GJB6, showed a de novo 13kb duplication of 10q24.31, resulting SLC26A4, POU3F4 and 12SrRNA which were previously in an intragenic gain including exon 5 of PAX2. found in other deaf patients in the Sakha Republic [Dzhe- Conclusion:Wedescribeachildwithclinicalfeaturesof mileva et al., 2009; Barashkov et al., 2016; 2018; Pshen- RCS with a novel intragenic PAX2 duplication. This is a nikova et al., 2017]. Further studies are necessary for previouslyunreportedpathogenicmechanismforRCS.This identification of genetic etiology of these HL cases. The case demonstrates the importance of considering dosage study was supported by Ministry of Education and Science analysis investigations when a clinical phenotype is ofRussia#6.1766.2017,FASOBRK_0556-2017-0003and suggestive of RCS. RFBR (17-29-06016_ofi_m, 18-015-00212_A). J.Gardner:None.O.Murch:None.D.Laws:None.A. N.A. Barashkov: None. G.P. Romanov: None. F.M. Kamath: None. Teryutin: None. V.G. Pshennikova: None. A.V. Solo- vyev: None. N.N. Gotovtsev: None. A.A. Nikanorova: E-P02.16 None. L.U. Dzhemileva: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: Progressive post-lingual sensorineural hearing loss with None. O.L. Posukh: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. unknown etiology in subarctic part of Russia (Sakha Republic) E-P02.17 Mutation Screening of Stargardt Disease by Next N.A. Barashkov1,2,G.P. Romanov2,1,F. M.Teryutin1,2, V.G. Generation Sequencing: clinical implication of p. Pshennikova1,2,A. V. Solovyev2,1,N.N.Gotovtsev1,2,A.A. Gly1961Glu (ABCA4) mutation Nikanorova1,2, L.U.Dzhemileva3,4,E. K.Khusnutdinova3,5, O. L. Posukh6,7,S. A. Fedorova2,1 B. Jimenez-Rolando1,R. Martin-Arenas2, S.Noval3,I. Rosa- Perez3,A.delPozoMate4,K.Ibañez4,H.Gonzalez-Pecellin2,V. 1Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, F. Montaño2,E.Vallespin2 Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of 1Ophthalmology Unit - Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Spain, 2Structural and Functional Genomics Unit - Medical AcademyofSciences,Ufa,RussianFederation,4BashkirState andMolecularGeneticsInstitute(INGEMM)-HospitalLaPaz Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 5Bashkir State - IdiPaz - CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Ophthalmology Unit - University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 6Federal Research Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Bionformatics Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Unit-Instituto deGenética Médicay Molecular (INGEMM)- Russian Federation, 7Novosibirsk State University, Hospital La Paz - IdiPaz - CIBERER, Madrid, Spain Novosibirsk, Russian Federation Introduction:Stargardtdisease(STGD1,MIM#248200)is Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is genetically heterogeneous the most common hereditary macular dystrophy affecting sensory disorder. To date more than 140 loci have been children, with a prevalence of approximately 1:10000. mapped and ~ 100 genes were associated with HL. It is STGDispredominantlyinheritedasanautosomalrecessive898 J.delPicchia trait. Biallelic mutations in ABCA4 are found in most mutations account for about 80% of all defects in the patients with autosomal recessive STGD (arSTGD) as well CYP21A2 gene coding the 21-hydroxylase enzyme. as in some patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pig- Materials and Methods: DNA samples from 23 mentosa (arRP) and autosomal recessive cone-rod dystro- Macedonian patients with clinical and laboratory signs of phy (arCRD). LO form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 5 male and 18 Patients and methods: In this study, we present two female, were collected and subjected to polymerase chain clinical cases of Bull's eye maculopathy with early cone reaction for the detection of presence of nine CYP21A2 degeneration and the absence of flecks studied by NGS. point mutations. The patients were evaluated at the Genes involved in arSTGD, arRP and arCRD were studied Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, University by INGEMM NGS custom panel, Oft-v1.0, designed with Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia. NimbleDesign, target bases covered >99%. Bioinformatic Results:Fivedifferentmutationsweredetectedin82.6% analysiswascarriedoutbytheClinicalBioinformaticsUnit (19/23) of the patients on 58.7% (27/46) alleles. The most of INGEMM center. prevalent mutation was P30L, present in 17 alleles (37%), Results and discussion: Patient 1: ABCA4 gene, followedbytheQ318Xin7(15.2%),andV281L,IVS2and compound heterozygous: p.Gly1961Glu and p. Del 8ntG110 in only 1 (2.2%) allele, each. I172N, cluster Thr1019Met. Patient 2: ABCA4 gene, compound hetero- exon 6, InsT307 and R356W mutations were not found. In zygous: p.Gly1961Glu and p.Asn96Thrfs*19. The p. 34.8% (8/23) of the patients complete genotype was Gly1961Glu mutation in both patients explains the same revealed (P30L/P30L in 6 patients, Q318X/Q318X and Bull's eye maculopathy with early cone degeneration and P30L/Q318X in one patient, each). Eleven of the patients the absence of flecks phenotype. NGS panel in clinical were heterozygotes, with no detected mutation on the diagnosis permits develop rapid, high-throughput, highly second allele, and in four patients no one mutation was sensitive and accurate testing. Custom panels offer better detected. base-pair coverage, running times, costs and dataset Conclusions: We found high frequency of nonsense handling than other NGS applications such as whole Q318X mutation, specific for severe classical phenotype of genomesequencingandwholeexomesequencing.Working the disease, among Macedonian LO patients. Our founding with custom panels also poses new challenges in variant iscomparabletotheneighboringSerbianLOpopulationbut interpretation,datahandlingandbioinformaticanalyses.To not with the most of the other European countries. optimizetheanalyses,paneltestingshouldbeperformedby V. Anastasovska: None. M. Kocova: None. E. Sukar- bioinformaticians, clinicians and laboratory staff in close ova-Angelovska: None. collaboration. B. Jimenez-Rolando: None. R. Martin-Arenas: None. E-P03.02 S. Noval: None. I. Rosa-Perez: None. A. del Pozo Mate: 5-Alpha-Reductase 2 deficiency in two siblings with a rare None. K. Ibañez: None. H. Gonzalez-Pecellin: None. V. genotype Mirjana Kocova1, Dijana Plaseska-Karanfilska2, F. Montaño: None. E. Vallespin: None. Predrag Noveski2, Elena Sukarova-Angelovska1, Maja Kuzmanovska2 E-P03 Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, kidney, M.Kocova1,D.Plaseska-Karanfilska2,P. Noveski2,E. liver, gastrointestinal) Sukarova-Angelovska1, M.Kuzmanovska3 E-P03.01 1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Hihg frequency of the severe Q318X mutation in the Republic of, 22Research Center for Genetic Engineering and CYP21A2 geneamongMacedonianpatients with mild late Biotechnology“GeorgiD.Efremov”,MacedonianAcademyof onset form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency Science and Arts, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 32Research V. Anastasovska, M.Kocova,E. Sukarova-Angelovska CenterforGeneticEngineeringandBiotechnology“GeorgiD. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Science and Arts, Skopje, GeneticLaboratory,Skopje,Macedonia,TheFormerYugoslav Republic of Macedonia ediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, Republic of The Former Yugoslav Republic of Introduction: 21-hydroxylase deficiency is an autosomal Introduction: 5-Alpha-Reductase 2 deficiency causes recessive endocrine disorder, present as severe salt wast- DSD in 46,XY individuals characterized with a variable ing(SW)orsimplevirilizing(SV)form,orthemilderlate genital phenotype. Determination of the sex of rearing onset form (LO). Nine pseudogene-derived point can be complicated. Genetic diagnosis consists ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 899 detecting SRD5A2 mutations mostly located in exons vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, shock, and generalized 1 and 5. pigmentation. The development of gonadotropin inde- Materials and Methods: We present two siblings with pendent (peripheral) precocious puberty in male children 46,XYkaryotypepresenting with female externalgenitalia withprimaryadrenalinsufficiencysuggestasteroidogenic atbirth.Diagnosiswasbaseduponthedetectionofbilateral enzyme deficiency. The most frequent form of congenital inguinal testis in the older child in the neonatal period, and adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is due to a 21-hydroxylase deep voice andAdam’s apple enlargementina second pre- (CYP21A2) defect. We report two young boys with a pubertal child. Measurement of testosterone/dihydrotestos- similar clinical phenotype including early onset primary terone was performed. Molecular analysis included multi- adrenal insufficiency and gonadotropin independent pre- plex quantitative fluorescent PCR screening for sex cocious puberty, both negative for CYP21A2 variants. chromosome aneuploidies and SRY presence, and MLPA DNA from the two patients were targeted resequencing analysis for detection of exon copy number changes using a customized panel of genes involved in adrenal combined with Sanger sequencing of exons and exons/ diseases and DSD. A homozygous variant in CYP11B1 introns boundaries of the SRD5A2 gene. and a hemizygous variant in NR0B1 were identified. Results: Both patients were compound heterozygotes for MutationsofCYP11B1genereduceorabolishtheactivity two novel mutations in SRD5A2 gene: c.146C>A (p. of 11β-hydroxylase enzyme and cause classical CAH Ala49Asp) point mutation in the first exon inherited from characterized by low cortisol levels and excessive adrenal themother,anddeletioninvolvingentirefirstexoninherited androgen production starting during fetal life. The typical from the father. Delayed puberty in the first patient was disorder of puberty in patients with NR0B1 mutations or treated with estrogens with a poor response. Breast deletions is represented by hypogonadotropic hypogo- implantation and vaginoplasty were performed at the age nadism, but few cases of peripheral precocious puberty, 20 and 22 years respectively. In the younger sister bilateral ACTH-dependent precocious puberty and central pre- orchiectomy was performed with a consecutive slight cocious puberty have been reported. The identified var- change in the voice and disappearance of the Adam’s iants have never been reported in literature but homology apple. The follow up continued up to 22 and 13 years. modelingofthegenesdemonstratethatbothvariantsaffect Conclusions: Genetic analysis is very useful in precise protein functionality. This study demonstrate as the use of diagnosis in patients with 5-Alpha-Reductase 2 deficiency. NGS analysis can be decisive in the characterization of However, final gender assignment is difficult and requires cases with apparently similar clinical phenotypes but combined medical interventions. completely different genetic defect. M. Kocova: None. D. Plaseska-Karanfilska: None. P. M. Mucciolo: None. C. Bizzarri: None. E. Pisaneschi: Noveski: None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M. None. C. Guzzetti: None. E. Bellacchio: None. A. Ibba: Kuzmanovska: None. None. L. Casula: None. S. Loche: None. A. Novelli: None. M. Cappa: None. E-P03.03 Gonadotropinindependentprecociouspubertyandadrenal E-P03.04 insufficiency: common clinical presentation of different Role of Rho-quinase polymorphisms in alcohol-induced genetic defects disorders M.Mucciolo1,C. Bizzarri2,E. Pisaneschi1, C.Guzzetti3,E. P.Segovia-Alonso1,E.BuenoMartínez2,1,M.Perez1,J.Torres1, Bellacchio4,A. Ibba3, L. Casula3, S.Loche3,A. Novelli1, M. A. Chamorro2,1,R.González Sarmiento2,1,F. Laso2,1,M. Cappa2 Marcos2,1 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Bambino Gesù Children's 1Ibsal, Salamanca, Spain, 2Universidad de Salamanca, Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Endocrinology Unit, Bambino Gesù Salamanca, Spain Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Pediatric Hospital Microcitemico “Antonio Cao”, AO Brotzu, Introduction: Rho kinases (ROCKs) are proteins involved Cagliari, Italy, 4Genetics and Rare Diseases, Research in regulating a variety of physiologic functions including Division, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy theactivationofinflammatoryresponseandhepaticfibrosis through NF-κB signaling pathway. To date, there are no Primaryadrenalinsufficiencycanoccuratanytimeduring studies showing an association between polymorphisms in life,includingtheneonatalperiod,infancy,andchildhood. rho kinase genes and alcohol abuse or dependence Children usually present with neonatal salt wasting crisis, (according to DSM IV criteria) or alcoholic liver failure to thrive with poor feeding, hypoglycemia, disease (ALD).900 J.delPicchia Here, we have analysed the polymorphisms ROCK 2 signs of Alport suggested this syndrome on clinical basis. rs2230774, ROCK 2 rs978906, ROCK 1 rs35996865 in MLPA (research) detected deletion of 250kb consisting of patientssufferingfromtheseconditionsinordertoevaluate the entire COL4A5 and COL4A6 genes. Further familial the role of these variants in modulating alcohol abuse or evaluation disclosed clinical signs of Alport to her son and dependence and ALD risk. daughterwithleiomyomatosis.Thedeletionwellsegregated Patients and methods: 650 men with alcohol abuse- in the family and was confirmed by CMA. induceddisordersand220healthycontrolswereincludedin Conclusions:Intrafamilialvariabilityhasbeendetected. the study. In all cases, DNA was extracted from peripheral As preventable treatment is indicated to both Alport and blood using phenol/chloroform procedure and genotyped leiomyomatosis,earlydiagnosisshouldbesoughtaswellas using TaqMan 5’-exonuclease allelic discrimination assays PGD or prenatal diagnosis . As several genes causing (Applied Biosystems). Statistical analysis was performed Alport are currently known, panels using NGS are being using SPSS software. offeredwithoutdel/dupinsome.Weemphasizetheneedfor Results: No significant differences were found in seeking this contiguous deletion and the use of appropriate genotype distribution for ROCK2 rs2230774 and ROCK2 methods for its detection. rs978906 between patients with alcohol abuse or depen- L.S. Benyamini: None. M. Regev: None. M. Mashe- dence and control subjects or between alcoholics with liver vich: None. O. Reish: None. diseaseandthosewithoutliverdamage.However,statistical differences in genotype distribution for ROCK1 E-P03.07 rs35996865werefound (p=0,05)comparing patientswith HLA and non-HLA genetic predisposing factors and ALD versus those without ALD. environmental effects at Celiac Disease pathogenesis Conclusions: Our study does not support the hypothesis that polymorphisms ROCK2 rs2230774 y ROCK2 P. Ata1, B.Erkal2,B. S.Akkelle3,S. Sisko4, Z.Ergin2, M.S. rs978906 are related to alcoholism or ALD. Nevertheless, Helvacı2, S.Celik5,A. M.Sasmaz5, F.Yilmaz2,D.Ertem6 ROCK 1 rs35996865 may be associated with genetic susceptibility to develop ALD. 1Marmara University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Funded by ISCIII, FEDER PI16/01548 and Junta de Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University CastillayLeónGRS1362/A/16,GRS1199/A/15andINT/ School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, M/17/17 3Marmara University School of Medicine, Pediatric P. Segovia-Alonso: None. E. Bueno Martínez: None. GatroenterologyIstanbul,Turkey,Istanbul,Turkey,4Marmara M.Perez:None.J.Torres:None.A.Chamorro:None.R. University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Marmara González Sarmiento: None. F. Laso: None. M. University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Marcos: None. Turkey, 6Marmara University School of Medicine, Pediatric Gastroenterology Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey E-P03.06 Alport as part of contiguous gene deletion syndrome: Introduction: Genetic predisposition plays a key role in Further characterization and recommendations celiac disease. The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of CTLA-4 CT60 A/G polymorphism and environ- L. S.Benyamini1,M.Regev1, M.Mashevich1,O.Reish1,2 mental factors on Celiac Disease. Materials and Methods: 45 celiac patients whose 1GeneticInstitute,BearYacov,Israel,22TheSacklerSchoolof HLADQ tissue groups had been known / studied and Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel corresponding number of control subjects were given a questionnaire and a peripheral blood sample was collected Alport with diffuse leiomyomatosis is a rare contiguous for the analysis of CTLA4 polymorphism. CTLA-4 genedeletionsyndromeoccurringin1:1,000,000ingeneral genotype analysis was performed by Sanger Sequencing. population. Results: Of the 45 patients, 27 were females with an Aim: To alert for this condition in the differential average age of 11. Of all patients DQB1 homozygosity 02 diagnosis of Alport syndrome, as it might be under- found in57%andDQB1 andDQA1allelehomozygosity 02 recognized when next generation sequencing panels in 26% . DQB1 allele was negative in 80% and DQB1 08 02 are used. DQA1 allele was positive in 86% of patients. Among all Methods and results: Two generation multiplex family celiac patients, 75% were breastfed less than two months, is described. The first case was disclosed at age 20y due to and45%wereintroducedtoglutenwithinthefirst6months leiomyomatosis of her vulva and prior to resection of the of birth. The one who were homozygous for DQB1 02 and excessive muscular tissue. Her examination along with DQA1 alleles were symptomatic. Abdominal swelling wasAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 901 less common at the patients with gluten exposure of 2yrs molecular analysis of CAH is useful in confirming the and older (p=0,042). Bone pain observed at 66% of 3 diagnosis, and provides a powerful tool in genetic allelecarriers(DQ2homozygousDQ andpositiveDQ ). counseling. On the basis of the important role of the 21- B1 A1 TheCTLA-4CT60A/Gallelewasfrequentamongcontrols hydroxylase in the occurrence of CAH symptoms we (p<.05). concluded that this compound heterozygous CYP21A2 Conclusion: We determined that HLA DQ allele status mutation may be a sound candidate for the disease- effects growth and development at Celiac patients. The causing mutation in this patient. In order to determine the HLA DQ2 allele (DQB1 and DQA1 ) was related to inheritance of identified mutations, parental studies are 02 05 more severe symptoms. The age of gluten exposure is pending. importantandCTLA-4 CT60Aallelemighthaveeffect on A. Tomaszewska: None. M. Straburzynski: None. M. disease etiology. Piechota: None. K. Lacna: None. A. Materna- P. Ata: None. B. Erkal: None. B.S. Akkelle: None. S. Kiryluk: None. Sisko: None. Z. Ergin: None. M.S. Helvacı: None. S. Celik: None. A.M. Sasmaz: None. F. Yilmaz: None. D. E-P03.14 Ertem: None. Mutations in the CFTR gene in Bulgarian patients with cystic fibrosis E-P03.13 MLPA based identification of compound heterozygous N.Yaneva1,M.Libik2,G.Petrova3,M.Macek4,A. Savov1 CYP21A2 mutations in Polish patient with congenital adrenal hyperplasia 1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, A. Tomaszewska1,M. Straburzynski1,M.Piechota1, K.Lacna2, 2. Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles A. Materna-Kiryluk1,3 University-2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Pediatric cilinic, UMHAT 11. Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, "Alexandrovska";Pediatricdepartment,MedicalUniversityof 21. Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Biology and Medical 32. Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Genetics, Charles University-2nd Faculty of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic Introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a Cystic fibrosis is the most common life-limiting genetic group of inherited genetic disorders resulting from a defi- disease, which affects many body systems and proceeds ciency in one of the enzymes involved in cortisol bio- with progressive lungs damage. Up to now 2025 muta- synthesis. In about 95% of cases, CAH is caused by tions havebeen described in association withthe disorder deficiencyofthe21-hydroxylase,encodedbytheCYP21A2 presenting a high allelic heterogeneity of the CFTR gene. gene. More than 100 mutations in the CYP21Α2 gene have Accordingtotheireffectontheproteintheyaredividedin been found to cause 21-hydroxylase deficiency. VII classes. The study of mutations in the CFTR gene in Materials and Methods: Presented case concerns a 3 Bulgarian patients has been conducted for more than 30 year old girl with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The years. More than 900 patients have been referred to the CYP21A2 was screened for deletion(s)/duplication(s) and National Genetic laboratory. The methodology for muta- subset of frequent point mutations using the multiplex tion detection includes SSCP, Sanger sequencing, MLPA ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technique analysis and NGS in a small group of a 25 patients andtheSALSAMLPAKitP050-C1CAH(MRC-Holland). with only one mutation. We described 63 mutations in Results: MLPA analysis demonstrated the presence of Bulgarian CF patients located in all exons (excluding compound two different heterozygous CYP21A2 mutations eighteen)ofthegene.Approximately5%ofthemolecular which was consist of a large heterozygous deletion of the defects remained unknown. The distribution of mutations CYP21A2geneandthefragmentofpseudogeneCYP21A1P indifferentclassesshowsthat12.8%ofBulgarianpatients (the result suggests lower signal for all the probes arecarriersofclassImutations,65.3%ofclassII,0.4%of complementaryforCYP21A2geneandprobescomplemen- class IV, 1% of class V. A part of the mutations (5%) tary for exons 4 and 7 of the pseudogene CYP21A1P) and is difficult to be classified, because they are described smaller heterozygous deletion consisting of exons 1-3 of in single patients and detailed functional studies CYP21A2. have not been performed. The determination of the Conclusions: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a com- molecular defects played and will continue to play mon disorder with genetic and clinical heterogeneity. The important role for the personalized approach to treating902 J.delPicchia and achieving a normal lifespan for the patients with E-P03.16 cystic fibrosis. Role of CLDN16 gene in one Iranian-Kurdish family with N. Yaneva: None. M. Libik: None. G. Petrova: None. end-stage renal disease M. Macek: None. A. Savov: None. R. Miri-Moosavi1,S. Saber1, A.Ebrahimi1,M.Faghihi2, T. E-P03.15 Malakoutian3 Genetic markers associated with osteopenia and osteoporosis in patients with cystic fibrosis in Republic of 1YAS Medical Molecular genetic laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Macedonia Islamic Republic of, 2Hussman Institute for Human Genomics Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine University of Miami, M.Kirijas1, T.Jakovska2,D.Trajkov1, O.Efinska Miami, FL, United States, 3Department of Nephrology, Mladenovska1,O.Sibinovska1,A. Petlichkovski1 Hasheminejad Kidney Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of 1Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Medical faculty, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, 1109 Skopje, Introduction:End-stagerenaldisease(ESRD)occurswhen Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University your kidneys clearly begin to shut down. Diabetes, hyper- Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, University “Ss. Cyril tension,andhyperlipidemiaincreaseriskofESRD.Athree- and Methodius”, 1109 Skopje, Macedonia, The Former tonine-foldgreaterriskofESRDisobservedinindividuals Yugoslav Republic of with a family history of ESRD (Satko SG et al, 2005), so role of genetic study is important now a day. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common Material and Method: A 35-year-old, Iranian man who autosomal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population had ESRD with hypercalcemia and hyperoxaluria were which affects most critically the lungs, and also the pan- detected, and regards to imaging finding medullary creas, liver and intestine. These patients also frequently nephrocalcinosis was found. According to nephrologist have low bone mineral density, osteopenia or osteoporosis. decision, primary hyperoxaluria was considered as one of The aim of our study was to determine whether poly- probably differential diagnosis then who was candidate of morphisms in 4 genes (VDR, COL1A1, CTR and ESR1) kidney and liver transplant. So, genetic analysis was included in the metabolism of calcium are associated with requested to approve mentioned diagnosis. His parents decreased bone mineral density in patients with cystic had consanguineous marriage. One brother and one of his fibrosis in Republic of Macedonia. sistersufferedofsamesignsandsymptoms.Accordingly,to Material and Methods: Sixty five patients with cystic results of whole exome sequencing (WES) and analysis all fibrosis were divided in three groups according to their genes responsible to renal disorder, one likely pathogenic DXA scans: patients with normal bone density, osteopenia variant(p.C113Y)wasfoundinCLDN16gene.Thisgeneis and osteoporosis. DNA was isolated with standard phenol- responsible to Hypmagnesia type 3 renal disease with chlorophormmethodofisolationandSSPmethodwasused autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. Clinical manifesta- to determine the polymorphisms in the four genes. tions in patients fit to Hypomagnesia type 3 renal disease, Results: TC genotype of the TaqI polymorphism, CT after reevaluation of clinical data. Familial segregation was genotypeofFok1andAGgenotypeofBsmIpolymorphism doneandhisparentsandoneofhissister(theyarehealthy) in VDR gene were the most frequent in all three groups. are carrier of this variant. It seems organs transplant don’t 23.4%ofthepatientswithnormalbonedensityhadtheCC need to do in this case. genotype,61.7%CTand14.89%TT,whilstinpatientswith Conclusion: Genetic analysis should be considered in osteopenia 10% had CC genotype, 60% had CT and 30% renal failure to do the best management in therapy. had TT; and in patients with osteoporosis 66.67% had CT R.Miri-Moosavi: None.S. Saber:None. A.Ebrahimi: and 33.33% had TT genotype in PvuII (IVS-397) None. M. Faghihi: None. T. Malakoutian: None. polymorphism in the ESR1 gene. Conclusion: Polymorphisms in genes involved in the E-P03.17 calcium metabolism are not contributing factor to develop- Polyposis coli due to a large deletion of the chromosomal ing osteopenia or osteoporosis in patients with cystic Region 5q22.1-q23.1 fibrosis. M. Kirijas: None. T. Jakovska: None. D. Trajkov: U.Siebers-Renelt, M. Vockel, A.Röpke,P. Wieacker None. O. Efinska Mladenovska: None. O. Sibinovska: None. A. Petlichkovski: None. Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, GermanyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 903 We report on an 18 year-old man who presented with correlate the most frequently observed heterozygous and recurrent diarrhea and abdominal pain. Colonoscopy homozygous pathogenic variants with symptoms of revealedclassicalpolyposiscoliandadditionallyadenomas patients. In total 4987 patient were analysed for MEFV of the duodenum were present. No other affected family gene. Patient’s data, such as age, gender, consanguinity of members are known. Molecular analysis of the APC-gene parents, complaints, complications, heterozygosity and showed a de novo heterozygous deletion of the complete homozygosity sequence variants were correlated among APC-gene. In order to check if the loss of one APC copy eachother.Pathogenicvariantswereobservedin%52.22 of was part of a greater deletion a microarray analysis was patients and most common ones were M694V, R202Q, performed and showed a loss of approximately 5.4 Mb in E148Q,M680IandV726A.Mostfrequentcomplaintswere the chromosomal region 5q22.1 – q23.1. Clinically, our abdominal pain, arthralgia, fever and chest pain. Con- propositus did not show any dysmorphic features, but his sanguinity ratio revealed to be %15.78, but homozygote mother reported about learning difficulties and a develop- variantsweredetectedonlyin%10.8patients.Inconclusion mentaldelayduringchildhood.Nevertheless,hewasableto we can say that heterozygous patients also may have a attendsuccessfullyaregularschoolandisnowworkingasa clinicalsignsandpatientswithsamesequencevariantsmay craftsman. show phenotypic differences. Although deletions of several exons of the APC-gene R. Bayramov: None. M.E. Doğan: None. B. Aynekin: mayaccountforabout15%ofclassicalFAPpatients,whole None. R. Emekli: None. F. Yavuz: None. M. Cerrah gene deletions are described only in a few patients. In the Güneş: None. A.Z. Yılmaz: None. Y. Özkul: None. M. era prior to MLPA-analysis some patients with cytogeneti- Dündar: None. cally visible interstitial 5q deletions have been described with a combined phenotype of polyposis and mental E-P03.23 retardation. Our case illustrates, that in case of a lack of Locus heterogeneity in goiter and hypothyroidism biallelic flanking markers in the MLPA-test a microarray should be considered to quantify the size of the deletion. N.Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, E.BuenoMartínez1,2, M.Ovejero- Moreover, this case illustrates the problems that may arise Sánchez1,2,3, S.Siffo4,5,M.Gomes Pío4,5, C.M.Rivolta4,5,J. when including a screening for microdeletions in prenatal Walker6,7, K.Lachlan6,7,R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3,H. M. testing as a first tier test and underlines the necessity of a Targovnik4,5 detailed information of pregnant women prior to testing. U. Siebers-Renelt: None. M. Vockel: None. A. Röpke: 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of None. P. Wieacker: None. Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer E-P03.18 (IBMCC). University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, Familial Mediterranean fever; looking into ten years' 4DepartmentofMicrobiology,Inmunology,Biotechnologyand experience Genetics, Faculty of Farmacy and Biochemistry, University of BuenosAires,BuenosAires,Argentina,5CONICET-University R.Bayramov,M.E.Doğan,B.Aynekin,R.Emekli,F.Yavuz,M. of Buenos Aires. Institute of Inmunology, Genetic and Cerrah Güneş,A.Z.Yılmaz, Y. Özkul, M.Dündar Metabolism (INIGEM)., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 6Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey Princess Anne Hospital., Southampton, United Kingdom, 7PortsmouthHospitalsNHSTrust,QueenAlexandraHospital, FMF is a hereditary autoinflammatory disorder caused by Portsmouth, United Kingdom alteration in Mediterranean fever gene (MEFV). FMF can be seen in all ethnic groups but, it usually occurs in people Introduction: The thyroglobulin (TG) gene is organized of Mediterranean origin; Turks Azerbaijanis Jews, Arabs, in 48 exons on human chromosome 8q24. Up to now, Greeks,andItalians,Armenians.Ingeneral,itisacceptedto 120 inactivating mutations in the TG gene have been be autosomal recessive disorder (OMIM # 249100), but identified in patients with congenital goiter and endemic there are observed clinical complaints in heterozygous or non-endemic simple goiter. The purpose of the present patients, which also suggests the possibility of autosomal study is to identify the mutations that cause goiter and dominant (OMIM # 134610) inheritance.Fever, abdominal, hypothyroidism in two members (siblings) of the same chest and joint pain, skin eruption are the most common family. complaintsandAA-amyloidosiswithkidneyfailureisworst Methods: TG gene alterations were identified by Sanger outcome.Soearlydiagnosisisessentialforimprovementof sequencing. Additionally, other genes (TSHR, PAX8, life quality and survival of patients.In this study we NKX2, FOXE1, DUOX2, TG, TPO, SLC5A5, SLC26A4904 J.delPicchia IYD, DUOXA2) related with these diseases were studied erosive gastritis (EG) and chronic gastritis (CG) in Yakuts. by NGS. We studied Hp DNA samples extracted from biopsies of Results: Both patients inherited the c.2359C>T [p. 172 patients with EG (n=77) and CG (n=95). 106 were R768*] mutation from their father, however no alteration adolescents (mean age 14.09 ± 2.4 years) and 66 were was detected in the other allele. The absence of a second adults (mean age 41.22±11.84 years). In the group of mutationintheexoniccodingornoncoding(5′and3′UTR) patientswith diagnoseEGcagA"+"strainswas detected in sequences, the promoter region or the exon/intron bound- 64/77 patients (83.1%) and cagA"-" strains was detected in aries, suggested no additional inactivating mutation of the 13/77 patients (16.9%) (p<0.001). Similar data obtained in TGgene.Sincethesinglemutationinheterozygosisdidnot CG group of patients: cagA"+" - 54/95 patients (56.8%), explain the phenotype, further genes related to the disease cagA"-" - 41/95 patients (43.2%) (p<0.001). The high per- werestudiedbynextgenerationsequencinganalysis.These centage of cagA«+» strains may indicate an increased risk studies discovered additional mutations in heterozygosis in development of gastric erosions as well as pre-ulcerous genes related to thyroid dysgenesis and dishormogenesis condition. Presence of cagA gene is a predictive marker of like the c.899-2A>C mutation in PAX8, which affects the EGinourpatients. The studywas supportedbytheProject splicing process. of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Conclusions: These results suggest that several mono- Federation(#6.1766.2017),bytheProjectoftheNEFU,by allelic defects in different genes which belong to the same the FASO project (BRK 0556-2017-0003). pathway could explain the phenotype. However, further N.N. Gotovtsev: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. T.V. studies need to be performed to confirm the cause of the Borisova: None. M.P. Alekseeva: None. N.N. Innoken- disease in this family. tieva: None. V.G. Pshennikova: None. A.M. Rafailov: This work was funded by FIS PI16/01920 None. S.N. Lekhanova: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. E. Bueno Martínez: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. S. Siffo: None. M. Gomes Pío: E-P03.25 None.C.M.Rivolta:None.J.Walker:None.K.Lachlan: Cys282Tyr, His63Asp and Ser65Cys mutations in 42 None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. H. M. patients with hereditary hemochromatosis type 1 Targovnik: None. S. Turyk,M.Sakurai, J.Benavides, S.Bonsergent, O. E-P03.24 Rabinovich,M.Curia,M.Notaris,A.Gomez,E.LudueñaClos, Association of cagA positive strains of Helicobacter pylori L. GarciadeRosa with gastric erosions in Yakut patients (Eastern Siberia, Russia) Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina N.N.Gotovtsev1,2,N.A. Barashkov1,2,T. V. Borisova2, M.P. Hereditary hemochromatosis type 1 (HH) is an autosomal Alekseeva3, N.N.Innokentieva2,3,V. G.Pshennikova1,2,A.M. recessivedisorderofironmetabolism.Itischaracterizedby Rafailov2,S. N.Lekhanova2,S.A. Fedorova1,2 progressive iron overload and caused by mutation in the HFE gene. The predominant feature of HH is excessive 1YakutScientificCenterofcomplexmedicalproblems,Yakutsk, absorptionofdietaryironanditsdepositioninparenchymal Russian Federation, 2MK Ammosov North-Eastern Federal tissues and results in cirrhosis, diabetes, skin pigmentation University, Yakutsk,Russian Federation, 3Republicanhospital and testicular failure. 42 HH patients (12 females and 30 №1NationalCenterofMedicine,Yakutsk,RussianFederation males) and 106 healthy controls were screened for the Cys282Tyr, His63Asp and Ser65Cys, using polymerase Helicobacter pylori (Hp) is a gram-negative, spiral bacter- chain reaction amplification of genomic DNA, followed by ium that colonizes gastric mucosa of human. Clinical out- digestion with Rsa 1 and Bel-1. All patients had the fol- come after infection related to environmental conditions, lowingparameters:ironstudiesincludingserumFe,ferritin immunological factors of host and virulence of micro- and transferrin saturation, serology for hepatitis B and C, organisms [Suerbaum et al., 2002]. Hp isolates with liver function tests and abdominal echography . The mean cagA«+»strainsareassociatedwithahigherrateofdamage ageatgenotypediagnosiswas51.3yearsinmalesand55.3 and inflammation of stomach, compared to the cagA«-» years in females. 38 from 42 (90.5%) HH patients were strains [Wu et al., 2003; Hatakeyama et al., 2005]. Clinical homozygous for Cys 282Tyr mutation . Three (7.1%) were outcomes of gastroduodenal diseases depending on viru- compoundheterozygousforCys282Tyr/His63Aspandone lence and pathogenicity factors of Hp is unexplored in (2.4%) was for Cys282Tyr/Ser65Cys. Five (6.9%) of our Yakut population living in Eastern Siberia (Russia). Our controls were heterozygous for Cys282Tyr and one (1.3%) aim was to study association of cagA gene presence with was heterozygous for His63Asp. HereditaryAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 905 hemochromatosistype1isanunderdiagnoseddisorder.The E-P03.27 most frequent form is associated with homozygosity of the Bilateral Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney in a three- Cys282Tyr mutation. We note that the clinical form in our generation family heterozygotes for Cys282Tyr/His63Asp is much less than that for Cys 282Tyr homocygotes. I.Jurca-Simina1, A.Chirita-Emandi1, N.Andreescu1,N. S. Turyk: None. M. Sakurai: None. J. Benavides: Olariu2,R.Isac2,F.Farkas3,Z.Andrei2,M.Gafencu2,M.Puiu1 None. S. Bonsergent: None. O. Rabinovich: None. M. Curia: None. M. Notaris: None. A. Gomez: None. E. 1Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and Ludueña Clos: None. L. Garcia de Rosa: None. Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania, E-P03.26 3Louis Turcanu Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis: a study of 6 Romania Tunisian patients Introduction: Multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK) is y.elaribi1,h.jilani1,i.rejeb1,s.hizem1,h.ouerda2,a.meherzi2,f. defined by multiple cystic dilatations replacing the normal broly3, l.benjemaa1,S. Karoui4 renalparenchymaandleadingtoorgandysfunction.Herein we present a three-generation family with chronic kidney 1service des maladies congénitales et héréditaires, tunis, disease (CKD) on bilateral MCDK. Methods: The clinical Tunisia, 2Pediatric department mongi slim hospital, tunis, workup was performed for each affected individual. NGS Tunisia, 3genetic department, lille, France, 4Department of wasperformedusingtheIlluminaTruSightOneSequencing Genetics Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia Panel, on MiSeq Illumina platform for index. Results:12yearsoldgirlwithCKDIIIBdiagnosedatage Introduction: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 4 years presents multiple millimeter cysts in bilateral renal (PFIC) is a serious disorder, classified into three types parenchymashowedonMRI.Thepatient'sfatherisonrenal namely PFIC1, PFIC2 and PFIC3, related to mutations in replacement therapy with the same renal cystic appearance ATP8B1 gene, ABCB11 gene and ABCB4 gene, respec- and associates bifid distal phalanx of one thumb, bilateral tively.ThebirthprevalenceofPFICisestimatedbetween1/ sensorineural hearing loss; paternal grandmother is on 50000and1/100000.ClinicalsignsofcholestasisinPFIC1 dialysis with a mild hearing loss and myopia forte. Renal and PFIC 2 usually appear in the first months of life, biopsy was yet performed due to parent refusal. NGS whereas the onset of PFIC3 is often delayed. Patients results:nopathogenicorprobablypathogenicvariantswere usually develop fibrosis and liver failure before adulthood. detected (PKHD1, PKD1, COL4A5, PRKCSH, TSC2, Materials and Methods: We report one patient with TSC1, EGF, TTR, FN1, UMOD, MUC1, SALL1 and other PFIC1,onepatientwithPFIC2and4patientswithPFIC3. genes associated with ciliopathies). Three heterozygous The molecular genetic analysis was performed in all cases. variants were considered as candidates: RET:c.C3152T:p. A total of 167 genes, which have previously been found to A1051V;BBS2:c.C1229G:p.T410,INPP5E:c.G304T:p. be involved in cholestasis disorders, were selected for D102Y, but with no clinical relevance. All three patients targeted next-generation sequencing. and the only sister of our patient’s father with no renal Results:Threenovelmutations,missense,frameshiftand impairment present a variant with uncertain significance in non-sens, were identified in ATP8B1, ABCB11 and ABCB4 GLA gene: c.G937T:p.D313Y. genes. All mutations were found to co-segregate with the Conclusions:MCKDwithautosomaldominanttransmis- disease in the three familial cases. sionwereconsidered,butthelargeNGSpaneluseddidnot Conclusion: The molecular study of the progressive identify any significant variant for the phenotype. Genetic cholestasisgenesallowedtoconfirmthediagnosisandthen work-up will continue with SNP array for microdeletions/ to propose a prenatal diagnosis for future pregnancies. In microduplications and whole exome sequencing. Renal Tunisia, there are no data on genetic variations in this biopsy will enlarge the clinical data for a better orientation disorder. This study expands the mutational spectrum of in molecular analysis and diagnosis. PFIC genes. I. Jurca-Simina: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. N. Y. elaribi: None. H. jilani: None. I. rejeb: None. S. Andreescu: None. N. Olariu: None. R. Isac: None. F. hizem: None. H. ouerda: None. A. meherzi: None. F. Farkas: None. Z. Andrei: None. M. Gafencu: None. M. broly: None. L. ben jemaa: None. S. Karoui: None. Puiu: None.906 J.delPicchia E-P03.29 Introduction: Complement factor H-related 5 nephropathy Two novel pathogenic NBAS gene’s variants in a patient isaformofinheritedkidneydisease.ItisendemicinGreek with infantile recurrent acute liver failure Cypriots,inwhomthediseaseiscausedby6.3kbpinternal duplication in the CFHR5 gene. This duplication includes N.Semenova1, I.Anisimova1,N.Taran2,T. Strokova2,I.Tin2 exons 2 and 3. Materials and Methods: The study included eighty 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian patients with microscopic hematuria. We detected no Federation, 2Federal Research Center of Nutrition and pathogenic variants in COL4A3, COL4A4 and COL4A5 Biotechnology, Moscow, Russian Federation genes in these patients previously. Thus Alport syndrome was excluded. The CFHR5 gene was sequenced using Introduction: Acute liver failure (ALF) in infancy and sequence capture-based next generation sequencing tech- childhood is a life-threating emergency and remains unex- nology. Copy number variation analysis was also per- plained in about 50% cases. Recently, bi-allelic pathogenic formed. Polymerase chain reaction and 5% polyacrylamid variants in NBAS were reported as a new molecular cause gel electrophoresis were used to detect the Cypriot of ALF in infancy, leading to recurrent liver failure. duplication. Materials and Methods: we describe a male patient Results:TheCypriotduplicationwasnotdetectedinany 2y.5m. of age with episodes of ALF. His infantile period ofthepatients.Neitherpathogenicvariants,norlargeexonic wasnormal.ThefirstepisodeofALFoccurredattheageof deletions or duplications were found using next generation 1y.9 m. with greatly elevated liver transaminases (ALAT sequencing technology in the patients. and ASAT more than 1000 U/L), succeeded by sever Conclusion: The CFHR5 nephropathy is not a frequent coagulopathy without jaundice. Alkaline phosphatase was cause of hematuria in Czech non-Alport families. normal, gamma-GT was slightly elevated. Blood amino Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the acids, acylcarnitines and very-long chain fatty acids profile Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic - Conceptual were normal. Organic acids in urine were normal. He had Development of Research Organizations, Faculty Hospital no extrahepatic symptoms. Over 6 months 5 episodes of of Ostrava (2015). ALFwithoutfeveroccurred.Afterlivercrisis,liverfunction K. Plevová: None. P. Plevova: None. completely repairs and remained normal in the interval. Results: NGS was used to analyze 47 genes responsible E-P03.31 forhereditarydiseaseswithpredominantliverdamage.Two Clinical exome sequencing: a new strategy for differential nucleotide variants in NBAS gene were identified: c.3928 diagnosis of complex phenotypes A>G (p.T1310A) and c.4228 A>G (p.T1410A) in com- pound heterozygous state. Parents and younger sibling are P. Constantoulakis1,A. Oikonomaki2,S. Samara1, G. healthy and heterozygous for one or another mutant allele. Christopoulou2,P. Kollia3 p.T1310A is benign according to Polyphen2.2 and MutationTaster but located in the conserved region, p. 1BioAnalytica-GenoType S.A., Athens, Greece, 2Science Labs T1410Aispossiblydamagingandlocated intheconserved M.S.A., Athens, Greece, 3Department of Genetics & region. ExAc frequency of both substitutions is <0,02%. Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, National Kapodistrian Conclusion: Two novel NBAS variants correspond to University of Athens, Athens, Greece patient’sphenotypeandcouldbethecauseofinfantileliver failure syndrome-2 in the patient. Introduction: In the genomics era, multiple gene inves- N. Semenova: None. I. Anisimova: None. N. Taran: tigations by exome sequencing may reveal known or None. T. Strokova: None. I. Tin: None. novel variants which are potentially disease causing allowing for effective healthcare management, previously E-P03.30 not feasible. The CFHR5 nephropathy is not a frequent cause of Materials and Methods: A 35-year-old male with a hematuria in Czech non-Alport families maternal origin family history of renal failure, with unspecified kidney disease, was referred to us for genetic K. Plevová1,P. Plevova2 testing. The clinical description was not indicative of a specific gene target therefore, clinical exome sequencing 1Wichterle Grammar School, Ostrava-Poruba, Czech wasrecommended.Followingpreparationsaccordingtothe Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University manufacturer’sprotocol(SOPHiAGenetics),DNAlibraries Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic were sequenced on a NextSeq-500 NGS system (Illumina). Data were analyzed by a bioinformatics pipeline (SophiaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 907 DDM). A gene panel consisting of 101 genes associated Results:The patient's karyotype was 46,XY. Molecular with nephropathies was created to filter variants related to genetic analysis show a heterozygous mutation c.841G>T the phenotype investigated. of the 21-hydroxylase gene and a hemizygous point Results: The analysis revealed 3 variants of unknown mutation c.1174C>T(pPro392Ser)of the AR gene. significance (VUS) in the PKD1 (c.12817C>T and Conclusion: Hormonal levels and hyperpigmentation of c.11246G>A) and ANKS6 (c.1360G>A) genes. Proband’s the patient were misleading in diagnosing. Whether the affectedandunaffected family members were subsequently combination of heterozygous CAH and hemizygous AR tested andtheanalysis revealed thatthetwoVUSallelesin mutations may affect the phenotype was discussed by the PKD1 gene co-segregated with the investigated considering the clinical, radiological and biochemical phenotype, while the ANKS6 variant was also found in findingsofthepatient.ItwasemphasizedthatPAISshould healthy individuals. notbeforgotteninthedifferentialdiagnosisofpatientswith Discussion:Eventhoughfurtherinvestigationisrequired minor CAH findings. to reach definite genetic diagnosis, this case highlights the M.N. Somuncu: None. A.G. Zamani: None. B.S. utility of clinical exome sequencing in clinical practice. Eklioglu: None. M.S. Yildirim: None. Clinicalexome sequencingcansupportdefinitive diagnosis or clarify differential diagnosis cases in patients with renal E-P03.33 diseases of unknown etiology, contributing to precise HLA class II protein and mRNA expression profiles in prognosis, systematic monitoring, and when appropriate, cultured parathyroid tissues identification of other family members, as well as the possibility of family programming with pre-implantation B.Goncu1,N.Kandas2,S.Atasoy3,B.Ozdemir1,E.Yucesan4,H. genetic diagnosis. Basoglu5,F. Akbas6,E. Aysan7 P. Constantoulakis: None. A. Oikonomaki: None. S. Samara:None.G.Christopoulou:None.P.Kollia:None. 1Bezmialem Vakif University, Experimental Research Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of E-P03.32 Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology, MaybeingacarrierofCAHleadtophenotypicvariability Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of in PAIS? Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Bezmialem Vakif University, Institute of Life Sciences and M.N.Somuncu1,A.G.Zamani1,B.S.Eklioglu2,M.S.Yildirim1 Biotechnology,Istanbul,Turkey,5BezmialemVakifUniversity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biophysics, Istanbul, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Turkey, 6Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, NecmettinErbakanUniversity,Konya,Turkey,2Departmentof Department ofMedicalBiology,Istanbul, Turkey,7Bezmialem Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Meram Medical Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of General Faculty,Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey Introduction: Androgen Insensitivity syndrome is esti- Introduction:Allorecognition of antigen presenting cells mated to be present in 1: 20,000–64,000 male births and activated by peptide/human leukocyte antigen (HLA) variable phenotypic expression. Congenital Adrenal complexandthuschangingitscoursethroughlymphnodes Hyperplasia(CAH)dueto21-hydroxylasedeficiency(21- where T cells reside.In solid organ transplantation,cultured OHD) is an autosomal recessive disorder with impaired tissue cells were presumed as passenger-leukocyte free synthesis of cortisol and aldosterone and oversecretion of which ensures prolonged graft survival. The aim of this androgens from the adrenal cortex. We present a patient studywastoevaluatethepotentialchangesofHLAclassII who has a clinical pre-diagnosis of CAH but underwent mRNA and protein expression levels during parathyroid sequence analysis and he was diagnosed as PAIS. cell culture. Materials and Methods: A consultation was requested Materials and Methods:Parathyroid hyperplasia tissues fromthemedicalgeneticsclinicforasix-day-oldnewborn wereobtainedfrompatientswhodiagnosedwithsecondary with diagnosis of CAH. Bifid scrotum, hypospadias hyperparathyroidism (n=11).After histopathological con- and pigmentation of the areolae and genital skin were firmation,glands were digested using collagenase type II detected in physical examination. Free testesterone and cultured.Afterwards, cells were collected at day 0(after and17-hydroxyprogesteronelevelswerehigh.Karyotype isolation) and 3,6,9 respectively. HLA class-II (-DR,-DP,- analysis was done and then reverse dot blot and MLPA DQα1,-DQα2) antibodies were selected according to analysesof21-hydroxylasegeneandsequenceanalysisof binding region and dissociation constant (KD) value which the subject's AR gene were performed. istheequilibriumbetweenantibodyandtarget,thenverified908 J.delPicchia by BLAST. Primers were designed for HLA-DR and -DQ significant association between TM6SF2 genotypes and but not for DP. Correlation between protein and gene level cirrhosis (OR 1.75; 95%CI 0.82-3.72; P=0.1444), but we results were investigated. observedasignificantassociationbetweenminorTalleleof Results: HLA-DR mRNA expression levels remained TM6SF2andalcohol-relatedcirrhosis(OR2;95%CI1.05- unchanged, only HLA-DQ mRNA expression level 3.8; P=0.0336). decreased during culture (p=0.03).Protein expression Conclusions: The variants in PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 levels of HLA-DP and -DQα2 were higher than -DR and genes are associated with increased risk of alcoholic liver -DQα1 levels during culture (p<0.0001). cirrhosis in Serbian population. Further prospective studies Conclusions:This study demonstrates that cultured para- are required to confirm these results and to evaluate the thyroid tissues are still potential targets for allorecognition potential of PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 as predictors and even during culture. In addition, -DQα2 and -DR protein therapeutic targets in alcoholic liver cirrhosis. expression was found higher in parathyroid tissues.Con- B.Nesic:None.I.Grubisa:None.J.Djordjevic:None. cordance between DQ and DR indicates a possible linkage D. Vrinic Kalem: None. P. Svorcan: None. in rejection/poor graft survival of parathyroid tissue transplantation via allorecognition. Presented work was E-P03.35 financially supported by Bezmialem Vakif University Search for a genetic factor for pleuroparenchymal Scientific Research Funding Unit (3.2016/7). fibroelastosis (PPFE) B.Goncu:None.N.Kandas:None.S.Atasoy:None.B. Ozdemir:None.E.Yucesan:None.H.Basoglu:None.F. E. YildizBolukbasi1,S. Ozkaya2, S.Asker3,A. Tolun1 Akbas: None. E. Aysan: None. 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogazici E-P03.34 University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Pulmonary Association of PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 variants with Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Bahçeşehir University, alcoholic liver cirrhosis in Serbian population Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Van Yuzuncu Yil University, Van, Turkey B. Nesic1,I.Grubisa1,J. Djordjevic2,D.Vrinic Kalem3,P. Svorcan3,4 Introduction: Pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis (PPFE) is an interstitial lung disease characterized by upper-lobe 1Department for Human Genetics and Prenatal Diagnostics, predominantfibrosis.Itisarareidiopathicdiseasewithfirst Zvezdara University Medical Center, University of Belgrade, symptoms of dyspnea (respiratory distress), dry cough and Belgrade, Serbia, 2Belmedic General Hospital, Belgrade, chest pain due to pneumothorax. Here we present two Serbia,3ClinicofGastroenterologyandHepatology,Zvezdara Turkish consanguineous families afflicted with PPFE. University Medical Center, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Materials and Methods: Candidate disease loci in Serbia,4SchoolofMedicine,UniversityofBelgrade,Belgrade, family 1 was detected (LOD score >2.52) by linkage Serbia mapping using SNP genotype data of parents and three affectedandone unaffected sib. Exomesequencingfor one Introduction: A recent GWA study identified a missense patientfromeachfamilywasevaluatedforrarevariantsand variant in TM6SF2 (C>T) and confirmed (C>G) variant in variants in telomere-related genes (TERT, TERC, RTEL1 the PNPLA3 gene as risk loci for alcohol-related cirrhosis. and PARN)implicated inPPFEaetiology insome families. Our aimwas tostudy theassociationofthose variants with Lastly, genes harbouring rare or novel heterozygous or the development of cirrhosis in Serbian patients. homozygous variants in both patients were evaluated as Materials and Methods: A total of 103 patients with possible risk factors. clinicallydiagnosedcirrhosisand103ageandsexmatched Results:Infamily1weidentifiednovel/rarehomozygous controls without clinical or laboratory evidence of liver variants in FAM35A and TNKS2 and possibly a hetero- disease were genotyped for TM6SF2 and PNPLA3 using zygous variant in either FAM22A or FAM22D which are PCR-RFLP methodology. Data analysis was performed paralogs in a large duplicated region. All variants were using IBM SPSS Statistics 21.0. predicted as disease causing by computational algorithms. Results: The prevalence of GG genotype of PNPLA3 TNKS2 c.1146A>T segregates with the disease, and gene was 50% in the group of patients and 21% in control FAM35A c.540_541insCC will be validated. No candidate group. We found significant association between GG variantwasfoundintelomere-relatedorthecommongenes genotype and cirrhosis (OR 3.8; 95%CI 2.06-6.98; with variants. P<0.0001), as well as between G allele and disease (OR Conclusion: We had hypothesized that PPFE was a 3.09; 95%CI 2.07-4.62; P < 0.0001). There was no monogenic disease and we would be able to identify theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 909 responsible gene. However, we could not discriminate E-P03.37 whether FAM35A or TNKS2 variant is causative. TNKS2 Diagnosis of novel splicing defect in the CFTR gene in interacts with telomere-related proteins and is highly Russian patient with cystic fibrosis living in Tomsk region conservedamongspecies.Wehopethatourfindingswould be helpful for future genetic studies on PPFE. (Grant: O.Odinokova,L. Nazarenko TUBITAK 114Z829) E.YildizBolukbasi:None.S.Ozkaya:None.S.Asker: Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National None. A. Tolun: None. Research Medical Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation E-P03.36 The contribution of the main genetic marker of type 2 Introduction: CF is the most common severe inherited diabetes to the genetic architectonics of type 1 diabetes disorder, but most CFTR gene mutations are rare. We present here new CFTR mutation in CF-patient from a O.N.Ivanova,E.V. Titovich, T. L. Kuraeva,T. V.Nikonova Russian family, revealed by CF-newborn screening in Tomsk region. NationalMedicalResearchCenterofEndocrinology,Moscow, Materials and Methods: We report case of newborn Russian Federation patient with severe CF, pancreatic insufficiency. Different mutation detection methods were combined. The DNA Introduction: A variant of TCF7L2 rs7903146Т has the assay for 50 common mutations (Elucigene® CF-EU2v1) strongest association with type 2 diabetes in most popula- and fragment analysis of the CFTR gene fragments were tions and has not the association with type 1 diabetes (t1d) performed as the first test followed by sequencing analysis overall. It was shown that TCF7L2 was associated with a of the coding and splicing regions of the CFTR gene. ® subset of children with t1d (with fewer markers of islet Results: With the Elucigene CF-EU2v1 assay we autoimmunity) and children with t1d who carried the identified only one mutant allele p.Phe508del. Analysis of rs7903146ТT genotype were less likely to carry high-risk CFTR genefragments, performed ona capillary sequencer, HLAII genotypes. The aim of this study is analysis of revealedsomeabnormalitiesinpeaksprofilesuggested5-bp association rs7903146ТT and low-diabetogenic HLAII deletioninexon3.Bysequencinganalysisoftheofexon3 genotypes among t1d children. of the CFTR gene we identified 5-bp deletion mutation in Materials and Methods: 249 children (Russian ethnic 3’-region of exon 3, which may be due to one of three group) with type 1 diabetes were studied. Allele identifica- events in exon-intron junction (according to nucleotide tion was performed with Real-Time PCR technique. HLA sequence): 1) deletion of Ggtaa - deletion of the last haplotypes DRB1*0301-DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 and nucleotideinexon3andthefournucleotidesinintron3;2) DRB1*04-DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 were considered deletionofgtaag-deletionof1-5nucleotidesinintron3;3) high-risk, all others low-risk. The chi-squared was used, deletion of taagg - deletion of 2-6 nucleotides in intron 3. and p-value<0,05 were taken to indicate statistical sig- Conclusions: New splicing mutation was located in the nificance of differences. invariant donor splice site, the mutation name: c.273 Results: Carriers of one or two high-risk HLAII +2_273+6delTAAGG or IVS3+2_6delTAAGG. As far haplotypes in the total sample - 56%. The frequency of as we know this mutation was not been previously rs7903146TT genotype in the total sample was 7.3%. described. Identification of mutations has important impli- Comparison of frequencies of TT genotype in groups cations for genetic counselling in families. stratified by HLAII showed statistically significant differ- O. Odinokova: None. L. Nazarenko: None. ences. 70% of carriers of the TT genotype did not carry high-risk HLAII haplotypes, 10% of carriers of the TT E-P03.38 genotype carried two high-risk HLAII haplotype. The association of the TNFSF15 polymorphism rs7848647 Conclusions:Themaingeneticmarkeroftype2diabetes and surgical diverticular disease in the Bulgarian isassociatedwithlow-diabeticHLAIIgenotypesinchildren population with type 1 diabetes. This supports the hypothesis of the possible simultaneous participation of autoimmune and I.Tourtourikov1,A.Chavoushian2,A.Petrov2, T.Todorov1,A. non-autoimmune mechanisms in the development of the Todorova1,3 disease. This study was supported by the grant № 17-75- 30035 of the Russian Science Foundation. 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Sofia, O.N. Ivanova: None. E.V. Titovich: None. T.L. Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2City Clinic Cancer Center, Kuraeva: None. T.V. Nikonova: None. Department of Gastroenterology, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia,910 J.delPicchia Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical Chemistry and and fragile with trichorrhexis nodosa), and diarrhea. All Biochemistry,MedicalUniversitySofia,Sofia,Bulgaria,Sofia, affectedchildrenrequireparenteralnutritiontomaintainlife Bulgaria and growth. Case Report: Our case is a 1-year girl born to the Diverticulosis and diverticular disease are one of the most 37.5weeksofuneventfulpregnancywithweightatbirthof common gastroenterological conditions in the western 1800 g. At 5 months of age, she began tracking weight world. Although believed to be primarily a disease of the stagnation, refusal of food, and increase in the number of elderly, recently there has been an increasing number of bowelmovements.Sheexhibitedmalnourishedappearance, cases worldwide, especiallyinpatientsunder 40years. The no adipose panniculus, sparse, weak hair and highlights clinicalmanifestationofdiverticulardiseasecanrangefrom with prominent forehead and hypertelorism dysmorphic mild and uncomplicated to potentially life-threatening facialfeatures.NGSanalysiswasperformedusingIllumina inflammation. Recurrent or complicated cases can involve (NextSeq 500) technology with a ClearSeq Inherited abscess, perforation, fistulizing disease and strictures/ Disease panel (Agilent Thecnologies), and consisted in obstruction usually requiring surgical intervention. Recent the analysis of the coding and intronic regions of SKIV2L insights into the genetic background of diverticular disease and TTC37 gene. Genetic study detected in compound have revealed an association between the polymorphism heterozygosity,c.4514T>C(p.Leu1505Ser)andc.3514C> rs7848647 in the TNFSF15 gene and complicated diverti- T(p.Gln1172Ter)variantsinTTC37gene.Firstvariantwas culitis, requiring surgical intervention. The TNFSF15 gene described as pathogenic in HGMD (CM103463). The itself has been associated with other inflammatory bowel variant c.3514C > T is not described in HGMD, ClinVar diseasessuchasulcerativecolitis(UC)andCrohn’sdisease or LOVD. Prediction in silico suggests that it is a (CD). In this study, 30 Bulgarian patients with various pathogenic change. Detected in 0,0016% frequently popu- degreesofdiverticulitishavebeengenotypedforrs7848647 lation gnomAD (nohomozygous);notdescribedin1000G. in the TNFSF15 gene via Sanger Sequencing. The per- DefiningthemoleculargeneticbasisofTHESwillfacilitate formed genetic testing has revealed that the most prevalent diagnosis and management. It will help in counselling allele in the selected cohort is the risk allele G, further regarding prognosis and will enable prenatal and preim- implicating the role of TNFSF15 as a factor, determining plantation diagnosis in families at risk and critical insight the manifestation and progression of diverticular disease. into the mechanisms of diarrhea and thus treatment. The results presented here are preliminary and a part of a B. Polo: None. A. Zúñiga: None. P. Marín: None. A. larger study, aimed at investigating the effects of poly- Parra: None. L. Pedrola: None. J. Cervera: None. morphic variants within TNFSF15 and their relation to gastrointestinal disease. The increasing number of diverti- E-P03.41 culosis worldwide prompt for further investigation on the Wholeexomesequencinginchildrenwithcolonicandileum underlying genetic factors of this condition. agangliosis with deafness I. Tourtourikov: None. A. Chavoushian: None. A. Petrov: None. T. Todorov: None. A. Todorova: None. J.Surikova1, J.Averyanova2,I.Povolotskaya3, H. Zaklyazminskaya1,4 E-P03.39 Case report of a trichohepatoenteric syndrome due to 1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow, heterozygous compound of novel mutations in ttc37 gen Russian Federation, 2Russian Children's Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Centre “Genetico”, B. Polo1, A.Zúñiga2,P. Marín3,A. Parra3,L. Pedrola4,J. Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Pirogov Russian National Cervera2 Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation 1Serv. Digestivo. HUP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Unidad de Introduction: The combination of Hirschsprung's disease, Genética.HUPLaFe,Valencia,Spain,3Serv.Pediatría.HUP hearing loss and pigmentation abnormality are evidence of La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 4Unidad de Genetica. HUP La Fe, theWaardenburgsyndrometypeIV(WS4).Itisgenetically Valencia, Spain heterogeneous disease and pathogenic variants finds in the EDNRB, EDN3 or SOX10 genes. Introduction:Trichohepatoentericsyndrome(THES;MIM Material and Methods: We investigated 3 pediatric 222470) is an autosomal-recessive inherited disorder patients with the Hirschsprung's disease and the deafness. (1:400,000-500,000 live births). THES clinical spectrum The DNA-diagnostics had included whole exome sequen- comprises distinctive facial features (hypertelorism, broad cing (WES) with following Sanger resequencing, bioinfor- nasal bridge, prominent forehead), abnormal hair (coarse matic analysis, and cascade familial screening.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 911 Results: Unrelated boy and two girls were operated on congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, hepatosteatosis, the first day of their life in connection with low intestinal hepatomegalyandectropion.Electropmyographicexamina- obstructioncausedbytotalcolonicandileumaganglionosis. tion was compatible with myopathy. A cousin of the little In 2 years all probands had cochlear implantation due to patient, born from not affected parents, was diseased too. sensorineural hearing loss. Patients don’t have skin Leucocytes of patients, stained with May-Grünwald- hypopigmentation, girls are blue eyed blondes. Giemsa,revealedlipidvacuoles.Molecularanalysisshowed Waardenburg-Shan syndrome was suspected. WES has the homozygous N209X mutation, frequently identified in revealedc.429-1G>AintheSOX10gene,p.Pro428Leuand CDS patients. p.Val275Met in the EDNRB gene, and c.1280-1281delTG Conclusions:todate,thechilddoesnotrevealdistinctive intheRETgene.Bioinformaticsresourcesconsiderthemas symptoms or a worsening of clinical traits in comparison probably pathogenic. Variants in the EDNRB gene have withhisrelativesandotherCDSpatients.Thetwochildren been found in the parents of the proband, variants in the started a diet poor in long chain fatty acids with MCT to RET and SOX10 genes are de novo. improve clinical condition and prevent severe systemic Conclusions: All finding variants evaluated as patho- damages. genic with strong or moderate evidence. Mutations in the S. Missaglia: None. M. Durdu: None. L. Moro: None. RETgenehavedescribedforHirschsprung'sdisease,butwe D. Tavian: None. didn’t find any information that pathogenic variant in the RET gene have been found in patients with WS4. E-P04.03 J. Surikova: None. J. Averyanova: None. I. Povolots- Craniosynostosis as an unusual finding in Noonan kaya: None. H. Zaklyazminskaya: None. syndrome-clinicalandmoleculardescriptionof3patients A.Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1,M.Gos1,M.Karpiński2,J.Bal1,E. E-P04 Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal and skin Obersztyn1 disorders 1Department of Medical Genetic, Institute of the Mother and E-P04.02 Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Cardiology, Jagiellonian Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome: first report of a University School of Medicine, Krakow, Poland consanguineous family with all members affected Introduction: Craniosynostosis is a result of premature S. Missaglia1, M.Durdu2, L.Moro3,D.Tavian1 fusion of cranial suturesleading toabnormalshape of head and dysmorphic facial features. In about 15% of cases, 1University, Milan, Italy, 2Baskent University, Adana, Turkey, craniosynostosis is syndromic and multiple sutures are 3University, Novara, Italy usually affected. Most of the syndromic patients have a mutation in one of FGFR genes, that affect cell signaling Introduction: α/β-hydrolase domain-containing protein 5 e.g. RAS/MAPK pathway. (ABHD5)isalipiddroplet-associatedproteinthatpromotes Patientsandmethods:Wepresentclinicalevaluationsof the hydrolysis of triacylglycerols (TAGs) by activating 3 patients with craniosynostosis and the clinical features of adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL). ATGL is a lipase that Noonan syndrome. The mutation analysis in these patients catalyzes the initial and rate-limiting step in lipolysis by was performed using classic Sanger sequencing (2pts) or removing the first fatty acid from TAGs. ABHD5 gene panel next generation sequencing (1pt). mutations in humans lead to Chanarin Dorfman Syndrome Results:Allpatients,besidestypicalfeaturesforNoonan (CDS), a rare condition in which TAGs accumulate in syndrome, like short stature, short neck and dysmorphic various tissues, mainly skin and liver. Indeed, CDS is also features, had abnormal shape of the skull. The patient with knownasNeutralLipidStorageDiseasewithIchthyosis,an p.Ala72Ser mutation in the PTPN11 presented with autosomalrecessivesyndromecharacterizedbynon-bullous scaphocephaly, ASDII and cryptorchidism. Patients with congenitalichthyosiformeryhthroderma,hepatomegalyand mutations (p.Thr58Ile and p.Asp153Val) in the KRAS gene liver steatosis. To date almost 110 patients have been had macrocephaly and developmental delay. One of them reported, 27 of them are from Turkey. had parietal foramina, submucous cleft palate and vertebral MaterialandMethods:Wereporthereforthefirsttime, defect, and the other one choanal stenosis and themolecularandclinicalcharacterizationofan8yearsold cryptorchidism. patient, born from affected parents. Conclusions: The fact that the craniosynostosis was Results: No particular complications were observed observed in our patients with Noonan syndrome caused by during pregnancy. The child presented non-bullous mutations of genes of RAS/MAPK pathway confirms the912 J.delPicchia role of this pathway in skull formation and suture fusion. D.Brazdziunaite1,B. Burnyte2,3,U.Mickys4,R. Meskiene2,3,L. Clinical follow-up of craniosynostosis patients is recom- Ambrozaityte2,3, G.Posiunas5,R. Cerkauskiene5,6, L. mended to ascertain of additional signs that could help in Cimbalistiene2,3, A.Utkus2,3 the diagnosis of non-FGFR-related syndromes. Supported from NCN research project no. 2013/09/B/ 1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, NZ2/03164 and IM&Ch intramural grant. 2InstituteofBiomedicalSciences,FacultyofMedicine,Vilnius A.Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak:None.M.Gos: None.M. University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Centre for Medical Genetics, Karpiński: None. J. Bal: None. E. Obersztyn: None. Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 4National Center of Pathology, Affiliate of Vilnius E-P04.04 University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, AnovelmutationofSALL4generesultinginDuane-radial 5Children’s Hospital, Affiliate of Vilnius University Hospital ray syndrome in a Hungarian family Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 6Children's Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania R.Ripszám,Á.Till,J.Zima,K.Hadzsiev,A.Szabó,Z.Bánfai,B. Melegh Background: Infantile systemic hyalinosis (ISH) is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by the accu- Department of Medical Genetics & Szentagothai Research mulation of amorphous, hyaline material in the skin and Center, University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical School, other organs. We report a case of infantile onset systemic Pécs, Hungary hyalinosis due to homozygous mutation c.1073_1074insC in the ANTXR2 gene presenting as a limb joint stiffness Introduction: SALL4-related disorders include Duane- leading to a painful functional disability. radial ray syndrome and acro-renal-ocular syndrome. Case: A 2,5-year-old female was monitored since Duane-radial ray syndrome or Okihiro syndrome is an 3 months of age because of limb joint stiffness, and poor autosomal dominantly inherited disorder characterized by weight gain. A patient was born to consanguineous couple upper limb and ocular malformations. The disease shows a from the 1st full-term pregnancy and delivery by C-section highly variable phenotype even in the same family. with birth weight below 3rd centile. Fetal movements were Materials and Methods: We report a 15-year-old child weak and observed from the 18th week of gestation. Since withradialraydefects:clubhanddeformityonthelefthand, the age of 6 months she presents multiple painful joint triphalangealthumbontherighthand,hypoplasiaoftheleft contractures with limited movements, delay of motor shoulder girdle. His sister has triphalangeal thumbs and development, hyperpigmentation over bony prominences, hearing impairment on the right ear. His father has Duane gingival hyperplasia with impaired eating and failure to anomaly and hypoplastic right thumb. With international thrive. Histopathological examination of skin revealed collaboration, Sanger sequencing was performed on the massive collagenic fibrosis with perivascular fibroblastic gene SALL4. reaction. Sanger sequencing of whole coding region of the Results: A heterozygous deletion of 2 nucleotides ANTXR2geneidentifiedahomozygousframeshiftmutation SALL4: c.474_475delGA was identified in exon 2 of the c.1073_1074insC(p.Ala359Cysfs*13)andintheunaffected SALL4 gene. The variant is a novel variant not previously parents as heterozygous carriers. describedinotherpatients.Thedeletioncausesaframeshift Conclusions: About 50 cases have been described in the that results in a premuture stop codon (SALL4: p. literature up to date. This rare disease has been recognised Glu158AspfsX22). Due to its truncating nature, it was in various ethnic populations, often reflecting presence of classified as a pathogenic variant. consanguinity. Our results support the idea that insertion Conclusions: The above mentioned finding of a patho- mutations, causing a translational frameshift, are associated genic heterozygous SALL4 variant confirms the clinically with more severe forms. suspected diagnosis of Duane-radial ray syndrome. As the D.Brazdziunaite:None.B.Burnyte:None.U.Mickys: father has Duane-anomaly and the sister radial defects, the None. R. Meskiene: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None. G. targeted variant is being tested in our laboratory. Posiunas: None. R. Cerkauskiene: None. L. Cimbalis- R. Ripszám: None. Á. Till: None. J. Zima: None. K. tiene: None. A. Utkus: None. Hadzsiev: None. A. Szabó: None. Z. Bánfai: None. B. Melegh: None. E-P04.06 Possible phenotypic expansion of IFT80-related skeletal E-P04.05 ciliopathy A case of infantile systemic hyalinosis associated with a frameshift mutation in the ANTXR2 geneAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 913 C. F.Rustad1,K. Tveten2,Ø.L. Holla2, Ø.L.Busk2, E. 3Sección de Genética Molecular. Centro de Bioquímica y Merckoll1, H.Nordgarden3, I.Mero1, T.E. Prescott2 Genética Clínica, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 4Sección de Genética Médica, 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Telemark Hospital ServiciodePediatría,HospitalClínicoUniversitarioVirgende Trust, Skien, Norway, 3National Resource Centre for Oral la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5Cátedra de Genética Médica. Health in Rare Medical Disorders, Lovisenberg Diaconal UCAM- Universidad Católica de Murcia, Murcia, Spain, Hospital, Oslo, Norway 6Servicio de Dermatología. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 7Department of Case: This girl had multiple admissions during the first Genetics. Cruces University Hospital. Biocruces Health 18 months of life for respiratory compromise requiring Research Institute, Barakaldo, Spain ventilatorsupport.Atage6yearsobesityandbrachydactyly led to a tentative diagnosis of Albright hereditary osteody- Introduction: Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD; strophy which was not confirmed molecularly. At age 2 OMIM#149730) syndrome is an autosomal dominant syn- years, a narrow thorax and wide ribs were noted. At age 6 drome with variable expression characterized by dental years, additional skeletal findings included: brachydactyly, anomaliesanddigitalmalformations, hypoplasia,aplasiaor short wide metacarpals and metatarsals with cone-shaped atresia of the lacrimal and salivary system with cup shaped epiphyses, bilateral iliac hypoplasia and increased antever- ears. Causal mutations have been described in FGF10, sion of the femoral necks. She had near complete lack of FGFR2, FGFR3 and TP63 genes. We present the clinical enamel of the incisal two thirds of all incisors and canines, andgenotypeapplyingNextGenerationSequencing(NGS) and abnormally shaped molars with enamel hypoplasia. By in two Spanish patients affected by LADD syndrome. wholeexomesequencinghomozygositywasdetectedinthe MaterialsandMethods:Subjects:Patient1(P1),maleof proband and heterozygosity in the parents for 3 years-old, with of short stature, dental anomalies, NM_020800.2(IFT80):c.1646_1648del p.(Leu549del). alacrimia and auricular dysplasia; father affected of short Discussion: Biallelic IFT80 mutations causing Jeune stature. Patient 2(P2), male of 16 moth-old with auricular asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy or short-rib polydactyly dysplasia, dental anomalies and scanty tears; mother syndrome type III have been reported in five individuals affected of ears and dental anomalies. NGS analysis: including a mesomelic stillborn with bent femurs, trident Libraries and massively sequencing were performed using acetabular roofs, short middle phalanges and metacarpals. standard protocol, SureSelect XTPanel Custom(Agilent) in Sharedfeaturesintheothersinclude:anarrowthorax,short aNextSeq(Illumina).Pathogenicvariantswerevalidatedby ribs, short bent femurs and brachydactyly. Abnormal teeth Sanger sequencing and segregation studies. and obesity have not been described previously in humans. Results: NGS revealed two heterozygous variants in However, studies in mice suggest that IFT80 may be FGFR2 (NM[[Unsupported Character - Codename &shy;]] involved in body weight control and in tooth development. [[Unsupported Character - Codename &shy;]]_022970): C.F. Rustad: None. K. Tveten: None. Ø.L. Holla: c.1875_1902del;p.R625fs, deletion that causes a premature None. Ø.L. Busk: None. E. Merckoll: None. H. stop signal (P1) and c.2165G>C;p.R722T, missense muta- Nordgarden: None. I. Mero: None. T.E. Prescott: None. tion (P2). These variants have not been previously described, but in silico prediction software indicated that E-P04.08 are found in a highly conserved region with predicted Identification of novel mutations in FGFR2 gene in two pathogenicity.Bothmutationsarelocatedinexon16inthe families with LADD syndrome by Next-Generation intracellulartyrosinekinasedomainofFGFR2affectingthe Sequencing tyrosine kinase activity of FGFR2. Conclusions:1.Wepresenttwonewmutations,extending M.C. Martínez-Romero1,2,3,M.J. Ballesta-Martínez1,2,4,V. the mutational spectrum of FGFR2. 2.Our findings support López-González1,2,4,M.Barreda-Sánchez2,5,L. I.Rodríguez- the implication of FGFR2 gene as responsible for LADD Peña4, M.T. Martínez-Menchón6, P.Sánchez-Pedreño6, G. syndrome suggesting a true hot spot for occurrence of Glover1,2,3,P. Carbonell1,2,3,B. Gener7, P.La Fuente7,E. mutations in this gene. Guillén-Navarro1,2,ygrupoGIEDE (Grupo deInvestigación M.C. Martínez-Romero: None. M.J. Ballesta-Martí- EspañoldeDisplasia Ectodérmica) nez: None. V. López-González: None. M. Barreda- Sánchez: None. L.I. Rodríguez-Peña: None. M.T. 1Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB), Martínez-Menchón: None. P. Sánchez-Pedreño: None. Murcia,Spain,2CIBERER,CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédica G.Glover:None.P.Carbonell:None.B.Gener:None.P. en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, La Fuente: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None.914 J.delPicchia E-P04.09 A. Gusina,S. Miasnikov,N.Gusina A rare hereditary connective tissue disease associated with the TGF-β signalling pathway:a case study of Loeys-Dietz NationalResearchandAppliedMedicineCentre“Motherand syndrome type 1 Child”, Minsk, Belarus M.BALASAR1, M.B. Oflaz2,G.D.Emlik3 Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MS) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disorder of the connective tissue, 1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, whichiscausedbymutationsinthegeneencodingfibrillin- Department ofMedicalGenetics,KONYA, Turkey,2Necmettin 1(FBN1).Uptodate,morethan3000mutationshavebeen Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of identified in FBN1 in relation to MS. Here we report about Pediatric Cardiology, KONYA, Turkey, 3Necmettin Erbakan two novel frameshift mutations found in family and University,MeramMedicalFaculty,DepartmentofRadiology, sporadic cases of MS. KONYA, Turkey Materials and Methods: Family case of MS presented with mother and daughter manifested aortic root dilatation, Background: Loeys-Dietz syndrome is a rare hereditary highmyopia,abnormalitiesoftheskeletalsystemincluding connective tissue disease associated with the transforming tall stature and arachnodactyly. Daughter also had lens growth factor beta (TGF-β) signalling pathway. This con- dislocation. Sporadic case of MS presented with patient dition ischaracterisedbyanautosomaldominant pattern of exhibited mostly skeletal features of MS with only minor inheritance. The global prevalence of Loeys-Dietz syn- involvement of cardiovascular and ocular systems. The dromeremainsunknown.Theclinicalfindingsaresimilarto genomic DNA from blood leukocytes of the patients was those of other TGF-β -related connective tissue disorders, isolated and the entire coding region and flanking intronic i.e., Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes. sequencesofFBN1wereamplifiedbyPCR.AmplifiedPCR Materials and Method: An eight-year-old male patient products were purified and sequenced directly by an ABI wasreferredtoourclinicwithadiagnosisofEhlers-Danlos 3500 Genetic Analyzer. syndrome. The patient had had previous surgery for Results: Sequencing of FBN1 in mother and daughter craniosynostosis, bilateral inguinal hernia and clubfoot. with classic MS revealed heterozygous single nucleotide The patient’s physical characteristics included low-set insertion in exon 38: c. 4640_4641insA. This mutation prominent ears, a high palate, dolichocephaly, pectus converts threonine to asparagine at amino acid 1547 and excavatum, skin-joint laxity, a translucent skin, micropenis terminates translation at codon 1551 (p.Thr1547Asnfs*5). and hypospadias. An ophthalmological examination A novel heterozygous one-base-pair deletion of thymidine revealed optic atrophy in the right eye. The patient was was found at nucleotide position 5155 in exon 42 demonstrated to have aortic and pulmonary artery root (c.5155delT) in sporadic case of MS. This deletion causes dilatation (+3 SD), mitral valve prolapse, scoliosis, dural aframeshiftofaminoacidsandresultsinatruncatedprotein ectasia, nasoethmoidal encephalocele, enophthalmos and (p.1719Cys>Alafs*174). cleft palate on radiological imaging. Conclusions: We identified two novel frameshift muta- Results: The patient was diagnosed with Loeys-Dietz tionsinFBN1.Toourknowledge,thesemutationshavenot syndrome type 1 as per the clinical and radiological been reported before in patients with MS. findings. TGFBR1 gene sequencing was performed and p. A. Gusina: None. S. Miasnikov: None. N. Ser241Leu(c.722C>T)heterozygotemutationwasdetected Gusina: None. in exon 4 of the TGFBR1 gene. Mutation was not seen in theparents.Geneticcounsellingwasprovidedtothefamily. E-P04.11 Conclusion: Genetic diseases associated with the TGF-β Exon deletions in FBN1 resulting in Marfan syndrome pathwayareknowntohavesimilarphenotypiceffects.Itis important to make the correct clinical and genetics A. Gusina,S. Miasnikov,N.Gusina diagnosis to ensure early diagnosis and treatment . This case is presented here to increase awareness of differential NationalResearchandAppliedMedicineCentre“Motherand diagnoses of Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Child”, Minsk, Belarus M. Balasar: None. M.B. Oflaz: None. G.D. Emlik: None. Introduction: Mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1) cause Marfan syndrome (MS), an autosomal dominant E-P04.10 connective tissue disorder. At present, more than 3000 Novel frameshift mutations in fibrillin-1 gene causing mutations have been identified in FBN1, with the vast Marfan syndrome majority being single-nucleotide substitutions, smallAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 915 deletions, and insertions. Here we report about two single- included missense variants within ADAMTS20 exon deletions found in patients with MS. (rs138035327), ARSD (rs78034736), BMP1 Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA samples from (rs368615556), CLDN18 (rs114998965), SELP 62patientswithsuspectedMSorMS-likephenotypeswere (rs754086574), TGFβ2 (rs773943154), TRIM45 screened using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplifi- (rs146244405), PCDHGA11 (rs138408376), PLEC cation (MLPA). MLPA analysis was carried out using (rs138924815) and SPARC (rs41290587), and one stop SALSA kits P065 (MRC-Holland, lot 0506, 0305, 0205) gain variant within WDR89 (rs944955056). and P066-2 lot (MRC-Holland, lot 0508). Amplification Conclusions: Future studies will evaluate the shortlisted products were run on ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer. variants by replicating in the Malta Osteoporotic Fracture Results: Two gross heterozygous deletions were identi- Study-acase-controlcollectionofmorethan1000Maltese fied in FBN1. Exon 3 deletion which was previously postmenopausal women and other extended Maltese reported was found in 17-year old male patient with tall pedigrees so as to determine association with osteoporosis stature, dolichostenomelia,arachnodactyly andmitral valve and low-trauma fracture risk at different anatomical sites. prolapse. Novel exon 49 deletion was detected in 25-year Top candidates will in turn be assessed using functional old female patient with classic MS manifested aortic root studies. dilatation, lens dislocation, high myopia, abnormalities of C.Cilia:None.J.Vassallo:None.A.Xuereb-Anastasi: the skeletal system including tall stature, arachnodactyly None. M.M. Formosa: None. and pectus carinatum. Conclusions: We identified two single-exon deletions in E-P04.14 patients with MS. To our knowledge, 49 exon deletion has Identification of a new FGRF2 mutation using NGS not been reported before in patients with MS. coupled gene panel testing in Pfeiffer syndrome A. Gusina: None. S. Miasnikov: None. N. Gusina: None. B.Kocsis-Deák1,K.Árvai2,V.Klujber2,B.Balla1,2,B.Tóbiás1,2, J.Kósa1,2,P. Lakatos1,2 E-P04.13 Searching for osteoporosis genes: The use of WGS in an 11st Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University, extended Maltese family with osteoporosis Budapest, Hungary, 2PentaCore Laboratory, Budapest, Hungary C. Cilia1,J.Vassallo2,A. Xuereb-Anastasi1,M.M.Formosa1 Introduction: The skeletal dysplasias are an extremely 1DepartmentofAppliedBiomedicalScience,FacultyofHealth heterogeneous group of conditions that affect bone devel- Sciences,UniversityofMalta,Msida,Malta,2Neuroendocrine opment. They encompass over 400 disorders and most are Clinic, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta the result of genetic defects. Pfeiffer syndrome is inherited inanautosomal dominantpattern.Itischaracterizedbythe Introduction: Osteoporosis is a complex metabolic and premature fusion of certain skull bones. This early fusion skeletal disease having a strong genetic background. preventsthe skull from growing normally and concernsthe Indeed, heritability of bone mineral density (BMD) in twin shapeoftheheadandface.Herewearepresentingacaseof and family studies ranges from 50 to 85%. The aim of the a5monthsoldgirl,withhealthyparentsandwithaskeletal study was to identify known and/or novel genes and gene phenotype. variants that play a role in the susceptibility of primary Materials and Methods: Total genomic DNA was osteoporosis in an extended Maltese family. extracted from her salive sample and analyzed with a Materials and Methods: A 2-generation family having comprehensiveskeletaldysplasiasanddisordersgenepanel multiple relatives with osteoporosis (T-score: <-2.5 or Z- test, that contains the most relevant genes for a skeletal score:<-2.0)atthespineorhipwererecruited.Biochemical phenotype. We have targeted all of the coding excons with analysis was performed to exclude other bone diseases. exon-intron boundaries of 186 genes using PCR-based Whole genome sequencing was performed on 12 members librarypreparationmethod.Sequencingreadsweremapped and comprehensive filtering strategies were carried out on tothereferencegenome(hg19)andaftervariantcallingthe the single nucleotide variant and indel files. In silico variants were classified based on ESP, ExAc, ClinVar and modelling and prediction tools were used to determine HGMD information. potential causality of the variants. Results: Gene panel test identified a likely pathogenic Results: Eleven shortlisted variants segregating in a heterozygous mutation in the FGFR2 gene (c.940- dominant inheritance pattern were identified in the affected 4_945delCTAGGCCGCC)whichencompassthesplicesite relatives having a minor allele frequency of ≤2%. Variants and two codons of exon 8. Currently, this mutation is not916 J.delPicchia present in the databases, but it overlaps with other M.C.Ergoren:None.L.Aliyeva:None.E.Eren:None. mutations, which are connected to Pfeiffer syndrome. E.Manara:None.S.Paolacci:None.G.Mocan:None.S. Conclusions:Multigenepaneltestscouldbeveryhelpful G. Temel: None. M. Bertelli: None. tool in cases, when the patients phenotype overlap with different syndromes.Weconcludedthat,theFGFR2c.940- E-P04.16 4_945delCTAGGCCGCC heterozygous mutation is the Two patients with isolated segmental overgrowth - cause of the Pfeiffer syndome. candidates for PIK3CA gene mutation testing B. Kocsis-Deák: None. K. Árvai: None. V. Klujber: None.B.Balla:None.B.Tóbiás:None.J.Kósa:None.P. V. Curtisova Lakatos: None. DepartmentofHumanGenetics,FakultnínemocniceOlomouc, E-P04.15 Olomouc, Czech Republic yPsychomotor delay in a child with Achondroplasia Wereporttwounrelatedboyswithnormalkaryotypeandan M.C.Ergoren1,L.Aliyeva2,E.Eren2,E.Manara3,S.Paolacci3, isolatedsegmentalovergrowth.Thisispresenttogetherwith G.Mocan1,S. G.Temel2, M.Bertelli3 a2-3syndactylyinthe1st-3rddigitofthehandofpatient1 and in the 2-4th digit of the foot in patient 2. In both cases 1Near East University Faculty of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus, the malformation was present at birth and is progressive. 2Uludag University Faculty of Medicine, Bursa, Turkey, There are no vascular lesions, no dysmorphic features and 3MAGI Euregio, Bolzano, Italy no delay in psychomotor development. There are no areas of lipoatrophy. The growth parameters (height, weight and This rare autosomal-dominant disorder achondroplasia headcircumference)arebetweenthe75thand90thcentileat (ACh) is caused by a gain-of-function mutation in the theage of3 years in patient 1 and onthe 50thcentileatthe gene encoding the type 3 receptor for fibroblast growth ageof21monthsinpatient2.MRIscanoftheaffectedfoot factor (FGFR3); in more than 95% of cases, the mutation inpatient2revealedwideningofthedistalsegmentofdigits is G380R. Hydrocephalus, a narrow foramen magnum, 2-4 and a hypertrophy of the adipose tissue. Segmental spinal deformity, and spinal canal stenosis can cause overgrowth has been shown to result from somatic muta- psychomotor delay problems, leading to disabilities in tions of the PIK3CA gene and is a feature of CLOVES locomotion, communication, and learning. The current syndrome and Fibroadipose Hyperplasia. In our patients, study presents the case of a two-year-old male with Fibroadipose Hyperplasia seems a more likely diagnosis. clinical manifestations suggestive of ACh including, We plan to perform PIK3CA gene mutation testing on the relative macrocephaly, mild narrow thorax, long body, tissue of the affected foot in patient 2 following a planned frontal blossing, flatted nose, simian line on thelefthand, operation. shortness on the tips of the fingers, and shortness of rhi- V. Curtisova: None. zome in the limbs. Hypotonicity also was presented, he could control his head control, however, he could not sit, E-P04.17 turning back without support. He could successfully pick Ischiospinal Dysostosis in a boy with a novel homozygous up and hold the objects with his thumb and index fingers. missense mutation in the BMPER gene He speaks with words instead of making full sentences. Although a clinical and radiologic ACh has been con- A. Kablan1,B. Mat2,S. G.Temel3, Y.Alanay4 sidered since the admission, there was no cervico medullary compression or hydrocephalus, therefore 1University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of sequencinganalysiscarriedouttounderstandthecauseof Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 2Medical Student, School of observed skeletal dysplasia due to the predominance of Medicine,AcibademMehmetAliAydınlarUniversity,Istanbul, neurological findings. Sequencing analysis has revealed Turkey, 3Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Department that a heterozygous G1138A mutation within the FGFR3 of Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 4Pediatric Genetics Unit, genewasdetected,confirmingthediagnosisofACh.Here Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Acibadem we report the first achondroplasia patient with common Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University, İstanbul, Turkey FGFR3 gene G1138A mutation with psychomotor delay while cervicomedullary compression and hydrocephalus Ischiospinal dysostosis (ISD) is a polytopic dysostosis are not presented. We concluded that the neurological characterized by minor facial dysmorphism, ischial hypo- manifestations of pediatric patients with Achondroplasia plasia, short stature with a short spine caused by vertebral are frequent and very important. anomalies including hypoplasia of the lumbosacral spine,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 917 scoliosisandsegmentaldefectsofthecervicothoracicspine development (2-3 words in Hindi) with normal receptive and occasionaly associated with nephroblastomatosis. ISD languageandgestures,markedlydelayedboneage,delayed is similar to, but milder than the lethal/semilethal condition motor milestones, bilateral mild-moderate conductive hear- termed diaphanospondylodysostosis (DSD), which is asso- ing impairment (previous chronic otitis media?), umbilical ciated with homozygous or compound heterozygous muta- hernia, surgery for bilateral zonular cataract (at 8 ys), tions of bone morphogenetic protein-binding endothelial normal echocardiography and brain MRI. On physical regulator protein (BMPER) gene. Here we report on a 3- examination triangular facies, low anterior hairline, pro- year and 7 month-old boy with ISD a third child born to a truding ears, widenasalbase, low hanging columella, short consanguineous couple. He was born at 36 weeks with a philtrum,widemouth,thinandstraightupperlipvermilion, birth weight of 1600 gr and delivered via cesarian section. mandibular prognathia, short neck, brachydactyly, broad The main clinical findings, high forehead, micrognathia, fingertips, clinodactyly of the 5th finger of both hands, broad bifid nose, long philtrum, bilateral ezotropia, stra- relatively broad thumbs and halluces were noted. Direct bismus, hyperlordosis, short trunk and short stature. sequencing of the two 3'-terminal exons of SRCAP ExtremitIes were normal. He is ambulatory, walks with identified the recurrent de novo mutation p.(Arg2444Ter) severehyperlordosisandneckhyperextensionbalancinghis (NM_006662.2:c.7330C>T). posture. He prefers to bend his body forward when he eat, Conclusion:Wereportthesecond SRCAP-mutatedFHS lookisatobjects.Hehasmildstridorandahoarsevoice,yet patientofIndiandescent.WhileFHSseemstobeveryrare nas no tracheostomy. Spinal computerized tomography based on current literature data, we believe that a low (CT) showed sacrum agenesis, thoracolumbar lordosis, threshold for molecular testing might uncover a significant vertebralcleftformationandposteriorfusiondefectsinlow rate of underdiagnosis worldwide among referrals to lumbarvertebrates.KidneyCTwasnormal.Sequencingof tertiary-level centres for short stature. BMPER gene in the proband revealed the presence of one A.M. Spinelli: None. M. La Bianca: None. E. pathogenic homozygous missense variant c.1166T>G, this Rubinato: None. A. Morgan: None. A. D'Eustacchio: variantleadstoap.Val389GlychangeinBMPER.Despite None. V. Guastalla: None. F. Guidolin: None. G. severeskeletalfindings,thisambulatorypatientextendsthe Parmeggiani: None. F. Faletra: None. I. Bruno: None. phenotypic spectrum of BMPER-related skeletal disorders. A.Kablan:None.B.Mat:None.S.G.Temel:None.Y. Alanay: None. E-P05 Cardiovascular disorders E-P04.18 E-P05.01 Whenshortstatureleavesyouspeechless:Floating-Harbor Andersen-Tawil syndrome revealed by next generation syndrome sequencing in a patient with Long QT syndrome A. M.Spinelli1, M.LaBianca2, E.Rubinato3, A.Morgan3,A. S.Josifovska1,2,3,R.Vazharova4,2,L.Balabanski2,M.Malinov2, D'Eustacchio2,V.Guastalla3,F.Guidolin3,G.Parmeggiani4,F. A. Kaneva5,S. Panov1, D.Toncheva3 Faletra2,I.Bruno2 1LaboratoryofMolecularBiology,FacultyofNaturalSciences 1University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Mathematics, “Ss.Cyril and Methodius” University, and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 4U.O. Genetica Medica, 2Genome Centre, GARH “Malinov”, Sofia, Bulgaria, AUSL Romagna, Cesena, Italy 3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,MedicalUniversityofSofia, Sofia,Bulgaria,4DepartmentofBiology,MedicalGeneticsand Introduction: Floating-Harbor syndrome (FHS) is a rare Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Sofia University “St. cause of syndromic short stature and expressive language Kliment Ohridski”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Pediatric delay.Tothebestofourknowledge74molecularlydefined Cardiology, National Heart Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria cases have been published to date. Casereport:Werecentlyre-evaluateda10-year-oldboy, Introduction: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is characterized born at term to healthy unrelated Indian parents. Weight at by prolonged QT interval because of longer repolarization birth was unknown. Paternal and maternal ages at of the heart after a heartbeat leading to increased risk of conception were 33 and 19 years respectively. Main tachyarrhythmias that trigger fainting, cardiac arrest or findings in his past medical history were proportionate sudden death. Andersen-Tawil syndrome (LQTS7), a form short stature (-4 to -4.5 SD) with microcephaly (-3.5 to -4 of LQTS, is an autosomal-dominant multisystem channe- SD) and poor response to GH, nearly absent speech lopathy, characterized by a highly variable triad: periodic918 J.delPicchia paralysis, ventricular arrhythmias and distinctive physical functionofpotassiumchannelschangingtheregularflowof features.Itisincrediblyrare,onlymorethan100caseshave potassiumionsinskeletalandcardiacmusclethatcancause been reported worldwide, about 60% caused by mutations periodic paralysis and irregular heart rhythm.In this study, inthegeneKCNJ2(Type1)andtherestbeingunexplained wehaveperformedthecardiacgene-panelsequencingfora (Type 2). patient who has atypical face and limb abnormalities. The Materials and Methods: The index patientis a 14 years patient also has bidirectional ventricular tachycardia and oldboywithLQTS,life-threateningventriculartachycardia clinically pre-diagnosed with ATS. We identified a novel andimplantedcardioverterdefibrillator.Patient’sDNAwas homozygousmissensemutationinKCNJ2 (NM_000891.2) analysed by targeted NGS of 176 genes using TruSight gene p.V200M (c.598G>A) which is not found in clinical Cardio gene panel (Illumina). Variants were validated by databases such as ClinVar or Human Genome Database Sanger sequencing. (HGMD). In silico analysis of this mutation indicated Results: Rare, pathogenic variant was detected in gene damaging functional effects. Further in vivo and in vitro KCNJ2 (Potassium channel, inwardly rectifying, subfamily analyseswillhelptoestablishthecausalityofthismutation J, member 2) in chromosome 17: g.68171832C>T, for ATS. NM_000891.2:c.652C>T, NP_000882.1:p.Arg218Trp. M.D.Sozuguzel:None.F.B.Isik:None.N.Genc:None. The KCNJ2 protein product forms a inwardly rectifying E.F.Caralan:None.Z.Dogru:None.C.Akdeniz:None. potassiumchannel ofcrucialsignificance thatregulates cell H. Cangul: None. excitability of cardiac and skeletal muscles. Arg218Trp substitution is within the C-terminal domain of the protein E-P05.03 andinheterozygouspatients,asinourcase,leadstolossof Definitive diagnosis of a family with Andersen-Tawil function and dominant-negative effect as previously con- Syndrome (ATS) using targeted clinical exome sequencing cluded by functional tests. Conclusions:Defining thegeneticdiagnosismay help to N.Marinakis1,R. Pons2, K.Kosma1,E. Drakou2,J. Arditi2,P. distinguish Andersen-Tawil syndrome from other forms of Constantoulakis3,A. Oikonomaki4,G.Christopoulou4, H. periodic paralysis and prolonged QT interval and further- Fryssira1,J.Traeger-Synodinos1 moreprovideappropriatetreatmentandgeneticcounselling in affected families. 1Department of Medical Genetics, National & Kapodistrian S. Josifovska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Bala- UniversityofAthens,St.Sophia’sChildren’sHospital,Athens, banski: None. M. Malinov: None. A. Kaneva: None. S. Greece, 21st Department of Pediatrics, National & Panov: None. D. Toncheva: None. Kapodistrian University of Athens, St. Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 3BioAnalytica- E-P05.02 GenotyposS.A.,Athens,Greece,4ScienceLabsM.S.A.,Athens, A novel missense KCNJ2 gene mutation associated with Greece Andersen Tawil Syndrome Introduction: We present a family in whom targeted clin- M.D.Sozuguzel,F.B.Isik,N.Genc,E.F.Caralan,Z.Dogru, ical exome sequencing supported definitive diagnosis of a C. Akdeniz, H.Cangul rare hereditary multisystem disorder, Andersen-Tawil Syndrome (ATS). Medipol University, İstanbul, Turkey Materials and Methods: A boy and his mother were referred to the Department of Medical Genetics, Athens Andersen Tawil Syndrome (ATS) is a rare genetic disorder University. Both had similar clinical findings with short which is characterized by muscle weakness, ventricular stature, dysmorphic features and arrhythmias. Laboratory arrhythmias and prolonged QT interval. Among clinical genetic investigation involved classical karyotype analysis findings are physical abnormalities such as low set ears, (negative),followedbysemi-targetedExomeSequencingin short stature, scaliolis, widely spaced eyes and neurocog- the proband, using Sophia Genetics Clinical Exome nitive abnormalities such as mild learning disabilities and Solution (CES) and Nextera Rapid Capture Exome abstract reasoning.KCNJ2 gene mutations cause the 60 (Illumina), run on a NextSeq-500 (Illumina). The CES percentofATScases.TheproteinencodedbyKCNJ2gene panel includes 4900 genes (114.405 exons). Data was is an integral membrane protein and inward-rectifier type evaluated with two bioinformatics pipelines: SOPHiA potassium channel. This channel allows potassium to flow DDM® (Sophia Genetics) and VarAFT 2.11 (http://varaft. intoacellwhichparticipatesinestablishingactionpotential eu). waveform and excitability of neuronal and muscle tissues. Results:Aknownpathogenicmutationp.Arg218Trpwas Mutations in the KCNJ2 gene alter the structure and identified in the KCNJ2 gene, previously reported in ATS.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 919 The variant in both the proband and his mother was woolly hair. Despite the absence of signs of ARVD in confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Chr 17 (GRCh37): him, our multidisciplinary team agreed to perform a pre- c.652C>T, NM_000891). dictive test, especially since he practises athletics at Discussion: The protein product of KCNJ2, Kir2.1, competitivelevel.Sangersequencingdetectedthefamilial belongs to a potassium-channel family, expressed at high c.6850C>T variant in him. In conclusion, in this family levelsinheart,skeletalmuscleandneuraltissue.Mutations variant c.6850C>T is responsible for ARVD suggesting interferewiththefunctionofKir2.1incellexcitability,and an autosomal hereditary pattern, excluding miocarditis. p.Arg218Trp is located in the domain critical for binding We stress the importance of predictive test in phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP ), an activator young people, even in the absence of cardiac signs, 2 ofKir2.1,wherebyweakerchannel-PIP interactionsreduce accordingtotheriskthatfrequentexerciseacceleratesthe 2 current.ATSischaracterizedbyatriadofclinicalfindings, developmentofage-relatedpenetrance andprogressionto including muscle weakness (periodic paralysis), arrhyth- heart failure. mias and dysmorphic features, although expression is B. Boschi: None. L. Candita: None. E. Contini: None. variable. CES can support definitive diagnosis in patients F.Girolami:None.U.Ricci:None.S.Frusconi:None.F. with cardiopathy of unknown etiology, contributing to Cutinelli: None. A. Marzullo: None. M. Targetti: None. precise prognosis, systematic monitoring, and when appro- I. Olivotto: None. E. Pelo: None. priate, identification of other family members. N. Marinakis: None. R. Pons: None. K. Kosma: None. E-P05.06 E. Drakou: None. J. Arditi: None. P. Constantoulakis: CTNNA3 gene mutation in a patient withcongenital None. A. Oikonomaki: None. G. Christopoulou: None. pulmonary valve stenosis H. Fryssira: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. H.Elghezal1,I.Ben abdallah1,B. Melaiki1,T. Momenah2,S. E-P05.04 Johansson2, A.Alhashem1, A.Abdulmoogaith1, M.Al amro1 Autosomal dominant inherited DSP mutation in an Italian family 1Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Prince Sultan Cardiac Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia B.Boschi1,L.Candita1,E.Contini1,F.Girolami1,U.Ricci1,S. Frusconi1,F.Cutinelli1,A.Marzullo1,M.Targetti2,I.Olivotto2, ALPHA-T-CATENINisacelladhesionmoleculecodedby E. Pelo1 the human CTNNA3 gene located on chromosome 10q 21.3.Mutationsinthisgenearereportedinonefamilywith 1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, familial, 13 2Unit Cardiomiopatie, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy (ARVD13) also known as dilated cadiomyopathy 13. Its main clinical features are structural and functional Wereportthecaseofa43yearoldwomanwithanearliest abnormalities of the right ventricle with progressive fibro- diagnosis of miocarditis. Cardiac MRI detected edema fatty myocardial replacement and electrocardiographic andephicardicanteroseptallategadoliniumenhancement. changes, causing arrhythmias and sudden death. We report Clinical evalution confirmed palmoplantar keratoderma hereacaseof192Kbdeletioninvolvingthetotalityofexon (PPK) referred since childhood. PPK were also present in 10ofCTNNA3genedetectedbyArray-basedComparative her sister died at the age of 40 for sudden death during Genomic Hybridization using 180 k microarray (Agilent physicalactivity.Inordertomakeadifferentialdiagnosis technologies, Santa clara, CA) in one year old male patient between miocarditis and desmin-related cardiomyopathy, presenting a congenital pulmonary valve stenosis (PVS) we performed NGS analysis of a panel of inherited heart- with mild right ventricular dilation but without arrhythmia disease genes which identified the pathogenic variant oranyothermalformation.Thepatientwastheresultofthe c.6850C>T p.(Arg2284*) in heterozygosis in DSP gene. third conception of a healthy non-consanguineous spouse. The variant c.6850C>T was previously reported in one The 1st and 2ed born were a 4 and 2-year-old normal individual with ARVD (Arrhythmogenic right ventricular females. PVS is one of the most common types of con- dysplasia) (Fressart et al., 2010) and also in a child with genitalheartdisease(CHD)aftercardiacseptaldefects.The Carvajal/Naxos syndromes (CNS) in compound hetero- genetic contributors to PVS are not as well defined even if zygosiswithapathogeneticvariantinDSPgene(Antonov familialformsofnon-syndromicPVShavebeenreportedin et al., 2015). CNS is characterized by woolly hair, pal- the literature. Only PTPN11 gene mutations were reported moplantar keratoderma and cardiomyopathy usually with in 50% of cases of PVS associated with Noonan syndrome autosomal recessive and rarely dominant hereditary pat- but never reported in isolated PVS. We suggest here that tern (IKelleretal.,2012).Proband’ssonshowsPPKand CTNNA3 gene mutation can be associated with large920 J.delPicchia phenotype spectrum of CHD including non syndromic E-P05.10 congenital PVS. The spectrum of associated congenital malformations in H. Elghezal: None. I. Ben abdallah: None. B. Melaiki: Down syndrome: a retrospective Lithuanian cohort study None. T. Momenah: None. S. Johansson: None. A. Alhashem: None. A. Abdulmoogaith: None. M. Al E. M.Blaytė1,V. G.Samsonė1,A.Matulevičienė2,3,B. amro: None. Aleksiūnienė2,3,B.Burnytė2,3,E. Dagytė2,3,B. Tumienė2,3, A. Utkus2 E-P05.08 Case report of familial dilated cardiomyopathy caused by 1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, LMNA mutation Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of D.P.Yermakovich1,L. N.Sivitskaya1,T. G.Vaikhanskaya2,A. Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius, D.Liaudanski1,T. V. Kurushka2, N.G.Danilenko1,O.G. Lithuania, 3Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Davydenko1 Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius, Lithuania 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Minsk, Belarus, 2Republican Scientific and Practical Center of Cardiology, Introduction: Down Syndrome (DS), affecting approxi- Minsk, Belarus mately 1 in 800 live births worldwide, is commonly asso- ciatedwithcongenitalheartdisease(CHD).However,there Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is an autosomal dominant is no consensus which anomalies are predominant in DS. inherited disease caused by mutations of several genes, We investigated DS cohort focusing on congenital heart among them LMNA. It encodes lamins A/C necessary for defects and their associations with extracardiac functioning and structural integrity of the nucleus. The malformations. LMNA mutation carriers have a poor prognosis of life due Materials and Methods: A retrospective study enrolled to rapidly progressive hearth involvement. patients diagnosed with DS from 2015 to 2017 at the We describe a male who developed dyspnea, weakness Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius and abnormal heart rhythm at age of 35. During the next University. Data of 65 patients (58.5% males, 41.5% 6 months, heart failure symptoms progressed rapidly. females) was analysed and the major congenital anomalies Negative myocardial remodeling and progressive heart in infants with DS were examined. Statistical analysis was failure were observed despite the biventricular resynchro- performed with SPSS Version 17.0 statistic software nization therapy with optimal medical management, so package. heart transplantation was accomplished. Results:Trisomycreatedthroughmeioticnondisjunction We performed NGS using TruSight Cardiomyopathy event was the most common cause (93.8%), with the Sequencing panel (Illumina Inc.) and identified LMNA unbalanced translocations and mosaic variants accounting variant c.565C>T(rs267607626), leading to amino acidic for the remaining cases. The most common associated change p.R189W. The variant was indicated as pathoge- anomalieswereCHD,42cases(64.6%),followedbyvision netic in several predictor programs. disorders(13.8%)anddigestivesystemanomalies(12.3%). The analysis of pedigrees has been conducted by the The most common cardiac anomaly was patent ductus Sanger sequencing. The proband and two elder brothers arteriosus(38.5%),followedbyatrialseptaldefect(35.4%), inherited p.R189W from a father who was died suddenly atrioventricular septal defect (15.4%) and ventricular septal duetoDCMattheageof65.Thebrothersalsopassedaway defect (7.7%). 14 children (21.5%) with CHD underwent abruptly at the age of 28 and 31. Investigation of 25 years- cardiac surgery within the first year of life. The other oldnephew,whoisap.R189Wcarrieraswell,didn’treveal common findings were muscle hypotonia, congenital any cardiac pathology. infections and typical dysmorphic features. We suggest the identified LMNA variant is associated Conclusion: We observed a particularly high prevalence with DCM. The family history reconstruction showed a of congenital heart defects, vision disorders and digestive high prevalence of sudden cardiac death and a wide age systemanomalies.Theresultsweresimilartofindingsfrom range of heart involvement for p.R189W. otherstudies.Thus,investigationduringtheneonatalperiod D.P. Yermakovich: None. L.N. Sivitskaya: None. T.G. and appropriate interventions are essential to improve Vaikhanskaya: None. A.D. Liaudanski: None. T.V. quality of life and to decrease mortality rates. Kurushka: None. N.G. Danilenko: None. O.G. E.M. Blaytė: None. V.G. Samsonė: None. A. Matule- Davydenko: None. vičienė:None.B.Aleksiūnienė:None.B.Burnytė:None. E. Dagytė: None. B. Tumienė: None. A. Utkus: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 921 E-P05.11 A.DeLuca1,V.Guida1,T.Biagini2,T.Mazza2,H.Hozhabri1,F. Hploinsufficiency as a mechanism of DSP related diseases PiceciSparascio1,C. Gaudio3, C.Letizia4,M.A. Russo5,N. Galea6,C. Chimenti7,A. Frustaci7 O.Freireich, O.Weiss,S.Zeligson, O.Lobel, M. BenUziyahu, E. Levy-Lahad,R. Segel 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, 2BioinformaticsUnit,CasaSollievodellaSofferenzaHospital, Jerusalem, Israel IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Department of Cardiovascular, Respiratory, Nephrologic, Anesthesiologic Introduction: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardio- and Geriatric Sciences, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, myopathy (ARVC) can lead to sudden death in otherwise 4Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Secondary healthy young individuals. ARVC is characterized by Hypertension, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 5IRCCS San variable expressivity even within families. 45–50% of Raffaele Pisana, and MEBIC Consortium, San Raffaele Rome ARVC cases are caused by mutations in genes encoding Open University, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Radiological, desmosomes, intercellular junctions that anchor inter- Oncological and Pathological Sciences, Sapienza University, mediate filaments to the plasma membrane, and have both Rome, Italy, 7Department of Cardiovascular, Respiratory, structural and signaling functions. Nephrologic,Anesthesiologic andGeriatricSciences, Sapienza A broad spectrum of point mutations in DSP (desmopla- University, Rome, Italy kin), a desmosome component, cause ARVC8 (MIM# 607450) or other OMIM phenotypes (MIM# 605676, Normal 0 14 false false false IT JA X-NONE /* Style 615821, 609638, 612908, 607655) that include at least one Definitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- of the following: ARVC, cardiomyopathy, tooth agenesis, Tabella normale"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle- skin disease (keratoderma, keratosis palmoplantaris, epider- colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-prior- molysisbullosa)orhairdefects.Bothautosomalrecessiveand ity:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in autosomal dominant inheritance has been reported, so it is 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bot- unclearwhetherlossofDSPfunctionistheunderlyingdefect. tom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font- Materials and Methods: Chromosomal Microarray size:12.0pt; font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family: Analysis (CMA), (Affymetrix CytoScan750K array, Cambria; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi- Thermo Fisher Scientific, Santa Clara, Ca.) was performed font-family:Cambria;mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}A in an amniocentesis sample obtained because of advanced novel a-actin gene (ACTC1) mutation is reported as cose- maternal age. gregatingforfamilialhypertrophiccardiomyopathy(fHCM) Results: We identified a 286kbp deletion, fully encom- and left ventricular (LV) myocardial noncompaction with passing DSP. Family history was found to include a transmural crypts (TC). In an Italian family of nine indivi- cardiomyopathy-related death, as well as wooly hair in duals, four subjects, aged 10, 14, 43 and 46 years, three several relatives. The DSP deletion segregated with wooly presenting abnormal ECG changes, dyspnea and palpita- hair in family members. Cardiovascular examination is tion, and one with recurrent cerebral ischemic attack, undergoing to determine its segregation. underwent2-dimensionalecho,cardiacmagneticresonance, Conclusions: This is the first evidence for whole gene Holter monitoring, and next-generation sequencing (NGS) deletion of DSP causing an ARVC-related disorder. Our analysis. Two patients with ventricular tachycardia under- results implicate haploinsufficiency as a mechanism of went a cardiac invasive study, including coronary with LV DSP-related diseases, and coupled with previous reports, angiographyandendomyocardialbiopsy.Inalltheaffected suggest dosage sensitivity with more severe manifestations members, ECG showed right bundle branch block and left in cases with biallelic mutations. Furthermore we recom- anterior hemiblock with age-related prolongation of QRS mend CMA testing for unresolved ARVC cases. duration. Two-dimensional echo and cardiac magnetic O.Freireich:None.O.Weiss:None.S.Zeligson:None. resonance documented LV myocardial noncompaction in O.Lobel:None.M.BenUziyahu:None.E.Levy-Lahad: all,andinthreeaprogressiveLVhypertrophyupto22-mm None. R. Segel: None. maximalwallthickness.Coronaryarterieswerenormal.LV angiography showed transmural crypts progressing to E-P05.12 spongeous myocardial transformation with LV dilatation Novel a-Actin Gene Mutation p.(Ala21Val) Causing and dysfunction in the oldest subject. At histology and Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy, Myocardial electron microscopy, detachment of myocardiocytes were Noncompaction, and Transmural Crypts. Clinical- associated with cell and myofibrillar disarray and degrada- Pathologic Correlation tion of intercalated discs causing disanchorage of922 J.delPicchia myofilaments to cell membrane. NGS showed in affected hepatocellular diseases.Financial grant from University for members an unreported p.(Ala21Val) mutation of ACTC1. Potential for Excellence is highly acknowledged. Novelp.(Ala21Val)mutationofACTC1causesmyofibrillar M. Monu: None. G. Gandhi: None. and intercalated disc alteration leading to fHCM and LV myocardial noncompaction with TC.<!--EndFragment--> E-P05.16 A. De Luca: None. V. Guida: None. T. Biagini: None. Hypertension among Italian high school students: genetic T. Mazza: None. H. Hozhabri: None. F. Piceci Spar- and environmental factors. Results from HYGEF project ascio: None. C. Gaudio: None. C. Letizia: None. M.A. Russo: None. N. Galea: None. C. Chimenti: None. A. L. Zagato1,C. Lanzani1,E. Messaggio1, L.Citterio1, S.Delli Frustaci: None. Carpini1,E.Brioni1,M.Simonini1,S.Fontana1,C.Magnaghi1, F. Nistri2,G.Santini2,S. Bianchi3,S. Lenti4,V.Campese5, R. E-P05.15 Bigazzi2, P.Manunta1 Genetic damage and lipid peroxidation in patients with Hypercholesterolemia 1IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 2ASL Nord- Ovest, Livorno, Italy, 3Ospedale San Donato, Arezzo, Italy, M.Monu,G.Gandhi 4Ospedale San Donato, Grottaglie (TA), Italy, 5Keck Hospital of USC, Los Angeles, CA, United States Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India Background: Obesity has increased among Italian teen- Introduction:Genetic and environmental factors are agers predisposing them to hypertension (HT) and cardio- important contenders for predisposition to hypercholester- vascular diseases. Environmental and genetic factors may olemia . High levels of low density lipoproteins(LDL-C) account differently in different regions of Italy. may induce an inflammatory response and its atherogenic Aims - Enrol 3,000 high school students in 3 regions of effects may produce significant quantities of reactive oxy- Italy (Lombardy, Tuscany and Apulia) in order to: gen species,resulting in oxidative stress. This oxidative - determine the prevalence of HT and obesity; stress alongwith prolonged medication can induce genetic - perform the genetic characterization of some HT damage and lipid peroxidation by oxidising the candidate loci; biomolecules. -searchfornewurinarymarkersusefulforanearlyrenal Materials and Methods:To investigate the state of damage detection. genetic damage and lipid peroxidation in patients with Materials and Methods: Blood pressure (BP), anthro- hypercholesterolemia, a case-control study was carried out. pometricvalues,asurveyondietaryhabitsof2960students Patients(n=50;20-40y) fromlocalhospitalsandage-,sex- and their parents have been collected. Genomic DNAs, and socioeconomic status- matched healthy controls from extracted from saliva (by OrageneG500, DNAGenotek), general population (n=50; 20-40y) formed the study group have been genotyped by OpenArray Technology (Thermo- under Informed Consent after approval of the study by the Fisher Scientific) for Adducin and Endogenous Ouabain Institutional Ethical Clearance Committee. Venous blood (ADD-EO) pathway genes. samples were used for serum separation and MDA levels Results:Regionaldifferencesboth forestimatedsodiuria (Malondialdehyde:by-product of lipid peroxidation) were (p<0.001) and SBP values (p<0.005) have been observed. determined. DNA damage was investigated in peripheral BP in the whole sample significantly correlated both with blood leukocytes of the subjects using comet assay. BMI (p <0.0001) and sodiuria (p <0.0001). Children of Results:Statistical analyses revealed that MDA levels hypertensiveparents(34%)showedhigherSBPvaluesthan were significantly higher (p=0.000) in patients (2.76 their peers with negative familiarity (p = 0.019). ±0.16 μmol/l) as compared to that in controls (1.45 Subjects carrying mutated variants of ADD1 and ADD2 ±0.08 μmol/l). A significant increase in damage frequency genes showed greater excretion of urinary Na compared to (94.75±4.89;p=0.050), damage index(144.22±107.86;p= wild-type ones (p = 0.015). LSS gene variants associate to 0.001) and per cent DNA in tail(44.85±0.89;p=0.000) BP. Salt excretion is significantly reduced in subjects were observed in patients. Correlation analysis revealed a carrying a variant of HSD3β2 gene (p=0.004). significant positive association of LDL-C with damage Conclusions:Theresultsobtainedconfirmtheroleofthe index(p=0.050) and MDA(p=0.000)and negative asso- geneticnetworkADD-EOandallowtoidentifyinteractions ciation of HDL-C with MDA(p=0.001). between environmental factors (eating habits) and genetic Conclusion:High LDL-C levels induces oxidative stress polymorphisms linked to HT. and genetic damage in the patients and thus requires Funded study: PE-2011-02346988 managementsoastoreduce theriskfor cardiovascular andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 923 L. Zagato: None. C. Lanzani: None. E. Messaggio: 1University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, None. L. Citterio: None. S. Delli Carpini: None. E. 2Medical Faculty Maribor, University Maribor, Maribor, Brioni: None. M. Simonini: None. S. Fontana: None. C. Slovenia Magnaghi: None. F. Nistri: None. G. Santini: None. S. Bianchi: None. S. Lenti: None. V. Campese: None. R. Introduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis has sig- Bigazzi: None. P. Manunta: None. nificantly increased the ability to diagnose medical condi- tions caused by copy-number variations. However E-P05.17 mosaicismcanconfoundtheinterpretationofchromosomal BIUXX microarrayresults.Wedescribeacaseofsexchromosomes mosaic fetus with four cell lines. At the 22th week of L. JoongGyo pregnancy the hypoplastic left heart syndrome: presence of endocardial fibroelastosis of the left ventricle with aortic The catholic medical center, Uijeongbu, Korea, Republic of valvestenosis,wasdetected.Becauseofpoorprognosisthe pregnancy was terminated. Autopsy of the male fetus con- The Korean government approved 46 gene and related 12 firmed the presence of hypoplasia of the left ventricle and phenotypes for direct to consumer (DTC) service in 2016. ascending aorta with VSD and mitral valve atresia. Each of the gene markers is already well known in many Materials and Methods: QF-PCR test, aCGH analysis previous studies. In this study, we tried to identify the risk using 8x60K array and metaphase chromosome analysis prediction of hypertension by the blood pressure marker after amniocenteses were performed. used in the DTC service based on the DTC service results. Results: QF-PCR result was normal. Array CGH Weanalyzed647Koreansforeightbloodpressuremarkers revealed additional copy of the whole short arm of (NPR3, ATP2B1, NT5C2, CSK, HECTD4, GUCY1A3, chromosome Y in approximately 40% of cells and a loss CYP17A1, FGF5). We took a DNA sample with buccal of the whole long arm of chromosome Y: arr(Yp)x2[40], swap kit and collected the customer questionnaire. We (Yq)x0. Metaphase analysis demonstrated mosaic karyo- analyzed the results of eight blood pressure markers and type: 45,X[82]/46,X,i(Y)(p10)[11]/47,X,i(Y)(p10),+i(Y) age, gender, smoking, drinking, and family history of (p10)[7]/46,XY[2]. hypertension in questionnaire. Among the eight markers, Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that although aCGH NT5C2andCYP17A1showedassociationtendencywith should be the first-tier test for clinical diagnosis of hypertension. Then, we combined the eight gene marker chromosome abnormalities, chromosome analysis remain genotypes and calculated the genetic risk scores based on valuable in the detection of mosaicism and delineation of thenumberofriskalleleandthemultipleregressioneffects chromosomal structural rearrangements. Phenotype of size to the hypertension. As a result, the combined index mosaic subject is primarily dependent on the dominant cell ofthegeneticriskscorewassignificantlyassociatedwith line in a specific tissue. Because our fetus was male we the questionnaire hypertension history (Odds ratio = speculated that in gonads the cell lines i(Yp) and XY 2.72 (95% CI : 1.52 ~ 4.86), P = 0.001). Using this predominated. The high incidence of hypolastic left heart genetic risk score, we estimated the risk prediction syndromeisseeninTurnersyndromegirls,sothepresence accuracy by ROC curve, and the area under cover was of 45,X cell line in our case could explain the heart 57.4%. Although there are some limitations, we confirmed malformation. that the blood pressure markers based on our DTC service A. Zagorac: None. A. Golub: None. B. Zagradinik: (GeneStyleTM) were well selected. None.A.Erjaveckerget:None.F.Mujezinović:None.R. Keywords: Hypertension, genetic polymorphism, DTC Kavalar: None. N. Kokalj Vokač: None. L. Joong Gyo: None. E-P05.19 E-P05.18 A new phenotype of severe Dilated Cardiomyopathy Hypoplasticleft heartsyndromeinamale fetus with45,X/ associated with a mutation in the LAMP2 gene previously 46,X,i(Y)(p10)/47,X,i(Y)(p10),+i(Y)(p10)/46,XYmosaicism: known to cause Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in the Do we still need karyotyping? context of Danon Disease A.Zagorac1,A.Golub1,B.Zagradišnik1,A.ErjavecŠkerget1,F. P. Gourzi1,M.P. Pantou1, A.Gkouziouta1,L. Kaklamanis1,D. Mujezinović1,R. Kavalar1,N.Kokalj Vokač1,2 Tsiapras1,C. Zygouri2,P. Constantoulakis2,A. Chaidaroglou1, S. Adamopoulos1,D.Degiannis1924 J.delPicchia 1Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center, Athens, Greece, Dentistry, Salerno University, Baronissi, Italy, 2BioAnalytica-Genotypes SA, Athens, Greece 4Cardiovascular Research Unit, IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy, 5Division of Cardiology, Policlinico Casilino Hospital, Introduction: Danon disease is a rare X-linked cardioske- ASL Roma B, Rome, Italy, 6Cardiology Unit, Sandro Pertini letal myopathy with multisystem clinical manifestations. Hospital, Rome, Italy, 7Department of Clinical and Genetic defects at the Lysosome-Associated Membrane 2 Experimental Medicine, Messina University, Messina, Italy, Protein (LAMP2) are the cause of the disorder. Due to the 8Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, IRCCS Istituto rarity of the disease, there is limited progress in under- Dermopatico dell'Immacolata (IDI), Rome, Italy, 9Department standing the correlation between genotype and phenotype, of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, L’Aquila and explaining the large variability observed in the clinical University, L'Aquila, Italy features of this disorder. Materials & Methods: The index case and her relatives Introduction: Variants in the LMNA gene encoding lamin underwent full cardiological assessment. DNA libraries A/C cause a broad range of different diseases (lamino- werepreparedusingIllumina’sTrusightCardiosequencing pathies). While clinical features partly overlap, major phe- panel, covering 174 clinically relevant genes to cardiac notypic groups include dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), diseases. VariantStudio v2.1 software and Sophia Genetics limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), premature aging DDM platform were used for annotation, classification and and lipodystrophy disorders. Genotype-phenotype correla- filtering of genomic variants. tions are tricky but correlations exist between a specific Results: In this study we report two twin sisters, LMNAvariantandadistinctcondition.Lessisknownabout presented in our hospital with end stage heart failure due different phenotypes resulting from the same mutation. to dilated cardiomyopathy, requiring heart transplantation Materials and Methods: Four families with multiple evaluation.Geneticanalysisshowedthattheybothcarrieda members carrying the c.1146C>T (p.G382G) variant in LAMP2missensevariant,c.928G>A.Themutationwasnot LMNA (causing abnormal splicing) were identified. Cardi- detectedintheirmother.Theirfatherdiedat38yearsofage, ologic and neurological assessment were performed. suffering from end stage heart failure of unknown reason. Result: In one family, five individuals carrying the p. This variant has already been reported by others and was G382G variant were affected by a cardiac-only phenotype correlated with the clinical triad of Danon disease i.e. with DCM and cardiac conduction defects (CCD). Neither hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mental retardation and per- the67-year-oldprobandhadmuscularinvolvement.Inthree ipheral myopathy, as well as autism in one case. In this additional families, the index cases (one male and two study, we present dilated cardiomyopathy as a new females) were ascertained for LGMD, with ages at onset phenotype for this particular mutation. varying 2nd-5th decade. Only inthe male proband, LGMD Conclusions: The new phenotype of dilated cardiomyo- wasassociatedtoDCMandarrhythmias,whilethefemales pathy associated to the LAMP2 c.928G>A mutation, aged >60 years, manifested LGMD and CCD. In their presented in this study, confirms the phenotypic hetero- families a variable combination of LGMD, DCM, arrhyth- geneity of Danon disease. mias was observed. P. Gourzi: None. M.P. Pantou: None. A. Gkouziouta: Conclusion: We report the same p.G382G variant in None. L. Kaklamanis: None. D. Tsiapras: None. C. LMNA associated to different phenotypes within the same Zygouri: None. P. Constantoulakis: None. A. Chaidar- and between different families. This unique variant may oglou: None. S. Adamopoulos: None. D. associate to cardiac-only phenotype, or manifest with Degiannis: None. neuromuscular involvement. These observations are rele- vant for genetic counseling and preventive medicine in p. E-P05.20 G382G carriers. The mechanisms underlying such varia- Intra- and interfamiliar variability in 4 novel pedigrees bility are currently unknown and their identification would with cardiac and neuromuscular phenotypes associated to represent an important target in medical genetics. G382G variant in the LMNA gene L. Camerota: None. S. Lanciotti: None. S. Benedetti: None. M. D'Apice: None. A. Puca: None. A. Martino: L. Camerota1,S.Lanciotti1,S. Benedetti2,M.D'Apice1,A. None. M. Ciavatti: None. C. Rodolico: None. F. Puca3,4, A.Martino5,M.Ciavatti6, C.Rodolico7,F. Brancati8,9 Brancati: None. 1Section of Genetics, Department of Biomedicine and E-P05.21 Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Laboratory Genetic screening of 3 major genes (KCNQ1, KCNH2, of Clinical Molecular Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific SCN5A) in 72 Turkish patients with long QT syndrome: Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Medicine, Surgery and single cardiac center experienceAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 925 A. GEZDIRICI1,E. Y. GULEC1, A.AYAZ1,H.KAFALI2, I. 4Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, TANIDIR2,Y. ERGUL2,A. GUZELTAS2 Czech Republic 1Kanuni Sultan Süleyman Training and Research Hospital, Introduction: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Mehmet arrhythmic syndrome characterized by abnormal prolonga- AkifErsoyThoracicandCardiovascularSurgeryTrainingand tion of QT interval, increased risk of malignant ventricular Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, arrhythmias and sudden death. With the prevalence 1:2000 Istanbul, Turkey it is the most often diagnosed arrhythmogenic disorder. At least 15 LQTS-related genes have been identified so far, Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a genetic disorder char- nevertheless 75% of mutations are found in 3 major genes acterized by prolongation of the QT interval on electro- (KCNQ1, KCNH2 and SCN5A). Here we report identifica- cardiograms, which may lead to syncope, cardiac arrest or tion of likely pathogenic variants in patient previously sudden death. LQTS is usually diagnosed after a cardiac investigated with negative results. event (eg, syncope, cardiac arrest). In some situations, this Materials and Methods: A sequencing panel including conditionisdiagnosedafterafamilymembersuddenlydies. 15 genes for LQTS was designed. Genomic DNA was Some individuals are asymptomatic; the diagnosis is made obtained from peripheral blood of LQTS patients or frozen incidentally when an ECG shows prolongation of the QT tissue samples for molecular biopsy in cases of sudden interval. Genetic diagnosis of LQTS is very important for unexplained death. Sequencing library was prepared by patients and their families because most of the patients are TruSeq Custom Amplicon kit (Illumina), sequencing was asymptomatic and the clinical follow-up is very difficult. performed on MiSeq (Illumina). Variants in coding and Up to date, mutations in more than 15 genes have been promoter regions were extracted. identified in LQTS. Three of these (KCNQ1, KCNH2 and Results: We identified 2 variants, Arg562Ser in KCNQ1 SCN5A) were detected at approximately 75% of cases. and Phe68Cys in KCNH2, in patient where single strand Here we investigated for mutations in three major genes polymorphism analysis (SSCP) was previously performed responsible for this disease in 72 Turkish patients with with negative results. Variant Arg562Ser was previously LQTS. We detected pathogenic or likely pathogenic muta- reported as pathogenic; variant Phe68Cys has not been tions in 34 patients. In 28 of our patients, we detected a described yet. Using the ACMG-AMP guidelines both of mutation in the KCNQ1 similar to the literature. We these two variants are evaluated as likely pathogenic. detected a mutation in the KCNH2 in 2 patients and a Conclusions: Molecular confirmation of diagnosis is mutation in the SCN5A in 4 patients. In 7 of our patients, important in LQTS cases. It improves the diagnostic we identified mutations that have not yet been identified in accuracy and risk stratification in patients and their the literature. Although these three gene mutations were relatives. Thus, it is necessary to reanalyze also previously reportedtobedetectedatapproximately%75oftheLQTS, negative patients as new techniques with higher capacity thisratewas%46inourcases.Thissuggeststhatmutations and detection limit are becoming available. may occur in other rare genes, perhaps even new genes, in Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech our cohort. Republic: grant nr 16-30571A. A. Gezdirici: None. E.Y. Gulec: None. A. Ayaz: None. I. Synková: None. E. Ostadalova: None. I. Valaskova: H. Kafali: None. I. Tanidir: None. Y. Ergul: None. A. None. R. Gaillyova: None. T. Novotny: None. I. Guzeltas: None. Andrsova: None. A. Florianova: None. P. Vit: None. E-P05.22 E-P05.24 Targeted resequencing of genes associated with long QT Polymorphism rs822396 in ADIPOQ is associated to syndrome in Czech patients: two newly identified likely anthropometric,clinicandbiochemistalterationsrelatedto pathogenic variants in previously investigated patient with metabolic syndrome in Mexican population negative results L. A.Rubio- Chavez1,K. L. Rubio-Chávez1,R. C. Rosales- I.Synková1,2,E.Ostadalova1,I.Valaskova1,2,R.Gaillyova1,2,T. Gómez2,J. L.Ramos-Núñez1, G.Camargo-Hernández1, T.A. Novotny3,2,I.Andrsova3,2,A. Florianova3,P. Vit4 Garcia-Cobian1,J.Sánchez-Corona3,S. A.Gutiérrez-Rubio1 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, 1Laboratorio del Instituto de Terapéutica Experimental y Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Clínica, Departamento de Fisiología, Guadalajara, Mexico, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Internal Medicine and 2Departamento de Ciencias Biomédicas, Centro Universitario Cardiology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, de Tonalá, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara,926 J.delPicchia Mexico, 3División de Medicina Molecular, Centro de predisposition to CAD and MI is best documented by the Investigación Biomédica del Occidente, IMSS Instituto predictive value of a positive family history. The genetic Mexicano del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico causes for familial clustering of MI are less clear. Next- Generation Sequencing in families with several affected Introduction: Adiponectin, encode by ADIPOQ gene, is individuals has revolutionized mutation identification in producedmainlybyadiposetissue,worksasmetabolicand Mendelian diseases, but can also successfully be applied to immunological regulator. Polymorphism rs822396 in ADI- more complex phenotypes such as CAD and MI. In this POQ gene was associated with diabetes mellitus II, hyper- study, we applied whole-exome sequencing and co- tension and components of metabolic syndrome in segregation analysis in one MI-family and identified a Caucasian and Asiatic populations. heterozygous c.1324G>T alteration resulting in a substitu- Ouraimwastoevaluatetheassociationofpolymorphism tionofp.V442Linexon6ofEPHA2,agenelocatedatthe rs822396 with anthropometric, clinic and biochemical 1p36 locus in humans, which is associated with MI. The parameters related to metabolic syndrome in Mexican missense variant, rs772857919 (p. V442L), was predicted population. asdeleteriousbased onPolyPhe2,deepneuralnetwork and MaterialsandMethods:theDNAfromperipheralblood MutationTaster. The same mutation was detected in an of 250 participants was genotyped for polymorphism unrelated patient presenting with MI while absent in the rs822396 by PCR-RFLP. We obtained clinic, anthropo- exomes of 2,000 controls. EphA2 receptor plays important metric and biochemical measures from participants and role in regulating the cellular events after permanent cor- statistical analysis was made with IBM-SPSSv20. onary occlusion and its entanglement in the progression of Results: the analysis was made according polymorphism ischemic cardiomyopathy. Further functional studies are rs822396 genotype carriers frequency of rs822396G allele ongoingtounderstandtheunderlyingpathomechanism.The in Mexican population was 22%. The rs822396GG carriers identification of a mutation in EPHA2 may give us new (GG/GA) had an increased risk to metabolic syndrome informationabouttheinvolvementofephrinreceptorinthe components as body index mass >25 (OR=1.989), glucose mechanics of coronary artery disease. >100mg/dL (OR=2.127), cholesterol >200 (OR=1.725), I.Ahmad:None.J.Erdmann:None.P.Diemert:None. waist circumference (OR=1.995), and triglyceride/glucose index (OR=2.279). E-P05.26 Conclusion: The rs822396 polymorphism of ADIPOQ Phenotypic heterogeneity within a family amongst carriers gene could be a molecular marker to alterations related to of the same RBM20 mutation metabolic diseases in Mexican population. L.A.Rubio-Chavez:None.K.L.Rubio-Chávez:None. M.P. Pantou1, P.Gourzi1, A.Gkouziouta1,C. Zygouri2,P. R.C. Rosales-Gómez: None. J.L. Ramos-Núñez: None. Constantoulakis2,S. Adamopoulos1,D.Degiannis1 G. Camargo-Hernández: None. T.A. Garcia-Cobian: None. J. Sánchez-Corona: None. S.A. Gutiérrez- 1Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center, Kallithea-Athens, Greece, Rubio: None. 2BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A., Athens, Greece E-P05.25 Introduction: RBM20 regulates alternative splicing of Identification of mutation in EPHA2 in a family with crucial cardiac genes associated with sarcomere assembly, premature myocardial infarction (MI) diastolic function and ion transport. Mutations in RBM20 have been associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) I.Ahmad1,2,J. Erdmann1,2,P. Diemert3 with conduction defects. Materials & Methods: The index case and his relatives 1Institute of Cardiogenetics, Luebeck, Germany, 2DZHK underwent full cardiological assessment. Genetic analysis (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Luebeck, were performed using Illumina's Trusight Cardio Germany, 3Westküstenkliniken, Medizinische Klinik 2, Heide, sequencing panel. Germany Results:Inthisstudywepresentsixmembersofafamily carrying the RBM20 mutation NM_001134363.2: Coronaryarterydisease(CAD)anditssequelaemyocardial c.1900C>T. The index case was initially diagnosed with infarction(MI)aretheleadingcauseofdeathintheWestern DCM at the age of 17 and received an ICD due to world. Genome wide association studies have reported ventriculararrhythmias.Hisbrother,carrierofthemutation, many common variants and risk loci that affect cardiac is now 28 years old and has been diagnosed with diseases, but they are limited to liking these variants with hypertensive cardiomyopathy. The mutation was shown to phenotypic consequences. The importance of genetic beofpaternalorigin,buttheirfatherat54yearsoldremainsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 927 asymptomatic with a mild DCM. The mutation was also investigate the relation between other risk factors which detected in index case's aunt who was resuscitated from may cause restenosis. suddencardiacdeathattheageof48.Shehadnohistoryof Patients and Methods: Ninety three stent implanted coronary artery disease and echocardiography revealed the CAD patients were enrolled to the study. rs2228570, initial stages of DCM and a bicuspid aortic valve. Her rs1544410 mutations in VDR; rs4588, rs7041 mutations in childrenwerebothcarriersofthemutation.Herdaughter,at VDBP were investigated by RT-PCR. Other risk factors the age of 30, was healthy, but her son was implanted with were also investigated. Results were evaluated statistically. anICDduetosustainedventriculartachycardiaattheageof Results: rs4588 and rs2228570 mutations were found 21 and presents initial signs of Left Ventricular Non statistically high in patients. Vitamin D deficiency was Compaction. found statistically significant in patients. Also it was found Conclusion: Six carriers of a single mutation in RBM20 that there is a relation between myocard infarction and belonging to the same family presented different pheno- rs7041 mutation. Additionally, rs2228570 mutation was types supporting the pleiotropic functional effect of found to be related with vitamin D deficiency. the gene. Conclusion: According to these findings, it was con- M.P. Pantou: None. P. Gourzi: None. A. Gkouziouta: sidered that the presence of both vitamin D deficiency and None. C. Zygouri: A. Employment (full or part-time); gene mutations which are related with vitamin D metabo- Modest; BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A. P. Constantoula- lism may increase restenosis in CAD patients. kis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; D.Kıraç:None.A.Yaman:None.H.Gezmis:None.K. BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A.. S. Adamopoulos: None. Yesilcimen: None. T. Avcilar: None. A.I. Guney: None. D. Degiannis: None. E.C. Altunok: None. R. Akkanat: None. T. Isbir: None. S. Turkmen: None. E-P05.27 VDR,VDBPmutationsandvitaminDdeficiencymaycause E-P05.28 restenosis in coronary artery disease patients after stent Sudden cardiac death (SCD) in the young - value of implantation postmortem genetic analysis in unclear autopsy cases D.Kıraç1,A.Yaman2,H.Gezmis1,K.Yesilcimen2,T.Avcilar3,A. S. Scheiper1,2,E. Ramos-Luis3,4,A. Blanco-Verea3,4,C. Niess1, I.Guney3,E.C.Altunok4,R.Akkanat3,T.Isbir1,S.Turkmen5,6 C. Geisen2,M. Kettner1, M.Verhoff1, M.Brion3,4,S. Kauferstein1 1Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of MedicalBiology,Istanbul,Turkey,2Dr.SiyamiErsekThoracic 1Institute of Legal Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt, and Cardiovascular Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, 2German Red Cross, Institute of Department of Cardiology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara Transfusion Medicine and Immunohaematology, University University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, 3Xenética de Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Yeditepe University, Faculty of enfermedades cardiovasculares e oftalmolóxicas, Instituto de Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey, InvestigaciónSanitariadeSantiagodeCompostela,Complexo 5Labor Berlin Charite Vivantes, Berlin, Germany, 6Charite Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Institut für medizinische Genetik, Berlin, Germany Santiago de Compostela (A Coruña), Spain, 4Medicina Xenómica, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Aim: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a complex and Compostela-Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, multifactorial disease, can be influenced by pathophysio- Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago logic conditions as well as by genetic and environmental de Compostela (A Coruña), Spain factors. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) by bal- loon angioplasty and stenting have participated in the Introduction: Cases of sudden unexpected death in young treatment of CAD. Unfortunately, after surgical interven- and apparently healthy individuals represent a tragic event tion, the vascular injury often causes restenosis that can be for those left behind. A significant number of these cases reducedtheluminaldiameterofmorethan50%.VitaminD remain unexplained, even after complete postmortem deficiency is a notable risk factor for CAD. Vitamin D investigation. Abnormalities in cardiac expressed genes receptor (VDR) and vitamin D binding protein (VDBP) havebeenassociatedwitharrhythmogenicdisorders,which gene mutations which play role in vitamin D metabolism may cause sudden cardiac death. Due to the fact that those mayalsohaveroleintheprogressionofthediseaseaswell diseases are inherited, close relatives of deceased may also as restenosis after stent implantation. Therefore, it was be at risk. aimed to detect VDR and VDBP mutations and to928 J.delPicchia Materials and Methods: Postmortem genetic analysis 12,8%0,32%and23,3%forFactorII(G20210A),FactorV was performed in sudden death cases under the age of 45. (Leiden), MTHFR (C677T and A1298C), Factor XIII DNA was extracted from blood and the samples were (V34L) and PAI-1 (4G/5G) respectively, and heterozygous sequenced by means of a defined gene panel using Next- mutation distributions are 25,3%, 3,5%, 41,5%, 45,1%, generation sequencing (NGS). The sequencing data were 7,4%, 50,1%. subjected to bioinformatics analysis and detected sequence Conclusion: In conclusion, thrombophilia panel test variants were assessed using common databases and reports of patients with early pregnancy loss showed that applying in silico prediction tools. the most frequent homozygous mutation is found as PAI-1 Results:Inthisstudy,severalsequencevariantscouldbe (4G/5G) change and the most frequent heterozygous identified in the genes analyzed. Due to the detection of mutation is also found as PAI-1 (4G/5G) change. Hetero- numerous unknown and unclassified variants, the inter- zygous mutations were found to be more frequent than pretation of the results proved to be challenging. However, homozygous mutations. Assessment of heterozygous muta- bymeansofanappropriateevaluationofthefindings,NGS tionsinPAI-1(4G/5G),MTHFR(C677TandA1298C)and mayrepresentanessentialpartfortheforensicinvestigation FactorII(G20210A)genesinfirstpregnancylosseswillbe in unclear autopsy cases. beneficial for diagnosis and treatment. Conclusion: Molecular autopsy is an important tool to G. Nacarkahya: None. F. Tusgul: None. S. Eroglu: supportforensicinvestigationinordertoclarifythecauseof None. Y. Kılıc: None. S. Oguzkan Balcı: None. deathandimpliesgreatprogressforrelativesofyoungSCD victims facilitating adequate risk stratification and genetic E-P05.30 counselling. Still, internationally accepted guidelines pre- Serum urate correlates with multiple previously- senting a standardized course of action need to be unexplored cardiovascular proteomic markers established. S. Scheiper: None. E. Ramos-Luis: None. A. Blanco- J.Marten1,T. S.Boutin1,A.Richmond1,J.F. Wilson1,2,C. Verea: None. C. Niess: None. C. Geisen: None. M. Hayward1,V. Vitart1 Kettner: None. M. Verhoff: None. M. Brion: None. S. Kauferstein: None. 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Usher Institute of Population E-P05.29 Health Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Evaluationofreportsofthrombophiliapaneltestinwomen Edinburgh, United Kingdom with early pregnancy loss Introduction: Serum uric acid (SUA) levels are associated G.Nacarkahya,F.Tusgul,S.Eroglu,Y.Kılıc,S.OguzkanBalcı with a variety of common diseases, but it is less clear whether it plays a role in the aetiology of these conditions. Gaziantep University/Medical Biology, Gaziantep, Turkey ThisprojectaimstoidentifycorrelationsbetweenSUAand protein biomarkers for disease. Objective: Coagulation disorders are defined as one of the Materials and Methods: OLINK Proseek panels were reasons for susceptibility to infertility. Gene mutations that used to measure serum levels of biomarkers for inflamma- cause coagulation disorders are analyzed with thrombo- tion and cardiovascular disease in the CROATIA-Vis and philia panel test. The aim of the study is to investigate the ORCADES cohorts (combined n=1,470). 266 proteins frequencyofgenemutationswithinthethrombophiliapanel were included in the analysis. Spearman correlations were test in individuals with early pregnancy loss Materials- calculatedbetweenSUAandproteinbiomarkers,alongwith Methods: A total of 1538 female patients with early preg- 20additionalphenotypes.Measurementswerecorrectedfor nancyloss,agedbetween17-54yearswhowereadmittedto kinship, age and sex. To account for confounding between the Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinic between 2014 and phenotypes, partial correlations were calculated between 2017 and whom mutations were screened in Molecular SUA and each phenotype. Additionally, multiple lasso Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory of Gaziantep University regressions were run and each phenotype scored on how were included in the study. Factor II (G20210A), Factor V often it was retained in a predictive model for SUA. (Leiden), MTHFR (C677T and A1298C), Factor XIII Results: Significant partial correlations were detected (V34L) and PAI-1 (4G/5G) genetic alterations within the between SUA and Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 (FGF23), thrombophilia panel test were studied by ASO-PCR Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule (EpCAM) and Insulin method. Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 2 (IGFBP2). Partial Results: Homozygous mutation distributions in indivi- correlations were calculated for these three proteins, duals with early pregnancy loss are; 2%, 0,13%, 11%, creating a network model of correlations that providesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 929 context for their relation to uric acid. These associations angiogenesis in the endometrium of miscarriages, along have persisted in sensitivity analyses, and have also been withthehigherexpressionofCXCR4(chemokinereceptor, detectedusinglassoregression.Replicationoftheresultsin expressed by NK cells) and its chemokine-ligand SDF-1 independent cohorts is in progress. (most probably expressed by endothelial cells). Conclusions: Uric acid correlates with multiple cardio- Acknowledgment: Grant NoD-63/2017 of MU Sofia. vascular disease and inflammation biomarkers. Investiga- M.Rizov:None.D.Kachakova:None.K.Belemezova: tion into the genetic basis of these associations may help None.E. Nikolova: None. M.Hristova-Savova: None. T. betterunderstandthedebatedroleofSUAincardiovascular Milachich: None. T. Timeva: None. P. Andreeva: None. disorders. R. Kaneva: None. A. Shterev: None. I. Dimova: None. J. Marten: None. T.S. Boutin: None. A. Richmond: None. J.F. Wilson: None. C. Hayward: None. V. E-P05.32 Vitart: None. Patient with recurrent ventricular fibrillation and polymorphic nonsustained ventricular tachycardia with E-P05.31 mutation in MYLK2 gene Expression of angiogenic factors VEGFA/VEGFR2 and chemokines SDF-1/CXCR4 in spontaneous abortions D.Vokač1,.Stangler Herode2, D.Krgović2, N.KokaljVokač2,3 M.Rizov1,D.Kachakova2,K. Belemezova1,E. Nikolova1,M. 1DepartmentofCardiologyandAngiology,UniversityMedical Hristova-Savova1,T. Milachich3,T. Timeva4,P. Andreeva4, R. Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Laboratory of Medical Kaneva2,A.Shterev4,I.Dimova1 Genetics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Maribor University, Medical Faculty, Maribor, 1Geneticslaboratory,SAGBAL“DrShterev”,Sofia,Bulgaria, Slovenia Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory of Genomic Diagnostics, MolecularMedicineCenter(MMC),MedicalUniversity Sofia, Introduction: Ventriculartachycardia (VT)andventricular Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3IVF laboratory, SAGBAL “Dr fibrillation(VF)arefrequentclinicalarrhythmiasinpatients Shterev”, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4SAGBAL “Dr with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). We are report- Shterev”, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria ingacaseofyoungpatientafterVFwithoutfamiliarhistory of sudden cardiac death (SCD) or structural heart disease, A series of studies have reported that increased concentra- with still undescribed variant in MYLK2 gene detected by tions of pro-inflammatory or T helper cell cytokines or NGS. Material and Methods: Patient was 37 years old increased frequencies of natural killer (NK) cells in the women after SCD and CPR procedure due to VF. On blood can be found during euploid sporadic miscarriage. admissionpatientwasstableandconscious.Bloodtestsand There is some evidence that uterine NK cells regulate echocardiographywerenormal,onECGasinusrhythmwas angiogenesis in the endometrium and therefore may also present. Coronary angiography and electrophysiologic play a role for implantation and early pregnancy. NK cell testingwerebothnormal,onlypairofventricularpremature density was positively correlated with the formation of complexes (VPC) from septal region were observed. Sev- bloodandlymphaticvessels,spiralarteriolesmoothmuscle eral polymorphic VPC triplets were present on Holter. differentiation and oedema in endometrium of women with Patient was declared idiopathic VF and an ICD was recurrent pregnancy loss. In our study, by using real time implanted. Up to now two episodes of VF and several PCR technique, we measured the expression levels for the episodes of polimorphic VT were treated with ICD. most important angiogenic factors VEGFA and its receptor Results: NGS genetic testing using TruSight Cardio VEGFR2, as well as for chemokine SDF-1 and its receptor (Illumina)wasperformed,mutationNM-033118.3:c.4G>A CXCR4, in decidua samples from spontaneous abortions in MYLK2 gene was detected. compared to decidua from matched controls of elective Conclusion: MYLK2 gene mutations are present in abortions. Six endometrial samples from euploid sporadic somefamilialHCM.Sinceourpatientpresentsnosignsof miscarriages and 4 samples from matched controls were cardiomyopathy or structural heart disease, it is possible investigated for mRNA levels of these angiogenic factors that clinical form of HCM will evolve later. Detected and chemokines. The results showed increased expression variant of c.4G>A in MYLK2 gene is currently classified of all studied molecules: about 3 times average increase in as a variant of unknown significance but due to highly the expression levels of VEGFA and CXCR4, as well as arritmogenic and malignant clinical course of disease in higher increase in the expression of SDF-1 (by 7 times on presentcaseitisworttodescribeit.Theworkwasdonein average) and VEGFR2 (by 9.8 times on average). Our the framework of an internal research project of UKC- results suggest dysregulation of VEGFA/VEGFR2 MB: IRP-2015/01-07.930 J.delPicchia D.Vokač:None..StanglerHerode:None.D.Krgović: E-P06.02 None. N. Kokalj Vokač: C. Other Research Support Menkesdisease:acasereportofpatientwithdenovonovel (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind variant in ATP7A gene support); Modest; Kemomed, Slovenia. O.Miljanovic1, J.Jovanović1,S. Teofilov1, T.Ostojic1,M. Bulatovic1,D.Likic2,F. Stellmer3 E-P06 Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders 1Center for Medical Genetic and Immunology, Podgorica, E-P06.01 Montenegro, 2Institute for Public Health of Montenegro, NGLY1 mutation in three siblings; a case report and Podgorica, Montenegro, 3Labor Lademannbogen, literature review Medizinische Expertise, Hamburg, Germany M.Shams, P. Namiranian, H.Najmabadi, A.Kariminejad Menkes`s disease (MD) is an rare X-linked recessive dis- orderwithsystemiccopperdeficiencycausedbypathogenic Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, variants in ATP7A gene, encoding a copper transporter P- Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of type ATPase. MD is characterized by an extensive clinical heterogeneity, as a direct consequence of dysfunction of Congenital Disorder of Deglycosylation is a group of dis- several copper-dependent enzymes. Severe progressive orders with defect in glycosylation¹. It is an autosomal neurodegeneration, seazures, developmental regresion and recessive disorder with low or absent tear production, low „kinky“ hair are typical characteristic of clasical MD. Over muscle tone, unusual muscular jerks and psychomotor 200 different mutations, affecting ATP7A, gene have been retardation. Additional features are microcephaly, intract- reported with one-third of cases arise from de novo able seizures, and evidence of liver dysfunction. mutations. We describe a family with three affected offspring. The Wepresenta13monthsoldboywithMS,whoappeared thirty-year-oldmalesufferedfromhypotonia,bentposture, healthyuntilageofsixmonths,whenlossofdevelopmental muscle contractures, muscle atrophy, abnormal muscle milestones, hypotonia, seizures, and failure to thrive movements during sleep. His 34-year old brother had the occurred. Clinical synopsis comprised microcephaly, tem- same symptoms plus more significant abnormal muscle poral bossing, poor facial and body movements, “kinky”, movements, constipation and right-sided scoliosis. The 35- “steely” hair, pale, eczema skin, pectus excavatum, trunk year old sister had the same symptoms in addition to hypotonia, spasticity of extremitas and severe mental strabismus. All three cases had normal tear production, retardation. Decreseed levels of serum copper and cerulo- normal head circumference,and no seizure. Isoelectric plasmin, metaphyseal flaring in the long bones, bladder focusing was normal in all three siblings. Liver enzymes diverticula, focal cortical reduction and defective myalini- and ultra-sound examination of liver was performed in one zation and pili torti were revealed. Molecular genetic and was normal. Parents are first cousin and there is no analysis (DNA sequencing, MLPA) of the ATP7A gene similar case in family. Next Generation Sequencing for revealed the hemizygous ATP7A mutation c.3226delA (p. Intellectual Disability was performed identifying a homo- Ile1076Leufs*13),notdetectedinthemotherofthepatient. zygote pathogenic variant defined as c.708G>T (p. This „de novo“ alteration in ATP7A gene has neither been Trp236Cys) in exon 5 of NGLY1 gene. Both parents and described in the literature (www.hgmd.org), but the nature siblingswerealsocheckedbySangerSequencingandwere of the alteration (frameshift with premature stop codon) heterozygout. The clinical findings are not similar to what indicates the mutation is with very high probability has been reported to previous patients with NGLY1 pathogenic. mutations and present new clinical features such as AtypicalclinicalpictureoftheMDinthereportedpatient contractures and muscle atrophy. Here we expand the with the novel variant c.3226delA in ATP7A gene could clinical phenotype associated with NGLY1variants. contribute to better understanding of genotype-phenotype 1.Ennns,G.M.,Shashi,V.,Bainbridge,M.,and31others. correlation in MD. Mutations in NGLY1cause an inherited disorder of the O. Miljanovic: None. J. Jovanović: None. S. Teofilov: endoplasmic reticulum-assosiated degradation pathway. None. T. Ostojic: None. M. Bulatovic: None. D. Likic: Genet. Med. 16:751-758,2014.Note:Erratum:Genet Med. None. F. Stellmer: None. 16:568 only, 2014.[pubmed:24651605] M. Shams: None. P. Namiranian: None. H. Najma- E-P06.03 badi: None. A. Kariminejad: None. When mitochondria hide among the tiger stripesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 931 R. S.Tincheva, T. N.Delchev,H. M.Kathom, D.M. Avdjieva- N.W.Y. Fong,S. S.Jamuar Tzavella KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) deficiency is a Introduction: COXPD12 (LTBL – leukoencephalopathy disorder of the proximal urea cycle. It is an autosomal with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate) recessive disorder which presents with severe hyper- is an autosomal recessive mitochondrial neurologic dis- ammonemia, typically in the newborn period. We report a order, caused by mutations in the EARS2 gene. The con- caseofaboywithCPS1deficiencywhopresentedatday3 ditionischaracterizedbyearlyonsethypotoniaanddelayed oflifewithdecreasedconsciousnessandshallowbreathing. psychomotor development, a specific MRI finding – leu- Diagnosis: He had severe metabolic acidosis with koencephalopathyaffectingprimarilythedeepwhitematter, hyperammonemia(813umol/L). Biochemical investigations brainstemandcerebellum.Serumlactatelevelsaretypically showed raised glutamine (3984umol/L), low citrulline elevated due to defects in mitochondrial oxidative (<5umol/L) and normal urine orotic acid(4.0umol/L), processes. suggesting a diagnosis of a proximal urea cycle defect Clinical case: We present a 4 year old girl with severe (UCD). Targeted DNA sequencing of CPS1 and NAGS psychomotor deficiency, mild dysmorphic features, a genes revealed that patient was a compound heterozygote number of seizures with different clinical repertoire and with 2 novel pathogenic mutations in the CPS1 gene: normalserumlactate.AbrainMRIwasperformed,showing c.3241del, p.(Leu1081fs) in exon 26 and c.3966C>A, p. a „tigroid pattern“ in the deep white brain matter. The (Asp1322Glu) in exon 33, confirming the diagnosis of followingpotentialexplanationswereeliminatedduringthe CPS1 deficiency. diagnostic investigation: metachromatic leukodistrophy, Interventions: High dextrosity drip with intravenous saposin B deficiency, Pezilaeus-Merzbacher disease, auto- lipids to promote anabolism and prevent catabolism, somal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay and ammonia scavangers such as sodium benzoate and sodium Krabbe disease. Finally, molecular-genetic testing revealed phenylbutyrate, supplementation of essential amino acids apathogenicmutationintheEARS2genewhichestablished with arginine, citrulline, and empirical trial of n- the correct diagnosis – COXDP12. carbamylglutamic acid. Removal of ammonia was also Results: facilitated by hemodialysis. Outcomes: Despite optimization of above therapy, ammonia levels remained high and decision was made Gene Variant VariantID Primary Aminoacid Varianttype Zygosity sequence transcript sequencechanges changes with parents for a one-way trial off dialysis. Ammonia levels continued to rise and the child was discharged home EARS2 Chr.16: Rs376103091 NM_ Arg108Trp Missenseclass5- Homozygous g.23555998G>A 001083614.1: Pathogenic for palliative care at 20 days of life. He passed away at c.322C>T 22 days of life. Lessons: Measurements of biochemical intermediary metabolites are insufficient to differentiate between CPS1 Conclusions: A pathogenic variant of this missense deficiencyandN-acetylglutamatesynthetasedeficiency,but mutation causes replacement of arginine with triptophan at these results should guide targeted DNA sequencing of 108th position in the aminoacid sequence encoded by UCD to facilitate management and genetic counseling. EARS2 gene. This explains the majority of clinical N.W.Y. Fong: None. S.S. Jamuar: None. manifestations,howeverthelackofincreasedlactatelevels, aswellasthetigroidbrainpatternmakethiscaseintriguing E-P06.06 in matter of widening the phenotypic spectrum of the Gene therapy - a practical approach: cloning the LDLr disease. gene in an attempt to treat hypercholesterolemia Key words: COXDP12, LTBL, leukoencephalopathy, EARS2 gene, psychomotor deficiency T. T. Grozescu1,T. G.Jensen2,L. C. Bohiltea3 R.S. Tincheva: None. T.N. Delchev: None. H.M. Kathom: None. D.M. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Aarhus, Department of Anatomy and Human E-P06.04 Genetics, Aarhus, Denmark, 3UMF Carol Davila Bucharest, Novel compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the Bucuresti, Romania CPS1 gene in a newborn with Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase 1 Deficiency932 J.delPicchia Genetherapyhasbeenagreatpromiseinmodernmedicine for a deletion comprising exons 3 and 4 of the for many years. The current presentation is focused on a GPIHBP1 gene. personal research in the field, which took place at Aarhus To verify and characterize the deletion harbouring exons University, in Denmark, under the supervision of Professor 3and4inGPIHBP1,severallong-rangePCRswerecarried Thomas G. Jensen. In an attempt to cure and/or contribute out by combining a forward oligo in exon 2 and different to the treatment of hypercholesterolemia cases, the experi- reverseoligos in3’UTR,andthedeletion breakpoints were ment started having a specific target: obtaining gene finally characterized. Sanger sequencing confirmed the expression of the cloned LDLr gene within keratinocytes. presence of a 3,8 Kb homozygous novel deletion in All steps were perfomed within this experiment, starting GPIHBP1: NM_178172.5:c.181+509_*2768del3828 – from cutting off the gene sequence from human DNA Chr8(GRCh37):g.144296334_144300161del. (previously isolated from hepatocytes) using Eco RI, E.DelNuevoMartinez:Other;Significant;LabGenetics. obtaining a construct of the gene fragment and lambda R.B. Fisher: None. J. Puente-Prieto: Other; Significant; phage(calledGCSam-LDLr)asavectorthatalsoincludeda LabGenetics. A. Sesto Yague: Other; Significant; plasmidic sequence of resistance to neomicin, followed by LabGenetics. ligation and transformation into a circular, single-stranded chromosome of E.Coli. Many control points were set and E-P06.09 used during all these steps (using several restriction Two Different Genetic Diseases in the Same Patient enzymes: Bam HI, Hind III, Eco RI, Xho I, Xba I, Not-1 and Sal-1). The E.Coli colonies were developed and L. ÖZER1,E. Unsal1,S. Aktuna1,V. Baltacı2 selected using the new bacteria's resistance to neomicin. The last step was the "infection" of keratinocytes with the 1MİKROGEN GENETIC DIAGNOSIS CENTER, ANKARA, transformed bacteria. Gene expression was obtained in a Turkey, 2Yüksek İhtisas University Medical School, spectacular proportion. Department of Genetics, ANKARA, Turkey T.T. Grozescu: None. T.G. Jensen: None. L.C. Bohiltea: None. Introduction: Rare disease is defined as a condition that affects fewer than 200,000 people. The consanguinity E-P06.08 increases the risk of cooccurence of two etiologically dif- Characterization of a novel GPIHBP1 large deletion in an ferent recessive Mendelian diseases in a single family. infant patient with hypertriglyceridemia Materials and Methods: Here we represent a Turkish familywithtwoaffectedchildrenwhohaddifferentclinical E. DelNuevoMartinez1, R.B. Fisher2,J.Puente-Prieto1,A. findings. The affected boy was born as the first child of Sesto Yague1 consanguineousfamilyanddiedat8yearsold.Theaffected girl was born as the third child of the family and is 5 1LabGenetics, San Sebastian de los Reyes, Spain, 2The James years old. Cook University Hospital, Middlesbrough, United Kingdom Case 1: He was diagnosed as Leigh syndrome clinically. He had hypotonia,mental and growth retardation, move- Characterization of a novel GPIHBP1 large deletion in an ment poblems infant patient with hypertriglyceridemia MRI findings: hyperintensity compatible with Leigh Type 1 hyperlipoproteinemia is an autosomal recessive disease disorder characterized by severe hypertriglyceridemia, Case 2; She has hypotonia, nystagmus, strabismus, recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis, lipemia retinalis, growth retardation, delayed language development and cutaneous eruptive xanthomas. Loss-of-function muta- Biochemical tests:Elevated plasma concentrations of tionsofGPIHBP1havebeenreportedasthecauseoftypeI branched-chain amino acids, ketonuria hyperlipoproteinemiainseveralpatients.Inthiscasereport, Cranial MRI: hyperintensity in basal ganglia we characterize a novel 3,8 Kb homozygous deletion Results: WES analysis revealed homozygous likely comprising exons 3 and 4 of GPIHBP1. pathogenic variant in the DUBT gene and homozygous A newborn male of Pakistani origin who presented VUS variant in the NDUFS7 gene, in case2. Both parents congenitalhypertriglyceridemiainaconsanguineousfamily are heterozygous carriers of the each detected variants. was tested for germline mutation in APOA5, APOC2, DUBT mutations cause Mapple Syrup Urine Disease and GPIHBP1, LIPI, LMF1 and LPL genes by Sanger NDUFS7 mutations cause Leigh syndrome. sequencing. No mutations were detected in any of these Conclusions: In some families different clinical findings six genes, but no PCR products were obtained for exons 3 mayduetoexistenceofmorethan1genedefect.Ourreport and 4 of GPIHBP1, so this patient could be homozygous demonstrated that such coexistence of different diseases inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 933 same family should be expected when analyzing rare 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of diseases in consanguineous families. Our report emphasize Helsinki, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, that the presence of two rare diseases in one family should 3Karolinska Institut, Stockholm, Sweden betakenintoaccountwhenthepresenceofbroadspectrum of phenotype and consanguinity.. Introduction: The genetic and molecular mechanisms L. Özer: None. E. Unsal: None. S. Aktuna: None. V. underlying severe early-onset obesity are still incompletely Baltacı: None. understood. Deletions at 2p25.3 have been reported in several patients with obesity and intellectual disability. E-P06.10 Myelin-transcriptor-factor-1-like (MYT1L) gene in this claudiajurca70@yahoo.com locus has been proposed a candidate gene for obesity. MYT1L is expressed in the developing brain and has been A.D.Jurca,M.Bembea,K.Kozma,C.Petchesi,A.Szilaghy,A. recognized as part of the leptin-melanocortin-SIM1 Balmos,D.Dubau, C. Jurca pathway. Materials and Methods: We report a 13-year-old boy University from Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, presenting with overweight already at 1 year of age (body Oradea, Romania mass index (BMI) Z-score +2.3) and obesity at 2 years of age (BMI Z-score +3.8). The patient had hyperphagia, Introduction: Neonatal mitochondrial encephalocardio- delayedneurological,cognitiveandmotordevelopment.He myopathy (OMIM, 614052) is due to a mutation of trans- also had speech delay, strabismus, hyperactivity and membrane protein 70 gene (TMEM70). TMEM70 encodes intellectual disability. Brain MRI was normal. The parents a mitochondrial membrane protein that plays a role in the and sister had normal BMI. biogenesis of mitochondrial ATP synthase. Results: Whole-genome sequencing, including DNA MaterialsandMethods:Theauthorsreportaboyaged1 samplesfortheindexandhisparentsandsibling,identified year and 9 months who presented immediately after birth in the index a novel heterozygous de novo frameshift with signs of encephalopathy associated with lactic deletion that introduces a premature termination of transla- acidosis, severe hypotonia, hyperammonemia, and 3- tion NM_015025.2(MYT1L): methylglutaconic aciduria. The infant was also found to c.2215_2224delACGCCTGCC, p.(Thr739Alafs*7) in have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrial septal defect, MYT1L. The frameshift variant was confirmed by Sanger pulmonary hypertension, hypospadias, moderate psycho- sequencing. motordevelopmentaldelay.Itisthefifthchildinthefamily, Conclusion: Our finding supports the association of born prematurely, low birth weight (1900 g); consangui- MYT1L mutations with early-onset syndromic obesity. The neous family of Roma (Gypsy) ethnic origin. identificationofnovelmonogenicformsofchildhood-onset Results:Genetictestingrevealedahomozygousmutation obesity will provide insights to the involved genetic (c.317-2A>G) in the TMEM70 gene. This mutation is pathways. Further studies on MYT1L will increase our prevalent, particularly in the Roma population. The understanding of its biological function, role in appetite inheritance is autosomal recessive. The prevalence of the regulationanddevelopmentofsyndromicfeatures,andmay syndrome is unknown. identify potential targets for therapy. Conclusion: To date fewer than 100 cases have been Grant references: Academy of Finland, Sigrid Jusélius reported in the literature (Orphanet). This is the only case Foundation, Foundation for Pediatric Research, Folkhälsan reported in Romania. Research Foundation, University of Helsinki and Helsinki Keywords: mitochondrial encephalocardiomyopathy, University Hospital research funds. TMEM70, ATP synthase P.Loid: None.R.Mäkitie:None.A.Costantini:None. A.D. Jurca: None. M. Bembea: None. K. Kozma: H. Viljakainen: None. M. Pekkinen: None. O. None. C. Petchesi: None. A. Szilaghy: None. A. Balmos: Mäkitie: None. None. D. Dubau: None. C. Jurca: None. E-P06.12 E-P06.11 NewNDUFS6variantsareassociatedwithLeighsyndrome A novel MYT1L mutation in a patient with severe early- and cause multiple deficiency of OXPHOS complexes and onset obesity and intellectual disability complex I assembly defect P. Loid1,R.Mäkitie2,A.Costantini3,H.Viljakainen1, M. C.Rouzier1,2,A.Chaussenot1,K.Fragaki1,2,V.Serre3,S.Saadi Pekkinen2,O.Mäkitie2 Ait-El-Mkadem1,2,V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2,S. Bannwarth1,2934 J.delPicchia 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de référence des Introduction: Exome sequencing has the power to render maladiesmitochondriales,CHU,NICE,France,2IRCANUMR molecular diagnostic procedures in an individual patient in CNRS 7284/INSERM U1081, Faculté de Medicine, Université the setting of a novel disease, after all standard diagnoses Côte d’Azur, Nice, France, 3Institut Jacques Monod, have been exhausted. Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed for an adult patient with clinically The genetic causes of Leigh syndrome are heterogeneous, diagnosed mitochondrial encephalopathy with progressive with a poor correlation between the phenotype and geno- external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis and mitochondrial DNA type.Todate,morethan50nucleargenescancausenuclear deletions gene-encodedLeighsyndrome.NDUFS6encodesa13KDa The proband was from a consanguineous Polish family subunit of complex I, which is part of the peripheral arm with two affected siblings in the pedigree suggesting and is localized in the iron-sulfur fraction of the complex. autosomal recessive inheritance. MutationsintheNDUFS6genewerepreviouslyreportedin Results:Bioinformaticsanalysisshowedanewvariantin only8patientsfrom5familiesandallpresentedwithsevere the RNASEH1 gene c.493G>C, p.Gly165Arg and predict neonatal lactic acidemia with complex I deficiency leading the damaging potential of the variant. to death in the first days of life. The RNASEH1 gene encodes a ribonuclease H1 that Here, we present a patient with two novel NDUFS6 specifically degrades the RNA of RNA-DNA hybrids and mutations to expand the clinical and biochemical spectrum playsakeyroleinDNAreplicationandrepair.Mutationsin ofthedisease.Comparetopreviousreports,thischildhada thisgeneleadtoprogressiveexternalophthalmoplegiawith milder phenotype compatible with a Leigh syndrome mitochondrial DNA deletions (MIM: 616479). associated with multiple deficiencies of OXPHOS com- The family studies confirmed biallelic inheritance in two plexes. Sequencing of a panel of 300 genes involved in affected siblings. The homozygous variant was not mitochondrial disorders allowed the identification of two observed in healthy siblings and offspring. The novel NDUFS6 pathogenic variants resulting in almost complete variantwas not detected in 360chromosomesfrom healthy absence of the protein. The first variant c.309+5G>A Polish subjects. resultsinthetranslationofanunstableproteinmissingexon Conclusion:Thisnovelvariantinthecatalyticdomainof 3.Thesecondvariantc.343T>Cresultsinasubstitutionofa theRNASEH1genewithhigh probabilitycausesautosomal cystein located in the Zn-finger domain needed for correct recessive progressive external ophthalmoplegia with mito- assembly of complex I and a major assembly defect of chondrial DNA deletions in this Polish family. complex I was revealed by BN-PAGE. These data confirm J.M. Rusecka: None. B. Kierdaszuk: None. M. that the presence of NDUFS6 and the integrity of the Zn- Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawiński: None. A. Kostera- finger domain are essential for correct assembling of Pruszczyk:None.A.Kamińska:None.E.Bartnik:None. complex I. R. Płoski: None. K. Tońska: None. C. Rouzier: None. A. Chaussenot: None. K. Fragaki: None.V.Serre:None.S.SaadiAit-El-Mkadem:None.V. E-P06.16 Paquis-Flucklinger: None. S. Bannwarth: None. A novel mutation indentified in ATP7B gene by direct sequence of hotspot exons in Moldovan patients with E-P06.15 Wilson disease Exomesequencingrevealsanovelhomozygousmutationin the RNASEH1 gene in a Polish family with progressive V. A.Hlistun, K. R. Boiciuc, I.I.Coliban, D.G.Turcan,D. external ophthalmoplegia and ptosis with mitochondrial Blanita, V.C. Sacara DNA deletions InstituteofMotherandChild,Chisinau,Moldova,Republicof J.M.Rusecka1,B.Kierdaszuk2,M.Rydzanicz3,P.Stawiński3,A. Kostera-Pruszczyk2,A. Kamińska2,E.Bartnik1,4,R.Płoski3,K. Wilson disease(WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder Tońska1 (ATP7B; EC3.6.3.54; OMIM606882) caused by a defi- ciencyofcoppertransportingP-typeATPase,characterized 1Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, University of by accumulation of free-copper(Cu) in liver, brain, kidneys Warsaw,Warsaw,Poland,2DepartmentofNeurology,Medical andcorneas.Theaimofourstudywastoanalyzemutations University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of of hotspot exons of the ATP7B gene in Moldovan patients Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, with WD. Poland, 4Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Materials and Methods: We report on 10 WD patients Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland showing unexplained liver disease and/or neurological orAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 935 neuropsychiatric disorders, presenting or not of Kayser- treatmentcanleadtodeathatthefirstdecadeoflife.PFIC3 Fleischer ring. The tests for serum ceruloplasmin, Cu and iscausedbymutationsintheABCB4orMDR3gene.This free Cu level were used for diagnosis and evaluation of protein is a phospholipid translocator involved in biliary WD.Geneticanalysiswasperformedby“Sanger”genomic phospholipid excretion. Phospholipids, cholesterol and bile DNA sequencing (3500dx Genetic Analyzer, Applied salt form micelles that are essential for the inactivation Biosystems Inc.) for hotspot exons 4, 8, 12, 13, 15, 17 process of bile salt toxicity and prevent epithelium injury and 20 in ATP7B gene. Study group: Ten members of a Bedouin family with 3 Results: Diagnosis was based on phenotypic manifesta- affectedchildrenweregeneticallyanalyzed.Allthepatients tion and laboratory results that reveal decrease of had cholestasis. Another infant from a different family was ceruloplasmin level[4,3-24mg/dl] and high free Cu[21- also diagnosed based on genetic analysis. 91.1 μg/dl]. Confirmation of diagnosis was based on Genetic analysis: DNA was extracted from peripheral molecular DNA analysis that revealed a mutation detection blood. Genotyping was done on parents and two affected rate around 50% of cases, allowing identification of children using Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping complete genotype in 40%. There was identified 1 novel 250K Sty arrays. Dedicated software (KinSNP) was used missensemutationinexone17ofATP7Bgene(p.A1227T- to search the microarray results for homozygous regions 5%), 2 reported missense mutations (p.H1069Q-30%, p. consistent with linkage. Homozygosity was detected for G1341D-15%) and 1 polymorphism (p.R952K-71,4%). chromosome7thatincludesABCB4,eachofthe28coding Although p.A1227T mutation was not yet described, exons and their splice junctions of ABCB4 was PCR different prediction tools were used to reveal its pathogeni- amplified and sequenced. city (SIFT-0.001; Polyphen2-0,999) being fortified by Results:Anovelmutationc.C433T,causingGln145Stop biochemical results (ceruloplasmin-4,3mg/dl; free Cu- was identified in exon 6. It segregated as expected in the 78μg/dl). family showing homozygosity only in the patients. The Conclusions: The most common mutation was p. truncation of the transporter in the cytoplasmic domain is H1069Q in Moldovan WD patients. One novel missense expected to result in an inactive transporter, thus to be the mutation,potential pathogenic, hasbeenfoundinexone17 cause the disease in the family. of ATP7B gene(p.A1227T). L. Aspit: None. M. Arafat: None. B. Yerushalmi: V.A. Hlistun: None. K.R. Boiciuc: None. I.I. Coliban: None. E. Hubara: None. R. Parvari: None. None. D.G. Turcan: None. D. Blanita: None. V.C. Sacara: None. E-P07 Immunology and hematopoietic system E-P06.17 Identification of a mutation in ABCB4 gene involved in E-P07.01 progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) in Compound haplotypes in CFH and CD46 genes, as well as bedouin families the C3 variants, determine clinical outcome of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome- a family-based study L. Aspit1,2,M. Arafat1,2,B. Yerushalmi3,E. Hubara3,R. Parvari1,2 A. Kubiak1,A. Furmańczyk-Zawiska2,E. Uzarowska1, M. Kotlarek1,K.Falana3,M.Kolanowska1,M.Swierniak3,P.Gaj1, 1The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology,Immunology J.Starega-Roslan1,B. Leszczynska4,J. Przychodzien4,M. &Genetics,FacultyofHealthSciences,Ben-GurionUniversity Panczyk-Tomaszewska4,K. Jazdzewski3, M.Durlik2,A. oftheNegev,Beer-Sheva,Israel,beersheva,Israel,2National Wojcicka3,5 InstituteofBiotechnologyintheNegev,Ben-GurionUniversity oftheNegev,BeerSheva,Israel,BeerSheva,Israel,3Division 1CentreofNewTechnologies,UniversityofWarsaw,Warsaw, ofPeditrics,PediatricGastroenterologyUnit,SorokaMedical Poland, 2Department of Transplantation Medicine, CenterandFacultyofHealthSciences,Ben-GurionUniversity Nephrology, and Internal Diseases, Transplantation Institute, of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, beer sheva, Israel Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Genomic Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, Introduction: Progressive familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis 4Department of Pediatrics Nephrology, Medical University of (PFIC) is a group of autosomal recessive disorders char- Warsaw,Warsaw,Poland,5WarsawGenomics,INC,Warsaw, acterized by malfunctioning secretion of bile acids or other Poland components of bile. These disorders usually present during infancy or childhood period as progressive conjugated Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare dis- hyperbillirubinemia and liver dysfunction, without proper ease consisting of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,936 J.delPicchia thrombocytopenia and acute kidney injury, resulting from size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; mso- thealternativecomplementpathwaydysregulation.Clinical style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0cm5.4pt0cm5.4pt;mso- presentation and severity of the disease depend on the para-margin-top:0cm; mso-para-margin-right:0cm; mso- common (MAF>5%) germline variants in the complement para-margin-bottom:8.0pt; mso-para-margin-left:0cm; line- system genes, including haplotypes in the CD46 and CFH, height:107%; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font- associated with the low (CD46 ) or high (CFH-H3) size:11.0pt; font-family:Calibri; mso-ascii-font-family: GGAAC risk of unfavorable disease outcome. Calibri; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-font- Herewedescribeafamilywithaclinicalfollow-upof11 family:Calibri; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; mso- years. Among 8 siblings, three brothers were affected by ansi-language:TR;} aHUS at 22, 27 and 27 yoa, and their niece developed a Introduction:Behçet’s disease (BD) is a chronic multi- severe disease at the age of 10 months. We employed next system inflammatory disorder with uncertain aetiology. generation-sequencingtoanalyzethecompletesequencesof inheritance pattern is multifactorial, and most cases are 13 aHUS related genes in all the 11 family members. We sporadic. A family with four affected members and also analyzed risk genotypes in 412 unrelated healthy presenting autosomal dominant inheritance, was studied to volunteers to verify their population frequency. search for the putative genetic defect. The analysisrevealed acomplexgeneticbackground and Materials and Methods: All affected patients met the familial aggregation of the disease. The 10-month patient InternationalStudyGroupcriteriaforBD..Fatherandthree was heterozygous for both the MC and CFH-H3 sibs are affected, and three sibs were unaffected. Exome GGAAC haplotypes, while the adult patients were heterozygous for sequencing was performed in all four affected individuals. the CFH and homozygous for the MCP haplotype, Candidate causative variant search in accordance with suggestingitsprotectiverole. Wealsoidentifiedapotential autosomal dominant inheritance was performed. Hetero- novel risk genotype in the C3 gene (AA in rs11569511), zygous rare (MAF <0.005), exonic/splicing variants which present only in the kindred patient, with a population were present only in affected individuals were prioritized. frequency at 1.3%. The analysis also revealed a population Result: Patients did not carry any rare variants in the frequency of the homozygous CFH-H3 risk haplotype at TNFAIP3 gene, which is the only known BD related gene. 2.6%, underliningthecomplexpathogenesisofthedisease. Further,sevenrarevariantssharedbythepatientsonlywere This work was supported by Warsaw Genomics and the chosen as candidates. These are heterozygous c.1756C>T Foundation for the Development of Diagnostics and (p.P586S) in PRG4 (rs757882876), c.35A>T (p.D12V) in Treatment. NAGK (rs150821125), c.1490C>G (p.A497G) in SLC9A2, A. Kubiak: None. A. Furmańczyk-Zawiska: None. E. c.3128G>T(p.G1043V)inPIK3R4(rs56160735),c.11T>G Uzarowska:None.M.Kotlarek:None.K.Falana:None. (p.L4R) in IL1RAP (rs200782803), c.379T>C (p.S127P) in M. Kolanowska: None. M. Swierniak: None. P. Gaj: ULBP3 (rs200023001) and c.3581A>G (p.K1194R) in None.J.Starega-Roslan:None.B.Leszczynska:None.J. AHNAK. Przychodzien: None. M. Panczyk-Tomaszewska: None. Conclusion: Seven candidate variants in genes involved K.Jazdzewski:None.M.Durlik:None.A.Wojcicka:A. in immunological and inflammatory pathways were Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Warsaw detected. Among the candidates, IL1RAP appeared to be Genomics. the most relevant to the disease. This is the first report suggesting possible IL1RAP gene in Mendelian BD. E-P07.03 <!--EndFragment--> CandidateGeneSearchForAutosomalDominantBehçet’s S.Ugurlu:None.G.Turan:None.I.Karacan:None.S. Disease Through Whole Exome Sequencing Dasdemir: None. M. Seven: None. M.B. Düz: None. H. Ozdogan: None. A. Tolun: None. E. Tahir S.Ugurlu1,G.Turan2,I.Karacan3,S.Dasdemir1,M.Seven1,M. Turanli: None. B. Düz1,H.Ozdogan1,A. Tolun4,E. TahirTuranli2 E-P07.04 1Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Beta thalassemia mutations in patients from Dobrogea, Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Romania Molecular Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey A.Mitroi1,2,G.Cozaru1,2,M.Aschie2,3,C.Brinzan1,A.Apostol1, A. Mitroi4 Normal 0 false false false TR JA X-NONE /* Style Defi- nitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"Table 1EmergencyClinicalCountyHospitalofConstanta,Constanta, Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-colband- Romania, 2Ovidius University, CEDMOG Center, Constanta,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 937 Romania, 3Emergency Clinical County Hospital, Constanta, heterogeneous diseases with reduction of one or multiple Romania,4OvidiusUniversity,FacultyofMedicine,Constanta, hematopoietic cell lines in bone marrow as a main feature. Romania Next-Generation sequencing (NGS) facilitated the dis- covery of novel germline mutations that are the cause of Introduction: Beta-thalassemia is a group of hemoglobin IBMFS.The aim of this study was the elaboration and (β+ diseases caused by a reduction thalassemia) or absence implementation of a custom-designed 173-genes NGS- (β0 thalassemia) in the synthesis of beta-globin chains that panel into routine diagnostics. We performed NGS- results in microcytic hypochromic anemia, an abnormal sequencing for 49 patients with different referral diag- peripheral blood smear with nucleated red blood cells, and nosis: Diamond-Blackfan anemia (17); aplastic anemia reduced amounts of hemoglobin A (HbA) on hemoglobin (16); Fanconi anemia (3), myelodysplastic syndrome (5); analysis bone marrow failure (3), idiopathic thrombocytopenia (3), Matherial and methods: 26 patients were studied for dyskeratosis congenita (1), severe congenital neutropenia characterization as either heterozygous or homozygous for (1). Sample preparation was carried out with KAPA HTP beta-thalassemia.MolecularanalysiswasdonebyPCRand Library Preparation Kit Illumina (Roche, Switzerland) and reverse-hybridization in order to detect 22 of mutations tagrethybridizationenrichmenttechniqueviacustomprobe most commonly associated with beta-thalassemia panel SeqCap EZ Choice Library (Roche, Switzerland). (Mediterranean type). Obtained libraries were sequenced on MiSeq platform Results:Ofthe22heterozygouspatients4(22%)hadthe (Illumina, USA).We revealed 27 rare genetic variants that β+ β+ IVS1.6[T>C] mutation, 4 (22%) had the IVS2.745 couldrelatetothecauseofthedisease(10-pathogenic,6- [T>C], 4 patients (22%) had β0 codon 8[-AA] mutation, 4 likelypathogenicand11variantsofuncertainsignificance). patients(22%)hadβ0codon39[C>T]mutationand2(12%) Among 49 patients the diagnosis was confirmed in 12 and patients had β+ IVS1.110 [G>A]. Three patients were likely confirmed in 7 cases. Thus, total efficiency of homozygouse for IVS1.6[T>C] mutation and one patient revealing causative variants is 38.8%. The use of NGS for was compound heterozygouse for IVS1.6[T>C] and diagnosticofIBMFSsignificantlyexpandsthesearchrange IVS2.745. while results can influence the patient’s clinical manage- Conclusions: In our study the most frequent mutation ment. Furthermore, identification of IBMFS genetic reason was β+ IVS1.6[T>C], contrary to another study who plays important role in genetic counseling of patient’s investigate population from Romania and find that β family members. Obtained results show high diagnostic + IVS1.110[G>A] are the most frequent for our country. yield and allow to apply this custom gene panel in clinical This is due because of great ethnic heterogenity of practice. population from Dobrogea. The mutation β0 codon 8 A.V. Pavlova: None. M.A. Kurnikova: None. I.V. [-AA] is not identified in the former study. Mersiyanova: None. S.G. Mann: None. R.H. Abasov: Acknowledgment: The research was made possible None. E.V. Raykina: None. N.S. Smetanina: None. O.V. following completion of the project POS CCE 2.21., ID Goronkova:None.E.V.Suntsova:None.M.A.Maschan: 1844, SMIS 48750, CEDMOG None. A.A. Maschan: None. A. Mitroi: None. G. Cozaru: None. M. Aschie: None. C. Brinzan: None. A. Apostol: None. A. Mitroi: None. E-P07.06 CBL syndrome as a cause of JMML: new case in a E-P07.05 premature neonate with cleft palate, brain anomalies and Implementation of a Custom-Designed Targeted Next- splenomegaly and review of the literature Generation Sequencing Panel for the Diagnostics of Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes R.Villa1,M.Iascone2,L.Pezzoli2,F.Lalatta1,V.Fergnani1,G. A. Cagnoli1,L. Pugni3,C. Pietrasanta3,F. Mosca3,M. F. A.V.Pavlova,M.A.Kurnikova,I.V.Mersiyanova,S.G.Mann, Bedeschi1 R.H.Abasov,E.V.Raykina,N.S.Smetanina,O.V.Goronkova, E. V.Suntsova, M.A.Maschan, A.A. Maschan 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, OspedaleMaggiorePoliclinico,Milano,Italy,2Laboratoriodi Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric GeneticaMedica,ASSTPapaGiovanniXXIII,Bergamo,Italy, Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian 3NICU, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Federation Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS) com- posed of great number of clinically similar but genetically938 J.delPicchia Introduction:CBLsyndromeisararediseasebelongingto persistent fever, splenomegaly with cytopenia, hyper- the group of RASopathies caused by heterozygous muta- triglyceridemia and hypofibrinogenemia. Some of genetic tions of the CBL gene. It has overlapping features to defects (PRF1, UNC13D, STX11, STXBP2) in primary Noonan syndrome such as developmental anomalies, heart HLH have been identified but above 10% have unknown defects, bleeding problems, lymphatic dysplasias and genetic defects. hyperextensive joints. Patients with CBL syndrome also Materials and Methods: We present two individuals haveanincreasedrisk todevelopjuvenilemyelomonocytic from a previously unreported family identified to have a leukemia(JMML)anaggressivehaematopoeticmalignancy novelCTLA4variant.Probandisa6-year-oldboy,whohad of early childhood characterized by anemia, thrombocyto- a birth weight of 3054 grams and length 56cm. He had penia and hepato-splenomegaly. normal growth and health until the age of 4. Then, the Case report: A girl, born at 27 weeks, was referred for patient was admitted to the hospital with primary immune genetic evaluation at 3 weeks (corrected age) with cleft thrombocytopenia. The mother of the child was diagnosed palate, brain abnormalities, severe thrombocytopenia and with type 1 diabetes and Hashimoto’ disease. Physical splenomegaly.Dysmorphologyassessmenthighlightedonly examination revealed atopic skin inflammation, ulcers of subtle facial anomalies. 180K CGH-array was normal. the mucous membrane of the oral cavity and one café-au- Clinical exome sequencing revealed de novo heterozygous lait spot 3x5cm. Immunomodulatory therapy with IvIgG point mutation p.(Gln367Pro)intheCBLgene.Because of was performed with good but short effect. Chest x-ray thisresult,abonemarrowexaminationwasperformedanda showed tumour in mediastinum, CT scan revealed that was diagnosis of JMML was made. fungal. The patient had intensified immunosuppression - Discussion: Fifty-four cases of CBL syndrome had been initially with cyclosporine and ATG, then started treatment describedbefore, four of them had the p.(Gln367Pro) point according to the HLH 2004 protocol. Next Generation mutation. The phenotype was quite variable among these Sequencing of CTLA4 detected in a proband and then patients, usually more subtle than in the NS with heart confirmed in mother a novel, variant CTLA4 defects being less common. Cleft palate is not a typical (NM_005214.4):c.356T>C(p.Leu119Pro).Thepathogenic feature and could represent either an expansion of the variant revealed in a CTLA4 gene was confirmed by direct phenotype or an occasional association. Brain malforma- Sanger sequencing. tions and the development of splenomegaly (and JMML as Conclusion: The gene CLA4 codes a protein being well) are reported, respectively, in 26% and >70% of inhibitory receptor acting as major negative regulator of T- patients with the CBL syndrome (including our case), cell responses. We expand the mutational spectrum of demonstratinghowthesetwofeaturesareactuallythemajor CTLA4-related point out to clinical variability in rare onesthatallowonetodistinguishtheCBLsyndromeinthe familial cases RASopathies spectrum. M.M. Lejman: None. M. Cienkusz: None. K. Drabko: R.Villa: None. M. Iascone: None.L. Pezzoli: None. F. None. K. Wojciechowska: None. M. Choma: None. I. Lalatta: None. V. Fergnani: None. G.A. Cagnoli: None. Jaszczuk: None. K. Bąbol-Pokora: None. M. Bielska: L. Pugni: None. C. Pietrasanta: None. F. Mosca: None. None. D. Winnicka: None. M. Babicz: None. B. Styka: M.F. Bedeschi: None. None. J.R. Kowalczyk: None. E-P07.08 E-P07.09 Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis caused by a rare Case report of primary immunodeficiency in Moldova mutation in CTLA4 A.Dorif1,2,L.Andriesh2,V.Petrovici1,L.Sinitina1,D.Turcan1, M.M.Lejman1,M.Cienkusz1,K.Drabko1,K.Wojciechowska2, V. Sacara1,2 M.Choma1, I.Jaszczuk2,K.Bąbol-Pokora3,M.Bielska3,D. Winnicka1,M.Babicz1,B. Styka1,J.R. Kowalczyk1 1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 2Nicolae Testemitsanu State University of Medicine and 1Medical University of Lublin, Children's University Hospital, Pharmacy, Chisinau, the Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, Lublin, Poland, 2Children's University Hospital, Lublin, Moldova, Republic of Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Central Clinical Hospital, Medical A 4 months and 15 days male infant died in intensive care University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland department, he had bilateral antibiotic resistant pneumonia. Before death he was tested of IgM and IgG for TORCH Introduction:Hemophagocyticlymphohistiocytosis(HLH) infectionswithallnegativeresults.IgMandIgGlevelswere is a rare disorder in children, that is characterized by as low as 0,3 and 2,00 g/l correspondently. Was performedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 939 TREC and KREC concentration measurement through preliminarydata about KIR genes analysisoffour patient’s qPCR. KREC level was at 468 copies at 100000 cells, no relatives in aploidentical bone marrow transplantation to TREC was detected. According to this data have been identifythebestdonorcandidate.Donorswereanalyzedfor assumed diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency (isolated boththepresence/absenceofNKalloreactivecellsandKIR IgM deficiency). Autopsy revealed thymal displasia and repertoire characteristics (B content). hypoplasiawithlobulationabnormalities,nodular-glandular Results: Family 1: 2/3 alloreactive, there was no further reticulo-epithelial stromal reconstruction, Hasall corpuscles selection for KIR repertoire; Family2: 3/3 alloreactive, agenesis and only unique lymphocytes. It also revealed donor selection was based on the KIR repertoire; Family3: significant ligament lymphocytic depletion and agenesis of donor selection was based on the alloreactivity; Family 4: follicular-nodularstructuresoftheorgansystems,combined there was neither alloreactivity nor B content. In this study viro-myco-bacterial infection (CMV +Pn. jirovecii+ A. we purposed to select the best donor candidate in baumani) with latent evolution: viral lesions by CMV in haploidentical, T cell-depleted peripheral blood stem cell generalized form with involvement of lungs, liver, cere- transplantations, basing on donor-vs-recipient NK-cell bellum, thymus, pancreas, spleen and adrenal glands with alloreactivity; further more families will be enrolled and development of CMV encephalitis and meningitis, both will be perform follow up studies monitoring focal and diffusal necrotico-leucocital pneumocystico-bac- transplantation. terialpolysegmentedpneumoniawithinvolvementofupper A. Lari: None. S. Palchetti: None. S. Iozzi: None. B. andlowerlobeswithretractivefibroplasticdisplazicprocess Rigatti: None. C. Ceccarelli: None. G. Rombolà: None. inS -S ofrightlobe,erosive-ulcerativeleucocytal-necrotic E. Pelo: None. 1 2 tracheobronchitis. As was mentioned before, tests for TORCH infections were negative, but CMV lesions were E-P07.12 detected. It could be due to very low IgM and IgG levels, NGS of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes making their detection impossible. Taking in account repertoire for minimal residual disease diagnostics in patomorphological changes a Nezelof immunodeficiency pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia diagnosis was presupposed. But in difference from Nezelof syndrome, child had low levels of IgM and IgG. This A. Miroshnichenkova1, A.Komkov1,2, E.Zerkalenkova1,A. condition makes us doubt if it was especially Nezelof Popov1,G.Nugmanov2,I. Mamedov2, Y.Olshanskaya1,M. syndrome. Maschan1 A.Dorif:None.L.Andriesh:None.V.Petrovici:None. L. Sinitina: None. D. Turcan: None. V. Sacara: None. 1Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian E-P07.10 Federation, 2Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic KIR genes analysis of four patient’s relatives in Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, aploidentical bone marrow transplantation Russian Federation A. Lari,S. Palchetti, S.Iozzi, B. Rigatti, C. Ceccarelli,G. Introduction: Minimal residual disease (MRD) is the Rombolà, E.Pelo major cause of relapse in leukemia and the strongest prognostic factor, allowing to evaluate the efficiency of Immunogenetics Laboratory AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy treatment, and to make a decision on the subsequent therapy. Efficient and sensitive detection of clonal rear- Hematopoietic transplantation from human leukocyte anti- rangements of immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell receptor gen (HLA) haplotype-mismatched (haploidentical) donors (TCR) genes by NGS is applicable in most cases of acute is an established treatment of patients with high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and used for MRD mon- leukemia who do not have a matched donor. In haploi- itoring along with RT-PCR of fusion transcripts and flow dentical, T cell-depleted peripheral blood stem cell trans- cytometry. plants without posttransplant graft-versus-host disease Materials and Methods: Our cohort consisted of (GVHD)prophylaxis,donornaturalkiller(NK)cellsplaya pediatric ALL patients aged 4 to 13. Initial detection of beneficial role in outcomes. NK cells express, as their only patient-specific clonal rearrangements, performed on DNA inhibitoryreceptorforself,aKIRforanHLA-classIgroup samplesextractedfrombonemarrowpriortotreatment,was that is absent on allogeneic targets, sense the missing carried out by 8 multiplex PCRs of Ig/TCR followed by expression of the self-HLA-class I KIR ligand and mediate NGS. MRD detection included targeted NGS of previously alloreactions. Donor-vs-recipient NK-cell alloreactivity detected rearrangements. Quantitative analysis was based controls high-risk leukemia relapse. Here we report on digital PCR-like statistical approach.940 J.delPicchia Results:Weidentifiedover500leukemicrearrangements G6PC3 deficiency. In agreement, combined whole-exome in87patients.Toevaluatetheaccuracyofthetechniquewe sequencing and autozygosity mapping found the causative comparedMRDlevelsof31follow-upsamples:16samples genotype NM_138387.3(G6PC3):c.[84_107del]; withRT-PCR-measuredMRDand15samplesmeasuredby [84_107del]. At follow-up visits neutrophils ranged flow cytometry. In both series both negative and positive approximatelyfrom500to1400/μL.Conclusion.Thenovel results were confirmed by NGS. homozygous 24-bp indel in exon 1 of G6PC3 we report Conclusions: MRD detection by NGS is a sensitive and here is associated with a syndromic phenotype towards the specificmethodallowingforclonalityevaluationandMRD severe end of the clinical spectrum. We also show that quantification.GiventhatRT-PCRoffusiongenesandflow G6PC3 deficiency should be considered in the differential cytometry in some cases are not applicable for MRD diagnosis of congenital neutropenia even when absolute detection, NGS-based detection of Ig rearrangements is neutrophil count is not below 500. likely tobecomeroutine procedurefor MRDmeasurement. G.Zanella:None.D.Vozzi:None.A.M.Spinelli:None. The study was funded by RFBR grant №17-29-06052, F. Faletra: None. V. Manfredini: None. O. Palumbo: RSF grant №17-75-10113, Russian President's Fellowship None. A. Tommasini: None. A.P. D'Adamo: None. F. SP-671.2018.4 Verzegnassi: None. A. Miroshnichenkova: None. A. Komkov: None. E. Zerkalenkova: None. A. Popov: None. G. Nugmanov: E-P07.14 None. I. Mamedov: None. Y. Olshanskaya: None. M. NOVEL VARIANTS IN ADAMTS13 DETECTED BY Maschan: None. NEXT GENERATION SEQUENCING (NGS) IN A PATIENT WITH ATYPICAL THROMBOTIC E-P07.13 THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA G6PC3Deficiency:MindtheGapbetweenMildandSevere Neutropenia V. Zakharova,I.Mersiyanova, M. Kurnikova,E. Raykina,A. Laberko,E. Deripapa,M.Maschan,A. Shcherbina G.Zanella1,D.Vozzi2,A.M. Spinelli3,F. Faletra1,V. Manfredini1,O.Palumbo1,A. Tommasini1,A. P. D'Adamo4,F. Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric Verzegnassi1 Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation 1I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy, 3University of Padova - I.R.C.C.S. Introduction: NGS is a useful tool to diagnose genetic BurloGarofolo,Trieste,Italy,4UniversityofTrieste-I.R.C.C. defects in patients with atypical course of congenital S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy disorders. Matherials and methods: We report a boy who Introduction:G6PC3deficiencyisarecentlycharacterized presented at the age of 7 months with hemolytic anemia, cause of congenital neutropenia variably associated with thrombocytopenia and no neurological and renal dysfunc- multisystem involvement. To date, less than 100 patients tion or evidence of thrombosis. He initially responded to have been described. Case report. A 5-year-old girl, born steroids and rituximab treatment. Subsequently the relapse preterm to healthy consanguineous Italian parents, was of the disease was accompanied by hypogammaglobuline- referred to our hospital for proportionate prenatal-onset mia. Various primary immunodeficiencies were excluded growth failure (height and HC -2 SD; weight -4 SD) and via Sanger sequencing. Eventually the boy died of mild to moderate neutropenia. Review of records and fur- intracranial bleeding and sepsis. The clinical exome ther investigation highlighted: stomatitis, persistent inflam- sequencing (TruSightOne, Illumina) was performed mation of unknown cause (normal faecal calprotectin) but (MiSeq, Illumina) in the patient. Detected variants were no amyloid deposition, mild global developmental delay, filtered, their significance was assessed according to the neonatal pulmonary hypertension, congenital heart disease ACMG recommendations. Candidate variants were con- (atrial septal defect, mild tricuspid insufficiency, vascular firmed in the patient and his healthy parents by Sanger ring),lowserumHDL-cholesterol,renaldysplasiawithsub- sequencing, their pathogenicity was tested by in silico nephrotic proteinuria, treated bilateral inguinal hernia, analysis. effusive otitis media. Previous findings and appearance on Results: In the patient we detected two novel complex physical examination (prominent superficial veins, trian- heterozygous variants in ADAMTS13(NM_139025) gene: gular facies, unilateral congenital ptosis, epicanthus, bluish c.947_948delinsTT, p.G316V (exon 8) and sclera,bilateralabnormalpalmarcreases,proximallyplaced c.1143_1144delinsC, p.A381fs (exon 10). Each was thumbs, mild clitoromegaly) led to a clinical diagnosis of inherited from respective parent. Both variants have notAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 941 been previously reported in the literature and mutations analysis of the patient's mother revealed no mutation, we databases. Substitution p.G316V was predicted to be canassumethatthemutationfoundinthepatientmusthave pathogenic by in silico analysis. occurred spontaneously. Conclusion: Familial thrombotic thrombocytopenic pur- Conclusions: The present study identified a splicing pura(TTP) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation of the WAS gene responsible for WAS in a mutation in the ADAMTS13 gene, encoding the von Moldavianfamily.Toourknowledge,thisisthefirstreport Willebrand factor-cleaving protease and characterized by on the splicing mutation of WAS gene in Republic of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, Moldova. neurologic and renal complications due to microthrombi D.G. Turcan: None. L. Andriesh: None. O. Schitco: formation. TTP was not suspected in the patient who died None. V. Hlistun: None. I. Coliban: None. A. Dorif: before the correct diagnosis was made. Quick access to None. V. Sacara: None. NGS is crucial in severe congenital disorders. V. Zakharova: None. I. Mersiyanova: None. M. Kurnikova:None.E.Raykina:None.A.Laberko:None. E-P08 Intellectual Disability E. Deripapa: None. M. Maschan: None. A. Shcherbina: None. E-P08.01 Differentphenotypewith22q13.3deletionsyndromeintwo E-P07.16 patients AcasereportofWiskott-AldrichSyndromewithasplicing mutation in WAS gene H.Gurkan1,E.Atlı1,E.Atlı1,S.Demir1,Y.Özen1,H.Tozkır1,D. Eker1,C. Akurut1,Y. Karal2,I.Gorker3 D.G.Turcan1, L.Andriesh2,O.Schitco2,V. Hlistun1,I. Coliban1,A. Dorif1,V.Sacara1 1Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics,Edirne,Turkey,2TrakyaUniversity,MedicalFaculty, 1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic Department of Pediatric Neurology, Edirne, Turkey, 3Trakya of, 2Nicolae Testemitsanu State University of Medicine and University, Medical Faculty, Department of Child and Pharmacy, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of Adolescent Mental Health and Diseases, Edirne, Turkey Introduction: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X- The 22q13.3 deletion syndrome, also known as Phelan- linked recessive disorder characterized by thrombocytope- McDermid syndrome (PHMDS) (OMIM #606232), is a nia, eczema, and recurrent infections. The incidence of this contiguous gene disorder resulting from deletion of the rare disorder is approximately one to four cases per distallongarmofchromosome22.Thedeletionoccursnear 1.000.000 live male births. the end of the chromosome at a location designated q13.3. Material and Methods: We report a six month old boy In addition to normal growth and a constellation of minor who had presented with pulmonary septicemia of mixed dysmorphic features, this syndrome is characterized by etiology, secondary thrombocytopenia, eczema and pete- neurological deficits which include global developmental chialhaemorrhagicrash.Immunologicalinvestigationshave delay,moderatetosevereintellectualimpairment,absentor demonstrated essential humoral and cellular changes: low severely delayed speech, and decreased muscle tone serum level ofIgM (0.3mg/L) andIgA (0.2mg/L), elevated (hypotonia). Some people with this condition have autism IgE (767.6kU/L), low level of CD4(+) T cells (9%) and or autistic-like behavior that affects communication and elevated CD8(+) T cells (59%). Genetic analysis for the social interaction, such as poor eye contact, sensitivity to detection of a mutation of WAS gene was performed by touch, and aggressive behaviors. They may also chew on polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformational non-food items such as clothing. Less frequently, people polymorphism analysis (PCR-SSCP) and direct sequencing with this condition have seizures. of the PCR product. The primers was taken from Ariga Patient 1: 9-year-old girl patient Genetic Diseases Tadashi et.al., 1997. Diagnosisreferredtoourcenterwithautism-likebehaviors. Results: In PCR-SSCP analysis, the patient had an Thechromosomestructurewasdeterminedas46,XX.Inthe abnormal shift band, which was not found in normal constructed arrayCGH analysis, 4315 kb deletion was controls. In direct sequencing analysis, the patient with detected in 22q13.31-q13.33 and 5057 kb duplication was WAS showed A-to-G transition at complementary nucleo- detected in 8p23.3-p22.2 (Agilent 4x180K ISCA CGH tide 274 (c.274-2 A>G), located in intron 2. A review of +SNP). family history did not reveal the presence of relatives Patient 2: A 16-month-old girl was admitted to our clinically diagnosed as having WAS and since DNA Genetic Diagnosis Diagnosis Center with findings of942 J.delPicchia hypotonia. The chromosome structure was determined as reports in the future will be important to definitely define 46,XX. 5205 kb deletion was detected in the arrayCGH the critical region of this deletion syndrome. analysis 22q13.31-q13.33. In 22q13.3 deletion syndrome, S. Huljev Frkovic: None. K. Francic: None. K. changes in the phenotype of the patient can be seen Crkvenac Gornik: None. I. Tonkovic Durisevic: None. according to the size of the deletion. Both patients M. Salamon Janecic: None. A. Pokupec Bilic: None. underwentSHANK3 deletion. However, patient 1 included 4315 kb deletions 45 genes, while patient 2 included 5205 E-P08.048 kb deletions 63 genes. p23.3 deletion and 16q23.2-q24.3 duplication detected by H. Gurkan: None. E. Atlı: None. E. Atlı: None. S. arrayCGH in a patient with intellectuel disability Demir:None.Y.Özen:None.H.Tozkır:None.D.Eker: None. C. Akurut: None. Y. Karal: None. I. Y.Özen,H.Gürkan,E.Atlı,E.I.Atli,Ç.Akurut,N.Moustafa, Gorker: None. S. Demir,H.Tozkır E-P08.02 TRAKYAUNIVERSITY,DEPARTMENTOFGENETIS,Turkey A case report of a patient with an interstitial deletion in region 2q31.2q32.1 Balanced chromosome translocations in either parent increases the risk of recurrent miscarriage, unbalanced S. HuljevFrkovic1, K.Francic1,K.Crkvenac Gornik2,I. chromosome rearrangements, congenital malformations, Tonkovic Durisevic2,M. SalamonJanecic1,A. PokupecBilic2 and mental retardation in liveborn offspring. The avail- ability and use of CGH with high-resolution microarrays 1UniversityHospitalCenterZagreb,DepartmentofPediatrics, has greatly improved the detection of micro-deletion and Division for genetics and metabolism, Zagreb, Croatia, duplications in patients with developmental delay and 2UniversityHospitalCenterZagreb,DepartmentofLaboratory congenital anomalies. An eleven years old girl referred us Diagnostics, Division for Cytogenetics, Zagreb, Croatia withspeech delayandintellectual disability.Sheisthefirst child of healthy nonconsanguineous parents. She was born Introduction: 2q31.2q32.3 deletion syndrome is a rare at 38th gestation weeks with a weight of 3400 gr. and genetic disorder reported in more than 30 cases up to date. hospitalized52daysintheneonatalintensivecareunitwith These deletions are responsible for developmental delay, sepsis, jaundice and milk allergy. The patient had dys- facial dysmorphism, mental retardation and behavioral morphic features including micrognathia, broad forehead, disturbances. We present a patient with interstitial broad nose wings, low-set columella. Cytogenetic analysis 2q31.2q32.1 microdeletion and compare his features with was performed and karyotype was 46,XX,der(8)add(8p23). those reported previously. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were Results: Our patient is a second child of a healthy and applied in order to confirm the chromosomal region and unrelatedparents.Hewasbornatterm,BW3100g,BL50 detected 46,XX.ish dup(16)(q24). High-resolution aCGH cm, Apgar scores were 10/10. Cytogenetic prenatal +SNP 4x180K platform (Agilent Technologies) revealed diagnosis due to advanced maternal age was performed 567 kb deletion on chromosome 8 arr[hg19]8p23.3 and revealed a normal karyotype. During early childhood (191.530,264-770.060)x1 and a 8657 kb duplication on developmentaldelaywasobserved.Atfirstvisit,hewas10 chromosome 16 arr[hg19]16q23.2-q24.3(81.491.655- years old, with severe intellectual disability, speech 90.148.393)x3. Parental karyotyping confirmed the chro- developmental delay, mild facial dysmorphism, aggressive mosomal abnormalities resulted from a paternal balanced behavioral problems worsening with age and occasional translocation involving chromosomes 8 and 16 [46,XY, t episodesofhyperactivity.Array-CGHanalysisshowedade (8;16)(p21;q22)]. We described molecular cytogenetic novo 9563 kb deletion in 2q31.2q32.1 between 179 to 188 characterization of deletion 8p23.3 and duplication of Mb. The deletion involves 54 genes, including CERKL, 16q23.2-q24.3. To our knowledge, this is the first case FRZB, ZNF804A, ITG4A genes, which, according to reported in the literature. literature, may be responsible for specific cognitive and Y. Özen: None. H. Gürkan: None. E. Atlı: None. E.I. behavioral phenotype and craniofacial abnormalities. We Atli: None. Ç. Akurut: None. N. Moustafa: None. S. have compered the specific phenotype of our patient with Demir: None. H. Tozkır: None. patients diagnosed with 2q31.2q32.3 deletion syndrome reported in literature and we have noticed similarities. E-P08.0516 Conclusion: This case of interstitial deletion revealed by p11.2CNVsdetectedbyArray-CGHinacohortofpatients array-CGH suggest that 2q31.2q32.1 could be the critical with intellectual disability, autism spectrum and obesity region in 2q31.2q2q32.3 deletion syndrome. The similarAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 943 I.M.Carreira1,2,3,J.Rosmaninho-Salgado4,L.M.Pires1,J.M. J.B. Melo1,2,3,S. I.Ferreira1,2,L. Ramos4,M.Pinto1,A. Saraiva4,5,S.B. Sousa4,6,J. B.Melo1,2,3 Jardim1,I. M.Carreira1,2,3 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2iCBR-CIMAGO–CentrodeInvestigaçãoemMeioAmbiente, 2iCBR-CIMAGO- Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e Oncobiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Genética e Oncobiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CNC-IBILI, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CNC-IBILI, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Clínica Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal Universitária de Pediatria, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Instituto de In the beginning of 2011, we received a 2 year old male GenéticaMédica,FaculdadedeMedicinadaUniversidadede patient with severe global developmental delay, micro- Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal cephaly, epilepsy and short stature, for array-Comparative GenomicHybridization(array-CGH)analysis.Theanalysis The presence of a large number of flanking segmental dupli- was performed with Agilent 180K oligonucleotide non- cations/low-copy repeat sequences with a high degree of ISCA slide, used in setting at that time, and showed no sequence identity in the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p) clinicallyrelevantCopyNumberVariant(CNV).Attheend leads to recurrent deletions and duplications as a consequence of 2017, we were contacted by the referring clinician of non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) during because a cousin from the maternal side had done array meiosis.Arecurrent ̴600kbmicrodeletionisoneofthemost abroad and was diagnosed with a 20Kb deletion at Xq24, frequentgenomicimbalancesin16p11.2(BP4-BP5)associated involving UPF3B gene. The phenotypes of both cousins with abnormal phenotypes including neurodevelopmental dis- were very similar. Being a maternal X-chromosome dele- orders, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and obesity. In a tion, we revisited the array-CGH result and check if we cohortof26patientsstudiedbyAgilent180Koligonucleotide have missed the deletion. We concluded that UPF3B gene array-ComparativeGenomicHybridization(array-CGH)and/or was only covered by 2 probes, both with a log ratio 2 multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) compatible with a deletion, and repeated the array-CGH carryinga16p11.2rearrangement(deletionorduplication),19 hybridization using an ISCA slide, currently the lab pro- (73%) showed a deletion in the classical region of 16p11.2 cedure, that contains 36 probes covering the UPF3B gene, (29,562-30,192 bp)[hg19]. Although the phenotype of indivi- confirmingthedeletion,thatprovedtobematernal.UPF3B duals with the deletion can be variable, all patients showed at gene is associated with intellectual disability, autism and leastoneclinicalfindingtypicalof16p11.2deletion:cognitive facial dysmorphisms, justifying both cousins phenotype. impairment, language delay, autism or obesity. Other features This case illustrates that misdiagnosis can result from less frequent include: neurological issues (epilepsy, neuroima- technical limitations, namely from inappropriate coverage ging findings), behavioural problems, cardiac malformations, and highlight the importance of reevaluation of cases pre- vertebralanomalies,macrocephaly,hearingloss.Althoughthe viously analyzed by array-CGH and without significant phenotype of 16p11.2 microdeletion syndrome shows a high CNVs. The use of arrays with ISCA design is of outmost variability,itrepresentsthesecondmostfrequentgeneticcause importance,since they havehigher coverageindiseaseand of obesity. The obesity observed in this population may be syndrome associated genome regions, overcoming the explained by the haploinsuficiency of one or more of the 30 general agreement that, at least, 3 consecutive probes are genespresentinthisregion.Ontheotherhand,itisknownthat necessary to confidently identify a true CNV. individuals with intellectual disability or autism have a higher J.B.Melo:None.S.I.Ferreira:None.L.Ramos:None. predispositionforobesity,possiblyduetheinvolvementofone M. Pinto: None. A. Jardim: None. I.M. Carreira: None. or more pathways. I.M. Carreira: None. J. Rosmaninho-Salgado: None. E-P08.07 L.M.Pires:None.J.M.Saraiva:None.S.B.Sousa:None. A patient with a new CNTNAP2 homozygous variant: J.B. Melo: None. further delineation of the CASPR2 deficiency syndrome E-P08.06 F. Riccardi1,2, J.Urquhart2,3, G.McCullagh4,S.Douzgou2,3 UPF3B gene deletion in a patient with severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, absent speech: problematic of array- 1Medical Genetics Department, La Timone Hospital, CGH coverage Marseilles Public University Hospital, Marseille, France,944 J.delPicchia 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Medical Faculty,Necmettin Erbakan University, KONYA, Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Turkey Foundation Trust Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Division of Evolution Introduction: Interstitial deletions of the long arm of and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, chromosome 6 are rarely reported. This condition shows University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, phenotypic heterogeneity which probably caused by wide 4Department of Paediatric Neurology, Manchester University variability in size and localization of the deletion. 6q dele- NHSFoundationTrustManchesterAcademicHealthSciences tions are classified according to position of the anomaly; Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom proximal (6q11q16), medial(6q15q25) and terminal (6q25qter).Todate,themedial6qdeletionwasobservedin The CASPR2 deficiency syndrome is caused by bi-allelic, approximately 30 patients. We report a patient with a loss-of-function variants in the CNTNAP2 gene and is medial 6q interstitial deletions. characterisedbyintellectualdisabilityandepilepsyonsetin Material and Methods: The proband, a 3-year-old boy, the first 3 years of life associated with loss of verbal skills. was the second child of healthy non-consanguineous Exome analysis focused for learning difficulties and epi- parents. He was referred to our clinic because of lepsy,identifiedanovel,homozygous,variantc.985delA,p. dysmorphic features and learning difficulty. His physical (Ser329Valfs*28) in the CNTNAP2 gene, in a boy with a examination demonstrated microcephaly, hypertelorism, clinical presentation overlapping Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. epicanthus,down-slantingpalpebralfissure,frontalbossing, This variant has not been previously reported in the litera- large-simple ear, scoliosis. His weight and height were ture;howeveritispredictedtodisruptnormaltranslationof within normal range. the CNTNAP2 gene. It segregated from heterozygous, Results: His cytogenetic evaluation with conventional consanguineous, normal parents. The patient was born fol- GTG banding resulted in 46,XY. Considering the pheno- lowing a normal pregnancy and delivery. Motor develop- typic abnormalities of the patient, array-CGH analysis was mental milestones’ acquisition was normal but speech was performed. 10000 Kb interstitial deletion at 6q21q22.31 delayed. Generalised, tonic-clonic seizures occurred at bands,arr[hg19]6q21q22.31(113,754,403-123,754,142)×1, 30monthsofageandwereassociatedwithlossofbabbling. was observed at analysis. The deleted region includes 55 At 4 years and 6 months, the patient had a severe, focal OMIM genes. His parents had normal constitutional epilepsy disorder with varied seizure semiology that karyotype but array analysis not performed yet. responded well to sodium valproate. EEG findings were Conclusion:The interstitialdeletions of6qcharacterized non-specific and brain MRI showed a slightly smaller, left byheterogeneousphenotypes.Intellectualdisability,micro- temporal lobe without cortical dysplasia. The patient had cephaly, developmental delay and skeletal abnormalities moderatelearningdifficulties,stereotypicmovements(side- were common among these patients. We compared the to-side, head movements and hand wringing) and episodic phenotype of our patient with those reported in the panting respiration. We expand the molecular spectrum of literature. We hope the clinical features that we present in the CASPR2 deficiency syndrome and we review the lit- our case, would be helpful for full comprehension of erature to delineate the differential diagnosis of the reces- karyotype/phenotype correlation in patients with 6q sive Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-like disorders. deletion. F. Riccardi: None. J. Urquhart: None. G. McCullagh: E.Goktas:None.S.Eray:None.M.S.Yildirim:None. None. S. Douzgou: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; FDNA. E-P08.09 UnravellingtheXp22.3microdeletion/microduplicationina E-P08.08 family with X-linked icthyosis combining aCGH, MLPA Acaseofinterstitial6q21-q22.31deletionwithdysmorphic and FISH techniques features N.Baena,E. Gabau,C. Aguilera, A.Ruiz, N.Capdevila, L. E. Goktas1,S.Eray2,M. S.Yildirim3 Capel, S.Ourani, M.Guitart 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,VanResearchandTraining Corporació sanitària Parc taulí, SABADELL, Spain Hospital, Health Sciences University, Van, Turkey, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Van Introduction: X-linked ichthyosis is a genetic disorder Research and Training Hospital, Health Sciences University, affectingtheskincausedbyadeficitinthesteroidsulfatase Van, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Meram enzyme (STS), and often is associated with a recurrent microdeletion at Xp22.31.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 945 PatientsandMethods:Theprobandisa17-year-oldboy syndrome (FHS) was suspected. FHS and Rubinstein- and he was referred to the clinical geneticist because of Taybi syndrome (RTS) are both rare genetic disorders icthyosis and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The characterized by multiple congenital anomalies and intel- molecular analysis consisted on Comparative Genomic lectual deficit. They share clinical features since causative Hybridization array (aCGH) (Agilent 60K), Multiplex genesbelongtothesamesignalingpathway.FHSiscaused Ligation Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) self by mutations in the SRCAP that codes for a protein who customized to analyze the CNV’s inheritance in parents activates CREBBP. CREBBP plays a key role in regulation andsiblingsandFluorescenceInSituHybridization(FISH) of cell growth and division and is crucial for normal using the BAC clone RP11-359O20 to characterize development. Pathogenic variants in CREBBP represent a the CNV. known cause for RTS. Results: aCGH analysis of the patient revealed an Materials and Methods: DNA was isolated from interstitialdeletiononXp22.3involvingtheXp22.3region. peripheral blood lymphocytes using salting out method. Thedeletionencompassesapproximately1.6Mb(arr[hg19] Clinical exome sequencing (Illumina TruSight One) which Xp22.31(6,488,721-8,097,511)x0) and contained HDHD1, targeted genes related to observed clinical presentation was STS, VCX, PNPLA4 and MIR651 genes. MLPA analysis performed. confirmed the deletion in the proband, reported a duplica- Results:Clinicalexomesequencingindicatedpresenceof tion in his sister and grand mother and a normal MLPA a novel, likely pathogenic, stopgain variant c.6244C>T dosage was shown in his mother and his maternal uncle. (NM_004380.2) in CREBBP. Variant is present in mosaic The grandfather has icthyosis too but he did not accept state (18,5%). genetic testing. In order to decipher the normal MLPA Conclusion: Presented boy is the first reported patient result in the mother we applied FISH that shows a with the mosaic variant c.6244C>T in CREBBP. While microduplicationinoneXchromosomeandamicrodeletion mosaicCREBBPvariantshavebeendescribedasacauseof in the other one. clinical presentation with traits associated with Rubinstein- Conclusions: The deletion on Xp22.3 gene is consistent Taybi syndrome, as far as we are aware, a clinical overlap with the principal feature of our patient of X-linked between RTS and FHS has not been previously reported. ichthyosis and probably for the ASD. To identification of J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M. Mijovic: None. A. the mother harbouring both microdeletion and microdupli- Miletic: None. B. Dimitrijevic: None. B. Peterlin: None. cationXp22.31foundthankstousingFISHallowedtooffer A. Maver: None. G. Cuturilo: None. a reliable genetic counselling. N. Baena: None. E. Gabau: None. C. Aguilera: None. E-P08.12 A. Ruiz: None. N. Capdevila: None. L. Capel: None. S. A clinical case of early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy Ourani: None. M. Guitart: None. caused by a de novo pathogenic variant in the STXBP1 E-P08.11 I.Anisimova, O.Levchenko,N.Semenova,A. Lavrov Novel mosaic CREBBP mutation in a patient with overlappingclinicalfeaturesofRubinstein-Taybisyndrome Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian and Floating-Harbor syndrome Federation J.RumlStojanovic1,M.Mijovic1,A.Miletic1,B.Dimitrijevic1,B. STXBP1-encephalopathy is an early-onset epileptic ence- Peterlin2,A. Maver2, G.Cuturilo1,3 phalopathy characterized by different types of intractable seizures, severe intellectual disability, autism-like features, 1University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinical hypotonia. It’s caused most frequently by a heterozygous Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre pathogenic variant in STXBP1 or contiguous gene deletion Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Faculty of Medicine, that includes STXBP1 gene which codes an essential pro- University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia tein for presynaptic vesicular release. We present clinical and genetic characteristics of a 3- Introduction: We present three-year-old boy with severe years old boywithearly-infantile epilepticencephalopathy. developmental and growth delay, agenesis of corpus cal- The boy was born in term from the pregnancy complicated losum, toracal scoliosis and craniofacial dysmorphism with bygestationaldiabetesmellitus.Proband’sbirthweightwas prominent forehead, dolichocephalic head, hypoplasia of 4160 g, length 54 cm, Apgar score 7/8 points. Motor nose, prominent collumela and smooth philtrum. He developmentisdelayed–keepshisheadfromamonth,sits underwent metopic craniosynostosis surgery. He does not fromayear,doesn’twalk.Speechisabsent.From3months speak. Based on clinical presentation, Floating-Harbor there is a periodic tremor of extremities. An EEG is946 J.delPicchia representedbyacutewaves,polyphasecomplexesandslow identified a new deletion-type mutation in the 19th exon wave activity. Typical epileptiform activity was not of the NSD1 gene that was not previously reported In the detected. A MRI of the brain at 2-years old revealed mild literature. Unlike the cases reported in the literature enlargement of subarachnoid spaces. xyphoidalprotrusionwasdetectedatthispatientwithnovel Phenotype features include upslanting palpebral fissures. mutation. The patient has impaired communication and limited eye Conclusions: Rapid growth, difficulty in learning, contact. macrocephaly, speech delay and skewed personality,it is Analysis of whole exome sequencing data revealed a absolutely necessary to think about Sotos syndrome. previously described pathogenic variant (rs796053361) Especially timid, shy personality was a bulge available in c.875G>A(p.Arg292Leu)inheterozygousstateinSTXBP1 our all patients. in the proband. This variant was not detected in either M. Elmas: None. B. Göğüş: None. B. Değirmenci: parent and was confirmed with Sanger sequencing. None. A. Gezdirici: None. M. Solak: None. Ourclinicalcasedescribesthephenotypeassociatedwith themutationinSTXBP1andcontributestotheevidenceof E-P08.14 itsroleofthisgeneinthepathogenesisoftheearly-infantile Nonrecurrent 11q12.1q13.3 gain in a patient with motor epileptic encephalopathy. and cognitive developmental delay, multiple congenital I. Anisimova: None. O. Levchenko: None. N. Seme- anomalies, and short stature nova: None. A. Lavrov: None. I.P.Pinto1,2,L.B.Minasi2,R.Steckelberg2,D.M.C.Cunha2,C. E-P08.13 L. Ribeiro1,2, C.C. daSilva2,3,1,A. D.daCruz2,3,1 ClinicalAndGeneticEvaluationOfSotosSyndromeCases With A Novel Mutation; A Single Center Experience 1Federal University of Goiás, Biotechnology and Biodiversity PhDProgram,Goiânia,Brazil,2PontificalCatholicUniversity M.Elmas1,B.Göğüş1,B.Değirmenci1,A.Gezdirici2,M.Solak1 of Goiás, Department of Department of Agricultural and Biological Sciences, Replicon Research Group, Goiânia, 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Kanuni Brazil, 3Human Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Sultan Süleyman Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey Laboratory, Secretary of Goias State for Public Health, Goiânia, Brazil Objective: In the literature review we found few studies that included Sotos syndrome findings and clinical mani- Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders are char- festations.The aim of this study is to evaluate the prenatal, acterized by substantial genetic heterogeneity and clinical natal and postnatal clinical findings associated with sotos variability. Hereditary cerebellar ataxias, characterized by syndrome. clinically variable gait disturbances, are often accompanied Methods:16 patients were examined retrospectively in byneurologicalsymptoms.Theinfantileonsets,commonin thisstudy,ranginginagebetween3and23.Parametersthat patients with congenital variants, typically have we investigated are; birth weight, birth length,Apgar score developmental delay. at 5 minutes, NSD1 gene, dysmofological face appearance, Material and Methods: Herein, we reported a 10 years bone age, seizure, learning disability, feeding difficulties, oldboywhowalkedattheageof6,talkedat7,borntonon- surgical operation and other accompanying abnormalities consanguineous parents. His clinical evaluation showed (brain MRI, abnormal echocardiographic findigs,have severemotor,speechandcognitivedelays,facialdysmorph- chronic otitis media, etc.).Patients files and genetic reports ismswithepicanthalfolds,palpebralfissure,hypertelorism, of patients were examined and the hospital registry system broadnose,bulbousnasaltip,longphiltrum,thinupperlip, was screened. high arched palate, irregular teeth, retrognatia, and short Results: İn this study, we found an increase in the stature. Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA) was ® frequency of the parameters; breech presentation, APGAR done using GeneChip CytoScanHDTM array. scoreinthe5thminuteisbetween4-7,largeforgestational Results: CMA revealed a 12.9 Mb duplication in arr age (LGA), atrial septal defect at echocardiography, [GRCh37] 11q12.1q13.3(56,928,391-69,867,039)x3, consanguinity marriage in the Sotos syndrome individuals encompassing 408 genes. The genes related to the compared to the normal population.We also found delay in phenotype were CLP1, CNTF, STX3, TMEM138, developmentalstepscomparedtothenormalpopulation.We TMEM216, BEST1, UQCC3, ATL3, COX8A, SCYL1, determined that all patients had macrocephaly, increased NRXN2, SNX15, SLC25A45, RNASEH2C, AP5B1, PACS1, bone age, chronic otitis media frequency and hernia KLC2, BBS1, SPTBN2, NDUFV1, and NDUFS8. There is operative frequency consistent with the literature.We evidencethatautosomalrecessivespinocerebellarataxia-21Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 947 (OMIM616719) is caused by compound heterozygous year old boy with cardiomyopathy, but with normal, mutation in the SCYL1 gene. Furthermore, mutation in hypermobile mitral valve and moderate intellectual dis- SPTBN2 gene cause spinocerebellar ataxia autosomal ability. MRI of the brain indicated widened interhemi- recessive14(OMIM615386).Inboth,areobservedpatients spheric space. Facial dysmorphism include prominent with developmental delay. cheeks, eyelid ptosis, epicanthus, prominent philtrum, Conclusions: The CMA is a powerful tool to investigate small teeth, and everted lower lip. Microduplication was children with motor and developmental delays, in order to determined using microarray technology, Agilent Sure clinically relevant genetic diagnosis, such as the genetic PrintG3 CGH4x180K oligo micorarray kit, followed by evidence found for our proband. Therefore, CMA was data analysis on Agilent Genomic Workbench Software. efficient to help in delineating phenotypic variation and Seventeengenesweredeterminedintheduplicatedregion allowedadequateclinicalmanagementandbetterfollowup including HIP and YWHAG genes. In conclusion here we for the proband and his family. report a new case with distal 7q11.23 microduplication, I.P. Pinto: None. L.B. Minasi: None. R. Steckelberg: with additional information of clinical variability, None.D.M.C.Cunha:None.C.L.Ribeiro:None.C.C.da important for diagnostic purposes, and possibility for Silva: None. A.D. da Cruz: None. adequate genetic counselling for affected families. K. Popovska-Jankovic: None. G. Bozhinovski: None. E-P08.15 E. Sukarova Stefanovska: None. E. Sukarova Ange- Duplication of distal part of 7q11.23 region not lovska: None. O. Jotovska: None. D. Plaseska- encompassing the Williams-Beuren critical region in a Karanfilska: None. patient with moderate intellectual disability and cardiomyopathy E-P08.17 Threefold imbalance - duplication 6p22.3, duplication K. Popovska-Jankovic1,G.Bozhinovski1,E. Sukarova 9p24.2, and duplication 13q33.3- in a boy with Stefanovska1, E.Sukarova Angelovska2, O.Jotovska3,D. developmental delay/intellectual disabillity Plaseska-Karanfilska1 U.Heinrich1,M.Cohen1,2,I.Rost1 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, 1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Pediatric Martinsried, Germany, 2kbo Children's Centre, Munich, Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Germany YugoslavRepublicof,3InstituteforMentalHealthofChildren and Youth “Mladost”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Case report: We report on a 9 years old boy with mild Yugoslav Republic of intellectual disability, motor delay, severe language delay, and behavioural problems. His body measurements are in The hemizygous microdeletion of approximatelly 1.5 Mb the normal range, and he only shows some mild facial region of chromosome 7q11.23, causes the neurodeve- dysmorphic signs. His mother and one of his brothers lopmental disorder known as Williams-Beuren syndrome attended special schools. (WBS). It is a complex multisystemic disorder, with the Materials and Methods: Conventional karyotyping was prevalence of 1:7,500-1:50,000 newborns. Patients with performed using standard GTG banding technique. For WBS demonstrate various clinical disturbances including array CGH analysis CytoChip Oligo 180K microarray was cardiovascular manifestations; developmental delay; used. Segregation analyses were performed by behavioral and cognitive abnormalities. Microduplication quantitative PCR. ofthe7q11.23region,knownasSommerville-van-derAA Results: Conventional chromosome analysis showed a syndrome was also reported, with milder phenotype but normal male karyotype. Array CGH revealed three also with facial dysmorphism and deficits in social inter- imbalances: a) A 388 kb duplication 6p22.3 encompassing action ability. In addition, a dystal 7q11.23 duplication thegenesNUP153,FAM8A1,CAP2,andKIF13A.b)A685 wasfoundasanewentityin 5cases with mildintelectual kb duplication 9p24.2 encompassing the gene RFX3. c) A disability, agressivnes and authistic spectrum disorders. 1,71 Mb duplication 13q13.3 encompassing the genes InfluenceofthegenesHIPandYWHAG wassuggestedto LIG4, TNFSF13B, ABDH13, and FAM155A. Segregation be critical for the manifestations of this microduplication analyses proofed the duplication13q33.3 to be maternally syndrome. Here we report a case with a de novo 7q11.23 inherited, the duplication 9p24.2 to be paternally inherited, microduplication distal from the Williams-Beuren critical and the duplication 6p22.3 to be de novo. region with a minimal lenght of 1Mb. The case is a five948 J.delPicchia Conclusion: The present case as another good example E-P08.19 for the complex genetics of children with developmental A novel MID2 mutation as a cause of X-linked intelectual delay/intellectualdisabilityandfortheproblemsconcerning disability-101 the classifications of the CNV’s in these patients. None of the CNV’s in our patient is described in the literature, but M.SoeiroeSá, O.Moldovan, A.Sousa for all three some patients are listed in the DECIPHER database.Consequently,allthreeimbalanceswereclassified Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, asvariantsofunknownsignificance(VUS),andpresumably Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, onlythecombinedeffectisresponsibleforthepatient’sfull Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal phenotype. U. Heinrich: None. M. Cohen: None. I. Rost: None. A mutation in MID2 has recently been associated with X- linked intellectual disability-101 (IDX101) in a large kin- E-P08.18 dred with affected males showing variable degrees of Identification of a novel mutationgt X-linked mental intellectual disability (ID), global developmental delay retardation type 102 by whole exome sequencing (GDD) and hyperactivity. Other features, present in more than half of the individuals, were speech disorder and M.Javaheri strabismus. Dysmorphic features were insignificant, except for a long face. Dr. Zeinali Medical Genetics center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Herein, we describe two maternal half-brothers with ID/ Republic of GDD in whom a hemizygous variant, c.668G>A, p. (Arg223His), was identified in MID2 through trio-based Introduction:X-linkedmentalretardationbroadlyrefersto whole exome sequencing (WES), including both boys and a group of inherited disorders characterized by varying theirunaffectedmaternalgrandfather.Theolderbrother(14 degrees of mental retardation. Mental retardation, X-linked years old) has severe ID, along with mild autism spectrum 102 is a form of mental retardation characterized by sig- disorder (ASD), microcephaly, strabismus, atrial septal nificantly below average general intellectual functioning defect and dysmorphic features including a long face, associated with impairments in adaptive behavior .This downslanting palpebral fissures, bilateral epicantus, long study presents a patient with no definite clinical diagnosis. and pear-shaped nose, thin upper lip and retrognathia. The WES (Whole Exome Sequencing) revealed a novel younger brother (6 years old) has moderate GDD with mutation. severe language impairment, severe ASD, astigmatism and Materials &Method: The case is a 7 years old girl with less marked dysmorphic features (a similar nose and mild mental retardation, delayed motor and speech devel- retrognathia). The variant, classified as of uncertain opment, and talipes equinovarus. Brain MRI showed mild significance (class 3), is absent in the grandfather and dilatationofventricularsystem.Karyotypeisnormal46XX. presentataverylowfrequencyinpopulationdatabasesand Metabolic screening, urine amino acids chromatography, is located in a highly conserved residue of the MID2 plasma amino acids HPLC, and thyroid function were protein. Other etiological investigations, including meta- normal. Age of manifestation was 6 months. Parents are bolic panel, FMR1 PCR and array-CGH were normal. asymptomaticandnon-consanguineous.Theyhavenoother Taking all into account, we believe this could be the cause affectedchild.WESwasrequested.Sangersequencingwas oftheboys’phenotypes,beingthesecondfamilydescribed used for segregation analysis of the identified variant. with IDX101. However, more families need to be reported Insillico analysis of the newly identified variant was done. in order to strengthen this causal relationship. Results: WES revealed a previously unreported hetero- M. Soeiro e Sá: None. O. Moldovan: None. A. zygous variant in the DDX3X gene, c.894C>A (p. Sousa: None. Cys298*).This is a nonsense substitution which interrupts the reading frame by a premature stop codon. E-P08.20 Conclusion: As this variant was not detected in either Genetictestingthroughmultiplexligationdependentprobe parent, we conclude that it is de novo in the index patient. amplification analysis for children with global All Insilico analysis supported the pathogenicity of the developmental delay or intellectual disability mutation.ThismutationiscompatiblewithX-linkedmental retardation type 102. No other phenotypes are known to be A. Boglis,F. Tripon,V.Moldovan, A. Crauciuc,C. Banescu associated with pathogenic variants in DDX3X. M. Javaheri: None. University of Medicine anf Farmacy of Tirgu Mures, Tirgu Mures, RomaniaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 949 Introduction: Global developmental delay or intellectual been recently proposed as a cause of autosomal recessive disability (GDD/ID) are relatively frequent clinical condi- intellectual disability (ARID) with a distinctive phenotype. tions for consultation and diagnosis continues to be a Clinical Report: We report on a 6-year-old girl, born to challenge when the etiology remains elusive in about 25% healthy and non-consanguineous parents of Roma origin. to 50% of cases. Identification of microdeletion/micro- Pregnancy and neonatal period were uneventful. Postnatal duplication syndromes with DD/ID is currently performed growth was within the normal range. She presented with by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification marked psychomotor delay, expressive language disorder (MLPA) analysis. The aim of this study was to detect the and hand flapping. She attends a regular school with major submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations using MLPA in supportandspeechtherapy.Herclinicalphenotypeincludes children with GDD/ID. broad nose, large mouth with thick lips, large ears, Materials and Methods: At the Laboratory for Medical brachydactyly with tapering fingers, and deep palmar Genetics Tirgu Mures, Romania we investigated a total of creases. 56 GDD/ID children with/without congenital anomalies Results:BrainMRI,renalultrasound,metabolicanalysis, who had normal results of G-banding karyotype analysis, Array-CGH, Fragile-X and Angelman methylation analysis using MLPA kits for common microdeletions/microdupli- were normal. Angelman-like and BAFopathies targeted cations syndromes and X-chromosome. exome sequencing yielded normal results. WES revealed a Results: The detection rate for submicroscopic chromo- previously reported homozygous missense variant somal aberrations was found to be 12.5%. The microdele- c.1831G>A, p.G611S in the NDST1 gene, that segregated tions/microduplications detected include regions for as expected within the family. DiGeorgesyndrome(3cases),Williamssyndrome(1case), Discussion: We report on a new case of ARID type 46 Wolf-Hirschhornsyndrome(1case),CriduChatsyndrome characterized by neurodevelopment delay with impaired (1 case) and Miller-Dieker syndrome (1 case). expressive language, stereotypies and dysmorphic features. Conclusions: Therefore, the MLPA is a cost-effective Hitherto, only nine patients from five unrelated families analysis for identification of submicroscopic chromosomal have been published. Due to the association of ID, aberrationsyndromes,enablesarapiddiagnosisofgenomic stereotypies, happy demeanor and macrostomy, Angelman imbalances in patients with GDD/ID with/without con- syndrome-like syndromes and BAFopathies should be genital anomalies, and the results needed to be confirmed regarded as differential diagnoses. Our report emphasizes using other types of molecular analysis. once again the clinical utility of WES in patients with A.Boglis:None.F.Tripon:None.V.Moldovan:None. undiagnosed ID.References: Reuter M et al, 2014. A. Crauciuc: None. C. Banescu: None. Najmabadi H et al, 2011. A. Serrano Antón: None. V. López González: None. E-P08.21 M.SánchezSoler:None.M.BallestaMartínez:None.L. Autosomal Recessive Intellectual Disability type 46 caused Rodríguez Peña: None. M. García-Hoyos: None. E. byhomozygousmutationinNDST1gene(OMIM#616116): Guillén Navarro: None. a case report E-P08.22 A.SerranoAntón1,V.LópezGonzález1,2,M.SánchezSoler1,M. Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome due to Ballesta Martínez1,2,L.Rodríguez Peña1,M.García-Hoyos3,E. NR2F1 gene deletion Guillén Navarro1,2 A. Repáraz-Andrade, C.Torreira Banzas,O.Blanco Barca, M. 1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Blanco Pérez, A.AmadoPuentes, C. MelcónCrespo, M.A. Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. IMIB-Arrixaca., Andrade Olivié,J. R.Fernández Lorenzo Murcia, Spain, 2Grupo Clínico Vinculado al Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro., Vigo, Spain (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII)., Madrid, Spain, 3Departamento Genética Médica-Instituto de Medicina Introduction: Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syn- Genómica, Valencia, Spain drome (BBSOAS, OMIM #615722) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by delayed development, Introduction: Intellectual disability comprises a large moderate intellectual disability, and optic atrophy and/or group of genetically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental hypoplasia, described in 2014. Dysmorphic facial features disorders with different inheritance patterns. The identifi- are variable and nonspecific. BBSOAS results from muta- cation of the underlying genetic cause is a recurrent chal- tions in NR2F1 and findings suggest haploinsufficiency as lengeinclinicalgenetics.MissenseNDST1mutationshave the pathogenetic mechanism, even though ClinGen950 J.delPicchia Haploinsufficiency Score for NR2F1 is 0 (being 0 no evi- Active vocabulary was limited to less than five words. She dence available and 3 sufficient evidence for dosage had mild unspecific dysmorphism and no major malforma- pathogenicity), requiring that more information is necces- tions. Microarray-analysis was performed with Affymetrix sary to determine the role of NR2F1 haploinsufficiency in CytoScan HD SNP-Array. Validation of CNVs and BBSOAS. segregation analysis was done by MLPA with self- Material and Methods: We present a 8 years old male designed probes. patient with delayed speech and language development, Results: By microarray-analysis we identified two visual impairment (bilateral optic tract alteration), poor intragenic deletions in NRXN1 in 2p16.3 that could be motor coordination and mild dysmorphic features (left confirmed by MLPA. Deletion 1 spans 248 kb (arr single palmar crease, sacral dimple and left supernumerary [GRCh37] 2p16.3(50373077_50621548)x1) and deletion nipple). Automatic DNA extraction was performed follow- 2 spans 208 kb (arr[GRCh37] 2p16.3 ing blood sample venopuncture (QIAcube, Qiagen) and (51054671_51263065)x1). Segregation analysis revealed Comparative Genomic Hybridization array (aCGH) was compound-heterozygosity as each deletion was inherited performed with Agilent SurePrint G3 ISCA V2 CGH from one parent, respectively. 8x60K. Bioinformatic interpretation was done with Agilent Discussion: To our knowledge this is only the second Cytogenomics4andCartagenia BenchLab CNVsoftware. published case of PTHLS2 with compound-heterozygosity Genome Build GRCh37 and ISCN 2016 recommendations for two intragenic NRXN1 deletions detected by micro- was used to report. array. Harrison et al. described a similar case of two sisters Results: arr[GRCh37] 5q15(92718667_93430350)x1 dn. who presented with severe epileptic encephalopathy aCGH showed a711,7 Kb interstitialheterozygote deletion (Harrisonetal.,AmJMedGenet2011).Ourcasebroadens in5q15(chr5:92718667_93430350),encompassingNR2F1 the clinical and molecular spectrum of PTHLS2 but gene. Parental studies determined de novo inheritance. retrospectively also shows that a clinical diagnosis of Conclusions: Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syn- PTHLS2 would not have been possible as specific drome is a recent described disorder. Most of the cases symptoms or dysmorphic features are missing. reported are due to mutations in NR2F1 and few whole S.B. Kamphausen: None. I. Schanze: None. M. gene deletions have been described. ClinGen Haploinsuffi- Zenker: None. ciency Score for NR2F1 is 0. This finding supports the NR2F1 happloinsufficiency role in the pathogenic mechan- E-P08.24 ism of BBSOAS. A novel pathogenic variant of PURA in a patient with A. Repáraz-Andrade: None. C. Torreira Banzas: severe developmental delay, delayed myelination and None. O. Blanco Barca: None. M. Blanco Pérez: None. empty sella A. Amado Puentes: None. C. Melcón Crespo: None. M. A. Andrade Olivié: None. J.R. Fernández T. Kaname1,K. Hosoki1,T. Kimura2,K. Yanagi1,M.Iso1,H. Lorenzo: None. Ogata3,K.Nakabayashi3,K.Hata3,K.Okamura4,T.Shinozaki2, Y. Matsubara5 E-P08.23 Rare diagnosis of autosomal-recessive Pitt-Hopkins-like 1DeptGenomeMedicine,NationalCenterforChildHealthand syndrome 2 by microarray-analysis Development, Tokyo, Japan, 2Nihonkai General Hospital, Yamagata, Japan, 3Dept Maternal-Fetal Biology, National S. B.Kamphausen, I.Schanze, M.Zenker Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 4Dept System Biomedicine, National Center for Child Health Institute of Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 5National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan Introduction: Pitt-Hopkins-like syndrome 2 (PTHLS2) is an autosomal-recessive disorder caused by biallelic muta- There are several reports that patients with severe neuro- tions in Neurexin 1 (NRXN1). Only a few cases have been developmental delay, learning disability, neonatal hypoto- published in literature. Characteristic features are severe nia, feeding difficulties, abnormal movements and epilepsy mental retardation and mild facial dysmorphism. We pre- werecausedbypathogenicvariantsinPURA.Herewerepot sent a girl with unspecific developmental delay who was apatientwithseveredevelopmentaldelay,neurologicaland diagnosed PTHLS2 by microarray-analysis. endocrinological abnormalities associated with a novel Patient and Method: The patient was seen at the age of pathogenic variant in PURA identified by whole exome 28monthsbecauseofglobaldevelopmentaldelay.Shewas sequencing (WES) analysis. The patient was a 9-year-old abletositattheageof12months,butnotabletowalkyet. boy.The boywas bornat39weeksofgestation asthefirstAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 951 child of nonconsanguineous healthy parents. His birth- years 10 months old, she remained non-verbal with no weight and Apgar score was 2210 g and 8/9, respectively. stereotypic hand movements and had regression in gross The boy showed nystagmus from infancy with delayed motorskillssincetheonsetofseizures.Shehasshortstature myelination in the brain. He was suspected to Pelizaeus- (-2.8 SD), moderate scoliosis, myopathic facies and no Merzbacger syndrome at 7 months of age, which was obvious facial dysmorphism. excluded. He presented with severe developmental delay, FISH for Prader-Willi syndrome, chromosomal micro- intellectual impairment with no meaningful words, short array analysis (CMA) and urine glycosaminoglycans stature, empty sella and pseudobulbar palsy. Written (GAGs) were normal. Whole exome sequencing (WES) informed consent was obtained from his parents. WES performed subsequently detected a novel, de novo hetero- analysis was performed using Human All Exon V6 kit zygous c.154dupG (p.L54fs*) variant in PURA gene, (Agilent) and Hiseq 2500 (Illumina). The detected variants consistent with the diagnosis. were confirmed using Sanger sequencing. A novel hetero- Conclusion: Even though a novel variant has been zygous 8-bp insertion in the PURA gene was found in the detected,ourpatient’sphenotypeisconsistentwiththecore patient. The variant was de novo and it causes frameshift features of PURA syndrome. Further studies are needed to and premature stop codon. The variant is at the N-terminal better understand genotype-phenotype correlation asso- PUR repeat region I related to severe developmental delay. ciated with PURA syndrome. PURA is one of the primary responsible genes for 5q31.3 J. Lim: None. H. Law: None. R. Foo: None. C. Chow: microdeletion syndrome. Thirty-two patients with neuro- None. S. Jamuar: None. developmentaldisorderandbrainabnormalitycausedbyde novovariantsinPURAhavebeenreported.Ourfindingand E-P08.27 those reports suggest that loss-of-function of PURA causes A large deletion of the MECP2 gene in a Japanese patient the disease. with severe phenotype of Rett syndrome T.Kaname:None.K.Hosoki:None.T.Kimura:None. K. Yanagi: None. M. Iso: None. H. Ogata: None. K. K. Yanagi1,M.Minatogawa1, M.Iso1,K. Satou1,N.Okamoto2, Nakabayashi:None.K.Hata:None.K.Okamura:None. Y. Matsubara1, T.Kaname1 T. Shinozaki: None. Y. Matsubara: None. 1National Center for Child Health and Development, Okura, E-P08.26 Setagaya, Japan, 2Osaka Women’s and Children’s Hospital, PURA syndrome: a case study Izumi, Osaka, Japan J.Lim1,H.Law1,R.Foo2, C.Chow1,S.Jamuar1 Methyl-CpG- binding protein 2 (MECP2)-related disorders in females include typical Rett syndrome (RTT, 1KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, OMIM#312750), variant RTT, and mild learning dis- 2Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore abilities,whichareinheritedinanX-linkedmanner.Typical RTT is recognizable by arrested development between 6 Background: PURA syndrome is a recently described and 18 months of age, and characterized by regression of neurodevelopmentaldisorder characterizedbymoderate-to- acquired skills, loss of speech, stereotypic movements and severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, feeding difficulties, mental retardation. Mutations in MECP2 are identifiable in hypersomnolence and hypotonia. To date, genotype- 80〜90%ofindividualswithtypicalRettsyndromebutless phenotype correlation has been observed to have no sig- frequently in atypical RTT. nificant differences between mutation classes and disease ClinicalReport:Apatientis7-year-oldgirlborntonon- severity. consanguineous parents at 40 weeks with birth weight of Case presentation: We report a 15 years old Chinese 2484g (-2.1 SD), height of 47 cm (-1.4 SD) and head female, who is the only child of non-consanguineous circumstance of 31.5 cm. (-1.5 SD). Amniotic fluid parents. Antenatal and birth history were unremarkable. As karyotyping showed 46,XX. She has severe neurodevelop- a neonate, she required tube feeding for somnolence and mental disorder characterized by psychomotor regression poor suck and also had apnea and desaturation episodes with the development of distinctive hand stereotypies, without need for intubation. She had global developmental seizure, breathing abnormalities, and gait apraxia. Her delay. She walked independently at 3 years old. She had thrive has decreased; current weight, height and head seizure-like movements at 5 years old with a normal EEG. circumstance are 15.5 kg (-1.9 SD), 105.5 cm (-2.6 SD), However, she developed tonic seizures with an abnormal 47.7 cm (-2.4 SD), respectively. Although she was EEG at 12 years old, in which sodium valproate had been clinically suspected RTT, no pathogenic variant was advised.WhenshewasfirstseenintheGeneticsclinicat12 detected in MECP2 by direct-sequencing method.952 J.delPicchia Results and conclusion: Whole exome sequencing Hospital,Ankara,Turkey,4AnkaraChildren’sHematologyand (WES) analysis suggested that there was a heterozygous Oncology Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey large deletion between the exon 4 of MECP2 and the upstreamregionofIRAK.Long-rangePCRandsequencing Introduction: A17-year-old female patientwasreferredto revealed that the deletion was spanning about 9 kb at 3’ us with complaints of severe intellectual disability, psy- region of the MECP2 gene. The large deletion might affect chomotor retardation, epilepsy, and operated cataract. Par- severephenotypeofRTTduetolossofterminalcodonand/ ents were first cousins. or the polyadenylation sites. Physical examination: Spelling a few words, short K. Yanagi: None. M. Minatogawa: None. M. Iso: stature, obesity, hypotonia, mild spasticity of lower None. K. Satou: None. N. Okamoto: None. Y. Matsu- extremities, friendly attitude, forward-leaning posture, and bara: None. T. Kaname: None. ataxic gait. Facial features: Bitemporal narrowing, hypoplastic E-P08.28 suborbital ridges, strabismus, bilateral epicanthus, bullous Marfanoid habitus in two patients with a mutation in the nasal tip, strabismus, downturned mouth, deep filtrum, and SATB2-gene maxillar hypoplasia. Brain MRI showed bilateral dysmye- linating areas adjacent to the posterior horn of lateral M.Sinnema1,J.Nicolai2,R.Dash-Vorstenbosch3,S.Stegmann1 ventricles.MRspectroscopyorroutinemetabolicscreening detected no abnormality. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, MUMC, Maastricht, The EEG: Focal paroxysmal activity in right parietooccipital Netherlands, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of location. Neurology, MUMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands, Maastricht, Materials and Methods: Sequence analysis was per- Netherlands, 3Severinus Stichting, Veldhoven, The formed on DNA from the peripheral blood sample using Netherlands, Veldhoven, Netherlands TruSight One sequencing panel (4813 genes). Results: Sequence analysis revealed c.434G>A variant Background: SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS) is a causing a non-conservative Arg145Gln alteration in amino multisystem disorder characterized by developmental delay acid sequence, classified as Variant of Unknown Signifi- / intellectual disability with limited to absent speech, cance (VUS). ClinVar harbors single missense variant with behavioralissuesandcraniofacialanomalies.Lesscommon likely pathogenic effect (GeneDx, clinical testing). phyloP features include several skeletal anomalies (e.g. pectus and phastCons estimated pretty high scores (3.167 and deformities and scoliosis). While dysmorphic features have 0.997, respectively), either SIFT and PolyPhen predicted been described in individuals with this condition, these this alteration as tolerated. features arenotdescribed astypicallydistinctiveenoughto Conclusions: Loss-of-function variants in TRAPPC9 are allow for a clinical diagnosis of SAS. associated with “Mental retardation, autosomal recessive Patients: We describe two patients with intellectual 13”. ACMG classification lets us determine c.434G>A as disabilityandadenovoSATB2-mutation.Theybothshow VUS, but the similar facial gestalt of the proband with a a remarkable marfanoid habitus, including tall height, previous case reported by Marangi et al. (2013) persuaded slender build, arm span > height, arachnodactyly, high us to deduce this variant as likely pathogenic. c.434G>A arched or cleft palate. might be causal for the neurological outcome and facial Conclusions: These findings might highlight a recogniz- features. Functional validation or statistical evidence is able marfanoid phenotype in at least part of the patients needed to prove the pathogenicity. with SATB2-associated syndrome. V.Topçu:None.B.Çavdarlı:None.A.Bakır:None.A. M. Sinnema: None. J. Nicolai: None. R. Dash- Değerliyurt: None. Vorstenbosch: None. S. Stegmann: None. E-P08.30 E-P08.29 TRIO gene deletion due to pericentric inversion on TRAPPC9 missense variant may associate with chromosome 5chromosome 5 dysmyelination N.Dragicevic, KressWolfram, Kolokotronis Konstantinos, V. Topçu1,2,B. Çavdarlı2,A. Bakır1,3,A.Değerliyurt4 KlopockiEva,Nanda Indrajit 1Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health Training and Research Institute of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 2Numune Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara Training and ResearchAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 953 We present a case study of a 5 year old boy using cytoge- Results:Wepresentclinicalandgeneticcharacteristicsof neticandmolecularcytogeneticapproachespresentingwith female patient 4-year old undifferentiated mental retarda- microcephaly, mild intellectual disability and global tion. The girl was born from 4th pregnancy, delivered developmental delay. He is the first child born to non- physiologically. Proband’s birth weight was 2750 g, length consanguineous healthy parents. Following an uncompli- 50 cm, Apgar score 7/8 points. Motor development is cated pregnancy, the newborn was delivered at 41 weeks delayed – keeps her head from a 4 month, sits from with normal head circumference of 36.5 cm. There was 10 month, walks from 1,5 year. Speech is absent. Neatness perinatal acidosis. First words were spoken around skills are not completely formed, self-service – are 15 months of life, walking without help was at the age of gradually being formed. By 20-minutes EEG a typical 18months,andhehasbeencleansincetheageofthree.IQ epileptiform activity was not detected, but neurophysiolo- value at four years was about 73. Other observed features gical immaturity, signs of dysfunction of cortical- were epicanthus of eyelids on both sides, discrete stra- subcorticalstructureswererevealed.Ultrasoundofthehead bismus, short fingers, and a shawl scrotum.Fragile X syn- revealed abnormalities of the differentiation of the cortex drome was ruled out at the age of four years. Cytogenetic structures and myelin. analysis revealed a male karyotype with a pericentric Objectively phenotype: motor awkwardness, not pro- inversion of chromosome 5 [46,XY,inv(5)(p15.2q31.1) nounceddysmorphicfacialfeaturesincludingdeepseteyes, mat]. Microarray CGH analysis was initiated to further macrostomy, long filter, ear lobules. Focal neurological characterize the rearrangement and check for imbalances at symptoms were not revealed. Exome sequencing revealed the inversion breakpoints. Two microdeletions were detec- de novo heterozygous variant in TRIP12 (c.3759_3760del, ted: in 5p15.2p15.1 spanning 2.51 Mb encompassing five NM_004238). OMIMgenes,andin5q.23.1spanning1.9Mb,threeOMIM Conclusions: The patient with the rare autosomal genes, respectively [arr[hg19] 5p15.2p15.1(13,017,195- dominant mental retardation type 49 was described to have 15,528,016)x1, 5q23.1(11,689,3086-118,788,712)x1]. In a novel mutation c.3759_3760del in TRIP12 gene. the 5p15.2p15.1 region is amongst others the TRIO (MIM O. Levchenko: None. E. Dadali: None. A. 601893) gene. An association between heterozygousloss of Lavrov: None. function mutations in the TRIO gene and mild intellectual disability with microcephaly was reported (autosomal E-P08.32 dominant mental retardation-44 – MRD44, MIM 617061). X-linkedsyndromicmentalretardation,Nascimento–type Karyotyping of both parents revealed that the mother car- identified by Whole Exome Sequencing riedanidenticalinversiononchromosome5aswellasboth microdeletions as shown by array CGH. O.KENTEROGLOU1,E.TSOUTSOU1,C.SOFOCLEOUS1,D. N. Dragicevic: None. VELTRA1,S. PSONI1,S. AMENTA1,P. WILLEMS2,H. FRYSSIRA1 E-P08.31 A clinical case of autosomal dominant mental retardation 1CHOREMIO REASEARCH LABORATORY, ATHENS, type 49 Greece, 2GENDIA, ANTWERP, Belgium O.Levchenko,E. Dadali, A.Lavrov Introduction: X-linked intellectual disability (ID) type Nascimento (MIM #300860), also known as ubiquitin- Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian conjugating enzyme E2 A (UBE2A) deficiency syndrome, Federation ischaracterizedbymoderatetosevereintellectualdisability (ID),speechimpairment,dysmorphicfacialfeatures,genital Introduction:Autosomaldominantmentalretardationtype and skin abnormalities. UBE2A gene (Xq24) has a role in 49was firstdescribedinFebruary 2017.Аtthemoment 17 DNA repair, fertility, and memory formation. All patients patients with this syndrome and mutation in the TRIP12 carrying UBE2A mutations are males with mothers with gene are described. The patients have a highly variable normal IQ. phenotype. Materials and Methods: A 14-years old male patient Material and Methods: Whole exome library was with moderate mental retardation,obsessive-compulsive prepared from genomic DNA using TruSeq DNA Exome disorderandmorphologicalfeaturessuchasmyxedematous (Illumina)andsequencedonaNextSeq550 (Illumina). One appearance,almond-shapedeyes,hypertelorism,shortneck, pathogenic variant was validated in the proband and her hirsutism, brachydactyly,abnormal dermatoglyphic pattern parents by Sanger sequencing. and small penis presented for clinical evaluation.Severe atopic dermatitis was obvious.As an infant he had954 J.delPicchia hypotonia and large fontanels. Standard karyotype was andautistictraits. Previousspecializedinvestigationsfailed normal, 46, XY and molecular analysis for Prader-Willi to explain the etiology of his affection. Exome sequencing syndrome was negative. We applied Whole Exome revealed a de novo heterozygous WAC frameshift variant Sequencing (WES) which analyses 214.405 exons dis- NM_016628.4:c.383del, p.(Pro128Leufs*64) which was persed throughout the genome. absent from all databases. All other patients with WAC Results: A hemizygous pathogenic deletion of 14 mutations also carried truncating variants spread across the nucleotides UBE2A:c.421_434del14 was indentified in gene.Thelongfollow-upofourpatientalloweddelineating exon 6 of the UBE2A gene by WES analysis. The variant of the WAC-related phenotype and its developmental tra- has been confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This deletion jectory. The facial phenotype was consistent with previous causes a frameshift predicted to result in a premature stop cases, but we show that the main features become more codon . This variant was novel but due to its truncating pronounced with age. Nevertheless, the guidance from nature it is classified as a pathogenic. Parental DNA phenotype is rather limited and it is likely that additional analysis of the same variant proved the de novo origin. casesofthissyndromewillcontinuetobeidentifiedviathe Conclusion: We identified a novel mutation associated genotype-first approach. Supported by 17-29423A and with X-linked syndromic mental retardation, Nascimento- 00064203. type. The use of NGS technologies help to establish the S.Bendova:None.M.Havlovicova:None.M.Hancar- diagnosisinpatientswithmentalretardationandanatypical ova: None. D. Prchalova: None. V. Stranecky: None. Z. phenotype, who until recently remained undiagnosed. Sedlacek: None. O. Kenteroglou: None. E. Tsoutsou: None. C. Sofocl- eous:None.D.Veltra:None.S.Psoni:None.S.Amenta: E-P08.34 None. P. Willems: None. H. Fryssira: None. Syndromic intellectual disability and developmental delay causedbynoveldenovotruncatingvariantinAHDC1gene E-P08.33 Novel WAC frameshift variant in a boy with DeSanto- L.Diaz-Ordoñez1,D.Ramirez-Montaño1,S.Cruz2,H.Pachajoa1 Shinawisyndromerevealed usingwholeexomesequencing 1Universidad Icesi, Congenital Abnormalities and Rare S. Bendova1,M. Havlovicova1, M.Hancarova1,D.Prchalova1, Diseases Research Center, Cali, Colombia, 2Fundación Valle V. Stranecky2,Z. Sedlacek1 del Lili, Cali, Colombia 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome is a rare genetic dis- University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital order with autosomal dominant inheritance caused by het- Motol,Prague,CzechRepublic,2DepartmentofPediatricsand erozygous mutations in AHDC1 gene. This condition is Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for Rare characterized by neurological manifestations that include Diseases, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and psychomotor delayed, intellectual disability and corpus General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic callosum hypoplasia with distinct facial features. Case report: We present a 13 years-old female from DeSanto-Shinawi syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant Colombia, born to non-consanguineous parents. She was neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the diagnosedatageof2yearsforpsychomotorandlanguage WAC gene. It is characterized by global developmental delay, facial dysmorphic features and sleep apnea with delay, hypotonia, behavioral, sleep and feeding problems, plagiocephaly. She has associated behavioral disorders eyeabnormalities,constipationandseizures.Facialfeatures that include self-harm, poor social interaction with can be mildly dysmorphic but are nonspecific. In total, 18 isolation. patients have been reported. We describe an 18-year-old Results: Chromosome analysis was normal (Kariotyping boywhohasbeenexaminedsincepreschoolagebecauseof and CGH-array). WES (Whole Exome Sequencing) was hypotonia, speech disorder and strabism. His facial pheno- performedat12yearsandrevealedanovelheterozygousde type was not remarkable, but with advancing age features novo frameshift variant c.1529delG (p.Gly510Alafs*12) in such as broad, prominent forehead, bushy eyebrows, deep- AHDC1 gene (NM_001029882.3), variant functional pre- set eyes, depressed nasal bridge, bulbous nasal tip, low-set diction software tools Mutation tester, Polyphen-2, and posteriorlyrotatedears,widemouthwiththinupperlipand SIFT classified it as a deleterious variant. broadchinbecamemorepronounced.Hehadabnormalities Discussion:Themutationreportedhereintroducesastop of extremities, abnormal CNS MRI findings and recurrent codon at the amino acid 522 of AHDC1 protein (1603 respiratory infections. He suffered from underweight amino acids). This leads to the loss of one DNA-binding affectingfatandmuscularcomponents,andshowedanxiety motif and PDZ carboxyl-terminal domain, which couldAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 955 truncateitsinteractionwithotherproteinsandcanberelated ClinicaldetailsofmalepatientswithXp11.22submicroscopicduplicationsinvolvingtheIQSEC2gene to the neurobehavioural manifestations in our patient. Patient Intellectual Epilepsy Language Visual Behavioural Otherclinical ChrX(hg19) Conclusion: The genotype-phenotype correlation in [Reference] Disability development impairment disturbances features Coordinatesand Duplicationsize patients with Xia-Gibbs syndrome is not understood. The PresentCaseMild- Neonatal Severely Opticnerve Hyperactivity, Corpuscallosum 53,253,932- Moderate seizures impairedspeechatrophy, aggressive agenesisand 53,670,215416kb patient reported by us is the second case in Colombia and enophtalmia behavior slightventricular system differ from previously reported in literature for absence of enlargement, craniofacial corpus callosum hypoplasia described in 40% of cases and dysmorphic features, for her severe neurobehavioral disorder that could be being including enophtalmia modulated for the novel frameshift mutation that truncated A009 Mild − Speechdelay − Hyperactivity Normalfacial 53,220,275- [Froyen features 53,981,275761kb protein early. etal.,2008] L. Diaz-Ordoñez: None. D. Ramirez-Montaño: None. A057 Mild − Limitedspeech − Hyperactivity Notpresent 52,987,689- [Froyen inlaterlife 53,712,958725kb S. Cruz: None. H. Pachajoa: None. etal.,2008] A119 Mild- Febrile Speechdelay − Attention Nosignificant 52,825,617- [Froyen Moderate seizures deficit dysmorphic 53,662,768837kb etal.,2008] hyperactivity features E-P08.35 disorder AU88848 Mild − − − − − 53,169,907- Xp11.22 microduplication including IQSEC2 gene in a [Froyen 54,101,252931kb etal.,2012] male with intellectual disability, epilepsy and dysmorphic FTD[Froyen Mild Cortico- Speechdelay − Attention Functionalheart 53,198,95- features etal.,2012] subcortical deficit murmur,chronic 54,237,527 dysfunction hyperactivity vomitingand 1,038kb disorder diarrhea, urolithiasis, P.P.Henrique,C.R.Lincoln-de-Carvalho,M.P.deMello,A.P. bilateralinguinal hernia, Marques-de-Faria cryptorchidism, facial dysmorphic features University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil F538 Moderate − Limitedspeech, Unequalpupils − Largehead 53,216,303- [Froyen Stutter circumference 54,239,670 etal.,2012] 1,023kb ON1[FroyenMild- − Partiallack MicrophthalmosHyperactivity Facial 52,982,784- X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a group of etal.,2012] Moderate ofspeech andattention dysmorphic 53,721,295730kb problems,self-features genetically highlyheterogeneousdisordersand one ofthe destructing behavior most frequent genetic causes of ID occurring in 5-10% of Patient1 Severe Generalised Notaquired Hypermetropia, Stereotypic Neonatal 53,283,513- allaffectedmaleindividuals.Around100geneshavebeen [TranMau- myoclonic strabismus hand hypotonia, 53,325,28442kb Them seizures movements postnatal etal.,2014] microcephaly, considered as determinant of XLID and the role for many hyperkinesia, normalfacial of them remains to be elucidated. Here, we described a features male with ID, epilepsy, severely impaired speech, Patient3 Severe Partial Regression Strabismus Midline Neonatal 53,276,030- [TranMau- epilepsy stereotypic hypotonia, 53,298,47222kb abnormal behavior with hyperactivity and some aggres- Them hand cerebralatrophy, etal.,2014] movements nonspecific siveness, optic nerve atrophy and craniofacial dys- hypersignalfoci inperiventricular morphisms as brachycephaly, frontal hair upsweep, whitematter, minorfacial features prominentnoseandears,evertedlowerlip,narrowpalate, P611 Moderate Notpresent Speechdelay Enophtalmia Hyperactivity Abnormalgait, 53,316,256- dental crowding, among others; hands and feet minor [Santos- andattention brachycephaly, 54,074,258758kb Rebouças problems, enophtalmia, anomalies were also observed. Array-CGH (Agilent etal.,2015] aggressive dysmorphic behavior facialfeatures human genome G3 SurePrint 8x60K microarray) dis- P3272 Moderate Seizures Speechdelay − Hyperactivity Dysmorphic 53,228,169- [Santos- facialfeatures 54,133,735905kb closed a 416 kb duplication which extends from ChrX Rebouças etal.,2015] (hg19): 53,253,932 to 53,670,215. This variation was Patient1 Not − Speechdelay − Poor Downward 52,954,520- confirmed by MLPA technique and Real Time PCR ana- [ eM tao le .,y 2016] determined s bo ec hi aa vli iz oa rt ai lon, c tho ern mer os uo thf 53,315,542361kb problems lysis showed the maternal inheritance. The duplicated Patient2 Mild- − − − Autism − 52,911,287- region encompasses the IQ motif-and Sec7 domain- [Moey Moderate spectrum 53,315,010403kb etal.,2016] disorder, containing protein 2 gene (IQSEC2), which has a sig- challenging behavior, nificant role in the brain maintenance and homeostasis. physical aggression, Althoughaconsistentphenotypeofnon-syndromicXLID avoidedeye contact was observed in individuals with IQSEC2 alterations, the Patient3 Globaldelay− Speechdelay, − Significant − 52,789,239- [Moey poor behavioral 53,368,927579kb additional features observed in present patient suggest a etal.,2016] pronunciation difficulties requiringa syndromic form related to Xp11.22 duplications and also special educationclass support the hypothesis that IQSEC2 has a role in patho- Patient4 Severe Constant Nowords,little − Smileand Hypotonia, 52,341,517- [Moey generalized receptive shakinghands microcephaly, 53,782,896 genesis of syndromic XLID. In addition, the inclusion of etal.,2016] sharpslow language hypogonadism, 1,441kb discharges myoclonus,not IQSEC2 variations among the causal factors when eval- walk,dysmorhic facialfeatures uating ID patients with seizures could be considered.956 J.delPicchia P.P. Henrique: None. C.R. Lincoln-de-Carvalho: Exome analysis revealed the presence of a previously None. M.P. de Mello: None. A.P. Marques-de- described pathogenic variant on ZMYND11 gene Faria: None. [c.1798T>C (p.Arg600Trp)]. Family analysis (parents and brother) confirmed its de novo origin. E-P08.36 Conclusion: The clinical and molecular findings in our New case of a de novo mutation at ZYMND11 gene patientconfirmtheassociationofthisidentifiedvariantwith resembling the 10p15.3 microdeletion syndrome the described phenotype and the implication of ZMYND11 gene in 10p15.3 deletion syndrome. M.García-Barcina1,M.A. Fernández-Cuesta2,B.Barreña3,E. M. García-Barcina: None. M.A. Fernández-Cuesta: Santamaría3,C.Ruiz-Espinoza4,M.I.Tejada5,N.Ibarluzea5,G. None.B. Barreña: None.E. Santamaría: None.C. Ruiz- PérezdeNanclares6,E. Sarasola3 Espinoza:None.M.I.Tejada:None.N.Ibarluzea:None. G. Pérez de Nanclares: None. E. Sarasola: None. 1Genetics Unit, Basurto University Hospital – Osakidetza, Bilbao, Spain, 2Neuropediatrics Unit, Basurto University E-P08.37 Hospital – OSI Bilbao-Basurto – Osakidetza, Bilbao, Spain, A recurrent de novo mutation and a second variant of 3Genetics Unit, Basurto University Hospital – Osakidetza, unknown significance in ZSWIM6 in a boy with severe Bilbao, Spain, 4Neuropediatrics Unit, Basurto University intellectual disability, microcephaly, strabism and Hospital – Osakidetza, Bilbao, Spain, 5Molecular Genetics hyperopia Laboratory, Genetics Service, BioCruces Health Research Institute,CrucesUniversityHospital–Osakidetza,Barakaldo, I.Bader1,A. Gamper2,M. Preisel1, W.Sperl1, J.Mayr1 Spain, 6Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, Araba University Hospital – 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Osakidetza, Vitoria, Spain Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK), Salzburg, Austria, 2DepartmentofPediatrics,SalzburgerLandeskliniken(SALK), Introduction: In 2012, a new microdeletion syndrome Salzburg, Austria affecting the short arm of chromosome 10 (10p15.3) was described. The implication of ZMYND11, a gene located Recently,arecurrentdenovononsensevariant(c.2737C>T within this region, in the phenotype (essentially character- [p.Arg913Ter]) in the penultimate exon of ZSWIM6 was ized by developmental and motor delay, craniofacial dys- reported to cause intellectual disability and additional cen- morphism and hypotonia) was also hypothesized. tral and peripheral nervous system symptoms by Palmer Patientandmethods:Wepresentthecaseofa8month etal.(AmJHumGenet.2017Dec7;101(6):995-1005),but male referred to our consultation due to developmental not frontonasal or limb malformations, which was the delay and facial dysmorphisms. He was the second child phenotype initially discovered with a recurrent missense of a non-consanguineous couple born after an uneventful mutation(c.3487C>T[p.Arg1163Trp])bySmithetal.(Am pregnancy with a normal perinatal period. His elder J Hum Genet. 2014 Aug 7;95(2):235-40.). We present the brother presents autism without specific phenotypical phenotype and genotype of a boy with severe intellectual features. disability, strabism, hyperopia, microcephaly and undes- At 8 months, he presented hypotonia, growth failure, cendedtestis.Themolecularkaryotypewasnormal.Exome bilateral cryptorchidism and hypospadias. analysis revealed the recurrent de novo nonsense variant Neurophysiological studies and biochemical analyses (c.2737C>T [p.Arg913Ter]) in the penultimate exon of showed normal results. ZSWIM6 and in addition a heterozygous missense variant Nowadays (6y), as major features, he has no verbal (c.3119G>A[p.Arg1040His])thatwaspredictedbyseveral language and presents a peculiar facial phenotype with tools to be probably pathogenic. This variant is present in hypertelorism and narrow palpebral fissures, low-set ears, dbSNP(rs192222164)andingnomAD(f=0.0003779)and prominent crus and auricular pit, among others. wasinheritedfromtheunaffectedmother.Thephenotypeof Informed consent was obtained from his parents for our patient as evident until now fits into the spectrum subsequent studies: conventional karyotype, aCGH, Prader described with the recurrent de novo nonsense variant. It WilliSyndrome-associateddefectsandexomevariantswere remains to be elucidated whether the maternally inherited studied. missense variant might be relevant in a possible recessive Results: Karyotype and aCGH analysis revealed no modeofinheritance.Anyway,themissensemutationofour alterations. Prader-Willi Syndrome was discarded (neither patient complicated the interpretation of the mode of methylation nor CNV alterations were found at 15q11 inheritance in our patient. Our findings widen the spectrum region). of genotypes and phenotypes associated with ZSWIM6.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 957 I. Bader: None. A. Gamper: None. M. Preisel: None. E-P09.02 W. Sperl: None. J. Mayr: None. Adrenoleukodystrophy for the first time in Bulgaria: two genetically verified cases, one novel mutation E-P09 Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders S. Tincheva1, T.Todorov1,M.Ivanova2,3,I. Sinigerska2, H. Kathom4,R. Tincheva4,D.Avdjieva4,S. Tsaneva1,5,A. E-P09.01 Todorova1,5 A microdeletion including the gene NUS1 demonstrating interpretation problems, expansion of the phenotype and 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, treatment modification Bulgaria, 2National Genetic Laboratory, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, E. Banne1,S. Josefsberg1,J.Rosensaft1, H.Bassan2 Bulgaria, 3Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Sofia University "St. Kliment 1Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel, 2Assaf Harofe Ohridski", Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Center, Be'er Ya'akov, Israel UniversityPediatricsHospital,MedicalUniversitySofia,Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Medical Chemistry and Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is nowadays recognized Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria as essential in the evaluation of autism and developmental delay. CMA interpretation depends on databases as Adrenoleukodystrophy (MIM# 300100) represents an X- ClinGen, DECIPHER and others, which lack information, linked recessive disorder and results in accumulation of and original papers are still essential in deciphering the saturated very long fatty acids in tissues throughout the significance of microdeletions/microduplications. We pre- body. The manifestations of thedisorderoccur primarilyin sent an8.5yearsoldboy,withintractableepilepsy, autistic theadrenalcortex,themyelinofthecentralnervoussystem, spectrum disorder (ASD), hypotonia during infancy, stra- andtheLeydigcellsofthetestes.Adrenoleukodystrophyis bismus and behavioral problems. Multiple EEG examina- caused by mutations in the ABCD1 gene (MIM* 300371) tions revealed frequent generalized interictal and ictal slow located on the Xq28. ABCD1 codes a peroxisomal mem- spike&wavedischarges.Hehasvariousseizuretypes,and brane transporter protein (ALDP), member of the ATP- istreatedwithacombinationofvalproicacid,clobazamand binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily. Here we ethusuximide with a relative improvement but partial con- report three patients with clinical diagnosis of X-linked trol. The child exhibited behavioral problems including adrenoleukodystrophywerereferredforABCD1analysis.In aggression and violence, with recurrent rage attacks. two of them Sanger sequencing showed the presence of a Levetiractam administration escalated the frequency of molecular genetic variant in the ABCD1 gene thereby these behaviors significantly, and therefore was dis- confirming the clinical diagnosis. In the first patient an continued. Metabolic workup was normal including: lactic, already reported missense mutation was found - ammonia, blood amino acids, Carnitine, Acylcarnitine. A c.1552C>T, p.Arg518Trp, and in the second - a novel still chromosomal microarray performed demonstrated a dele- unpublished variant c.2002A>G, p.Thr668Ala. Multiple tion on chromosome 6: arr[hg19]6q22.1(117,431,000- prediction software tools (PolyPhen-2; MutationTaster; 118,040,939)x1. This 609kb deletion including the NUS1 SIFT) define p.Thr668Ala as deleterious. Furthermore, it gene is located within the minimal essential critical region was not recorded in the population genetic variation data- on chromosome 6q22. The region is known for autism, base dbSNP v138 and was not found in 60 000 control seizures, tremor and mild dysmorphic features, but less subjectsintheExACprojectaffirmingtheprobabledisease known for behavioural problems as in the case presented. causing character of p.Thr668Ala. Unfortunately, the third The databases mentioned had only scarce information on patient did not show any pathological variations in the themicrodeletion,andwefoundonlyonepaperinterpreting ABCD1genesupposingtheneedfordiagnosisrevision.To it. This work further delineates this rare genetic disorder. the best of our knowledge the present study comprises all We suggest that behavioral problems are part of this clinically and genetically diagnosed adrenoleukodystrophy microdeletion, and suggest caution using Levetiractam in patients in Bulgaria and enriches the spectrum of reported these patients. We emphasize the importance of early ABCD1 mutations. genetic evaluation in children with ASD and epilepsy. S. Tincheva: None. T. Todorov: None. M. Ivanova: E. Banne: None. S. Josefsberg: None. J. Rosensaft: None. I. Sinigerska: None. H. Kathom: None. R. None. H. Bassan: None. Tincheva: None. D. Avdjieva: None. S. Tsaneva: None. A. Todorova: None.958 J.delPicchia E-P09.04 G.Guven:None.E.Vurgun:None.B.Bilgic:None.H. Cholesterol related gene polymorphisms in Alzheimer Hanagasi: None. H. Gurvit: None. E. Lohmann: None. Disease E. Ozer: None. N. Erginel-Unaltuna: None. G.Guven1,E.Vurgun1,2,B.Bilgic3,H.Hanagasi3,H.Gurvit3,E. E-P09.06 Lohmann4,5,E. Ozer1,N.Erginel-Unaltuna1 An Andermann syndrome case of Bulgarian Roma origin due to a new frameshift mutation in the SLC12A6 gene 1DepartmentofGenetics,AzizSancarInstituteofExperimental Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department T. Todorov1,I.Pacheva2,3,Z. Halil4,F. Galabova4,R. of Medical Biochemistry, Okmeydani Training and Research Yordanova2,4,I.Geneva2,4,I.Ivanov2,4,A. Todorova1,5 Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Behavioural Neurology and MovementDisordersUnit,DepartmentofNeurology,Istanbul 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, Bulgaria, 2Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, 4Department Of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3Department of forClinicalBrainResearch,UniversityofTübingen,Tübingen, Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Germany, 5DZNE, German Center for Neurodegenerative Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4University Hospital “St. George", Diseases, Tübingen, Germany Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 5IMDL Genome Centre Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria Introduction:Numerousgeneticevidencespointedoutthat variations in cholesterol related genes may be associated Andermann syndrome [OMIM: # 218000] is an autosomal withAlzheimerDisease(AD)risk.Weaimedtoinvestigate recessive disease which is a characterized with motor and the association between polymorphisms in cholesterol sensory neuropathy, mental retardation, facial dysmorph- related genes and AD in a cohort of Turkish patients. ism,developmentaldelay,muscularhypotonia,seizuresetc. Therefore we have selected APOA5_(rs662799), APOC1_ Most cases also present with agenesis or malformation of (rs11568822), APOD_(rs1568565), CH25H_(rs13500), the corpus callosum. Andermann syndrome is caused by LDLR_(rs5930) and SORL1_(rs2282649) gene poly- mutationsintheSLC12A6gene[OMIM:*604878].Herewe morphisms that have been previously showed significant report a male infant from Roma origin at the age of association with AD risk. 8months.Theclinicalsymptomsincludemusclehypotonia, Materials-Methods: The study group consisted of 257 areflexia and agenesis of corpus callosum on brain ultra- AD patients (mean age: 75.9 ± 10.4) and 414 healthy sound. Furthermore, the patient has developmental delay, controls (mean age: 62.2 ± 13.1). Genotyping was with the greatest impairment found in his motor functions. performed by real-time polymerase chain reaction using Interestingly, he presented clinically like spinal muscular hydrolysis probes in Light Cycler 480. Genotypes between atrophy plus syndrome. Based on a previously exercised groups were compared by Pearson x2 test and multivariate SMAgenetictestwithanegativeresult,Sangersequencing regressionanalysiswasperformedtoanalysetheaccumula- oftheSLC12A6genewasperformed.Anovelhomozygous tion effect of APOE ε4 allele. deletion was found - c.2604delT, p.(Asp868GlufsTer11) Results: Our results showed that the “TT” genotype of clarifying the patient’s case as Andermann syndrome. The CH25H_rs13500 polymorphism was significantly more variant has not previously been reported in patients with frequentinADgroup(p=<0.001)andindividualscarrying similar clinical manifestations. Segregation analysis in the CH25H “T” allele per se, had increased risk for AD familyshowedthesamevariantinheterozygousstateinthe (OR=3.27, 95%CI=2.0-5.35, p=<0.001). The “ins/ins” patient’s parents, sister and brother. Based on the variant genotype of APOC1_rs11568822 was significantly more type which implies a functionally inferior protein product frequent in AD group compared to controls (p=<0.001). the variant is probably pathogenic. In conclusion, we pre- HowevernosignificantassociationwithADriskwasfound sent the first clinically diagnosed and genetically verified inAPOC1insertionallelecarriersthatdidnotharborAPOE patient with Andermann syndrome in Bulgaria so far. We ε4 allele. established a new mutation in the SLC12A6 gene in a Conclusions: Our results suggest that CH25H_rs13500 patient of Roma origin, born to non-consanguineous par- polymorphism is associated with AD risk in the Turkish ents, probably a private variant for the Bulgarian Roma populationandCH25Hmighthavearoleinpathogenesisof (Gypsy) population? AD independent of APOE. Association between APOC1 T.Todorov:None.I.Pacheva:None.Z.Halil:None.F. “ins” allele and AD risk can be explained by linkage Galabova:None.R.Yordanova:None.I.Geneva:None. disequilibrium with the APOE locus. I. Ivanov: None. A. Todorova: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 959 E-P09.07 1"C.Davila"UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy,Bucharest, Val34Leu polymorphism in Factor XIII is associated with Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, low risk of Aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage in a Romania, 3Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia Clinical Hospital of South Indian population Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania, 4Victor Babes National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 5Titu Maiorescu G.K. Chetan,S.Arati, D.I.Bhat University, Bucharest, Romania National Institute of Mental Health and Neuroscinces, Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental Bangalore, India conditioncharacterizedbyimpairmentofsocialinteraction, reduced communication skills and stereotyped patterns of Background: The rupture of brain aneurysm causes behavior. The etiology of ASD is complex including bleeding in the subarachnoid space and is known as genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors. 2q13 dupli- aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage (aSAH). In our cation have been associated with developmental delay, study we evaluated the association of Factor XIII poly- intellectual disability, ASD and dysmorphism. Several morphism and the risk of Aneurysmal subarachnoid hae- previous studies have linked the NPHP1 gene, located in morrhage (aSAH) in a South Indian population. thisgenomicregion,toASD.Inthispaperwereportanew Methods: The study was performed in 200 subjects with case of 2q13 duplication in association with ASD and aSAH and 205 healthy control subjects. Five ml blood intellectual disability. The patient is a 5 years old boy born samples were collected from subjects and DNA isolated at term from health, non-consanguineous parents who was were used for genotyping of rs5985 (Val34Leu) poly- referred to the department of Child Psychiatry for speech morphism of Factor XIII with Taqman® allelic discrimina- delayandbehavioralproblems.Clinicalevaluationrevealed tionassay.StatisticalsoftwareR.3.0.11wasusedtoanalyse dysmorphic features (high forehead, large protruding ears, the data and P value <0.05 was considered as statistically open-held mouth), severe speech delay (he says only significant. 6 simple words), moderate intellectual disability, autistic Results: In our study, Factor XIII Val/Leu variant behavior (no visual contact, difficult social interaction, genotype frequency was higher in control subjects (18%) stereotypic movements). The genomic profile obtained by comparedtoaSAHpatients(9%).Val34Leuvariantshowed array-CGH (Agilent platforms) unveiled a 645 Kb dupli- significant difference in genotypes (χ2 =5.81 ; df=2 ; P = cation at 2q13 (110457697-111103309, hg18) encompass- 0.04) and allele frequencies (χ2 =4.12 ; df=1 ; P = 0.04) ing RGPD6, MALL and NPHP1 genes. To date, 11 cases between cases and controls. Val/Leu genotype (OR=0.48, with 2q13 microduplication, including NPHP1 and MALL 95%CI=0.26-0.88, P=0.02) and Leu allele was signifi- genes, have been reported. All patients presented behavior cantly associated with low risk of aSAH (OR=0.55, 95% problems including ASD, attention deficit hyperactivity CI=0.32-0.95, P=0.03). Significant association of geno- disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder. Intellec- types was observed in dominant model (OR=0.50,95% tual disability was also noted in 8 patients. Other features CI=0.28-0.90, P=0.02). In subtyping, we found Leu/Leu describedinsomecaseswerespeechdelayanddysmorphic genotype was associated with Basilar top aneurysm traits. All these findings were found in our case, further (OR=3.59, 95%CI=1.1111.64, P=0.03). contributing to the delineating of the 2q13 Conclusion: These results suggest that Factor XIII microduplication. Val34Leu polymorphism is associated with lower risk of I.O. Focsa: None. I. Streata: None. S. Sosoi: None. M. aSAH in South Indian population. Ioana: None. R. Grozavescu: None. M. Grant Reference: The funding for the study was Budisteanu: None. obtained from Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India (SR/WOS A/LS-1040/2014). E-P09.09 G.K. Chetan: None. S. Arati: None. D.I. Bhat: None. Duplication of 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 region in Bulgarian autistic patient E-P09.08 A new case involving 2q13 microduplication associated A. Mandadzhieva1,2,A. Kirov2,I.Pacheva3,4,E. Simeonov5,T. with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability and Todorov1,2,A. Todorova1,2 dysmorphic features 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, I.O.Focsa1,I.Streata2,S. Sosoi2,M. Ioana2, R.Grozavescu3, Bulgaria, 2IMDL Genome Centre Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, M.Budisteanu3,4,5 3Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 4University Hospital “St.960 J.delPicchia George”,Plovdiv,Bulgaria,5PediatricClinic,Aleksandrovska Purpose: To study the state of vitamin D metabolism in University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria children with ASD for the development of the examination and treatment algorithms. It is well known that copy number variants (CNVs) with Results:Weexamined130children:86withASDand44 different frequency and inheritance patterns contribute to neurotypical. The polymorphism Bsml of the VDR gene neurodevelopmental disorders etiology and could be con- was studied: bb (pathological homozygote) - 13 (15.20%) sidered as significant risk factors. Here we report autistic and 0 (0%), respectively, Bb - 43 (50.00%) and 26 behaviour patient with lack of speech and developmental (59.09%), BB - 29 (33.72%) and 18 (40.90%). 95% of delay that was referred for genetic testing. Both father and children with ASD showed adecreaseof 25-OH-Dlevel in brother of the proban are heterozygous carriers of beta- the blood, whereas in the control group in only 9% cases. talasemia mutations. The patient was previously tested for Polymorphic variants of the genes methylation cycle were FragileX-syndromeandX-linkedmentalretardationrelated studied: an increase in the frequency of MTHFR 677 C/T genes were sequenced as well as whole exome sequencing polymorphisms (47.67% and 36.36%, respectively), was performed without detecting any relevant variants MTHFR 677 T/T (9.30% and 6.82%), MTRR 66 G/G correlating with the clinical features. The only positive (31.40% and 25.00%), MTR 2756 A/G (44.19% and resultwasforHLADQ2andHLADQ8genespredisposing 34.09%). to celiac disease. At the end aCGH array (180K) was per- Conclusions:ThespecificweightofvitaminDdeficiency formed and it detected 278kb duplicated region (11p14.3 / inchildrenwithASDoccupiesoneoftheleadingplacesand chr11: 22102205-22361578) that included the ANO5 and frequent combination with a disorder of the methylation SLC17A6 genes. This duplication was interpreted as cycle allows to carry out effective complex therapy. uncertain clinical significance based on the international S. Lisniak: None. Y. Grechanina: None. recommendations. Second aCGH analysis with higher resolution (2,7M) was perform so we can gain additional E-P09.11 information and eventually to clarify the previous finding. Identification of 4q24 microdeletion in a child with autism An additional duplication of 312 kb was detected in chro- spectrum disorder, epilepsy and postaxial polydactyly mosome15(15q11.2),whichincluded4genes:TUBGCP5, CYFIP1, NIPA2 and NIPA1 (PMIDs: 28588435, O.Novoselova1,2 27566550). Duplication was inherited by the father who is without clinical manifestation. The 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 1Filatov Children's clinical hospital, Moscow, Russian region is found duplicated or deleted in people with cog- Federation, 2Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research nitive, language, and behavioral impairmen and a variable Centre for Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation phenotype so probably this finding is the leading cause for the clinical features in the affected child. Introduction:IdentificationofrareCNVsleadstothegreat A. Mandadzhieva: None. A. Kirov: None. I. Pacheva: difficulties in evaluating the clinical significance of these None. E. Simeonov: None. T. Todorov: None. A. chromosomal changes, and this is an important part of Todorova: None. genomic research. Materials and Methods: We examined a 6-years old E-P09.10 male patient with a mild dysmorphic features: short Metabolism of vitamin D system in children with autism palpebral fissures, long eyelashes, large ears with fleshy spectrum disorders lobe and outward turned helix, hyperlaxity of joints. The boy is only child of non-consanguineous healthy parents S. Lisniak,Y. Grechanina with no history of congenital anomalies or developmental delay. The boy was born with uses of vacuum extraction Kharkov interregional specialized medical genetic center, after 41 weeks of an uneventful pregnancy. At birth, he Kharkiv, Ukraine presented macrosomia (4230g/57cm, head circumference 37cm), bilateral postaxial polydactyly and stridor. Devel- Introduction: The frequency ofautistic spectrum disorders opmental delay presented from early stages, later he (ASD) over the past 5 years has increased from 1:110 to demonstrated poor speech. He was diagnosed autism 1:68 and continues to grow. An important role in etio- spectrum disorder at the age of 3 years. At the age of 5 pathogenesis of ASD is given to metabolic disorders, in years he demonstrated subclinical epileptiform activity particular, to the disorder of metabolism of vitamin D sys- on EEG. tem,whichplaysoneoftheleadingrolesinmaintainingthe Results: Chromosomal microarray analysis using Affy- epigenetic health of the organism. metrix Cytoscan 750k array revealed a 6 MbmicrodeletionAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 961 at 4q24 region (arr[hg19] 4q24(101574821_107631432) repeat length allele of ATXN1 (35 repeats) was detected in x1). Due to bioinformatics assay deletion was classified as onlyoneALSpatient.IntermediaterepeatlengthofATXN2 variant of unknown significance. However, deletions (27 and 28 repeats) was detected in 2 ALS patients. comprising the region 4q24 have recently been described Conclusion: To elucidate the significance of ATXN1 and among individuals with an overlapping phenotype. The ATXN2intermediaterepeatsamongALSC9ORF72carriers CXXC4genelocatedindeletedregionmightbeacandidate further analysis needs to be conducted. gene for postaxial polydactyly, as it inhibits the Wnt- A. Marjanovic: None. V. Dobricic: None. M. Branko- signaling pathway and subsequently transcription of GLI3 vic: None. M. Jankovic: None. G. Mandic: None. E. gene, which is associated with polydactyly. Stefanova:None.Z.Stevic:None.I.Novakovic:None.V. Conclusions: We assume that the 4q24 locus is Kostic: None. associated with a combination of polydactyly and mental retardation. Finding candidate genes associated with E-P09.14 cognitive impairment is a potential target for further Further delineation of ACPHD syndrome and a novel investigation. mutation in DNAJC3 O. Novoselova: None. S. Zeybek1,G.Farre2,M. Öztürk1,B.Albuz1, S.Beltran2,A. E-P09.12 Bowcock3,G.Çetin1 AnalysisofATXN1andATXN2repeatlengthinC9ORF72 expansion carriers 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School of Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey, 2CNAG-CRG, Centre A. Marjanovic1,2, V.Dobricic1, M.Brankovic1,2,M. Jankovic1, for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and G.Mandic1,2,E.Stefanova1,2,Z. Stevic1,2, I.Novakovic1,2, V. Technology, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, Kostic1,2 3Department of Dermatology, Oncological Sciences and Genetics and Genome Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 1Neurology Clinic, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States Belgrade, Serbia We recently identified two siblings from consanguineous Introduction: Phenotypic spectrum of C9ORF72 hex- parents who shared similar phenotypic features. These anucleotideexpansion,besidesamyotrophiclateralsclerosis included motor and mental retardation, cerebellar ataxia, (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), is widening to neuropathy, bilateral hearing loss, endocrine changes and other neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s some congenital anomalies including microcephaly, facial disease (AD) and Huntington disease like (HD like) syn- asymmetry, tubular nose, prominent ears. We performed drome. Latest studies hypothesize possible role of CAG chromosomal microarray analysis and whole exome repeats of ATXN1 and ATXN2 gene in phenotypic expres- sequencing on the family to identify the genetic cause. No sion of C9ORF72 expansion carriers. copy number changes were detected, but we identified a p. Materials and Methods: A large cohort of Serbian Arg415Pro homozygous mutation in DNAJC3 gene in both patientsdiagnosedasALS(311),FTD(276),AD(170),HD affected siblings. This mutation was predicted to be dama- like (145) was analyzed to determine the number of ging and was not present in Exac or Kaviar databases. C9ORF72 repeats using standard PCR amplification with DNAJC3 is a co-chaperone of BiP, an endoplasmatic reti- one fluorescently labeled primer followed by fragment culummemberoftheHSP70family,whichpromotesnormal analysis on capillary electrophoresis. Repeat-primed PCR proteinfolding.HomozygousmutationsintheDNAJC3gene wasperformedforapparentlynormalhomozygoussamples. were recently identified as being causative for combined In addition, all C9ORF72 expansion carriers were screened cerebellar and peripheral ataxia with hearing loss and dia- toestimatethenumberofCAGrepeatlengthinATXN1and betes mellitus (ACPHD) syndrome [OMIM #616192] and ATXN2usingonefluorescentlylabeledprimerandsizedby since then one patient with hypothyroidism in addition to capillary electrophoresis. ACPHD has been reported. The clinical features of the Results: The presence of hexanucleotide repeats was patientswereconsistentwithACPHDsyndrome,butarenow detectedin12ALS(3,86%),5FTD(1,81%)and1HDlike further expanded to include growth hormone and thyroid (0,7%) patients. One (0,59%) AD patient had borderline hormone deficiencies and mild dysmorphic features. Given repeatsnumber.InmajorityofC9ORF72expansioncarriers the crucial role of DNAJC3 in endoplasmatic reticulum ATXN1 and ATXN2 repeat length was normal. The most protein folding, the clinical phenotype of the patients with frequent ATXN1 allele was with 29 repeats and the most DNAJC3 mutations may correlate with the overlapping fea- frequent ATXN2 allele was with 22 repeats. Intermediate tures of the unfolded protein response diseases like962 J.delPicchia Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome, Wolcott-Rallison syndrome, and Wolfram syndrome type 1. S.Zeybek:None.G.Farre:None.M.Öztürk:None.B. E-P09.16 Albuz: None. S. Beltran: None. A. Bowcock: None. G. Behavioral phenotype related to CNV in 2q13: report of Çetin: None. onepatientaffectedbyduplicationandapatientcarryinga deletion E-P09.15 AnIranianpatientwithCharcotMarieToothtype2caused M.Vismara1,F. Scionti2,L. Pensabene2, K.Roppa2,G. by a novel GDAP1 mutation Romano2,M. Ceravolo2,D.Concolino2 A. Kouroshnia1,E. Davoudi-Dehaghani2, M.Zafarghandi1, S. 1PhD school of medical genetics, Sapienza University, Roma, Dabbagh-Bagheri1, T.Shirzad1,H. Bagherian1,S. Zeinali1,2 Italy, 2UOC “Pediatria Universitaria”, Azienda Ospedaliera “Pugliese-Ciaccio” – Università “Magna Graecia”, 1Dr.Zeinali'sMedicalGeneticsLab,KawsarHumanGenetics Catanzaro, Italy Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Two unrelated patients with behavioral phenotype and a Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, CNV affecting the same region in 2q13 are here presented: Islamic Republic of one has a deletion (patient A), and the other a duplication (patient B). Patient A, female, clinical diagnosis: ”Border- Introduction: Charcot Marie Tooth Type 2 (CMT2) is a line intellectual functioning + mixed disorder of scholastic type of CMT which is characterized by distal limb muscle skills”. Last follow-up at 10+4/12 years: height: 75th-90th weakness and atrophy.So far more than 20 different genes pc; weight: 75th-90th pc; head circumference: 51cm; Tan- have been identified for CMT2. ner’sscale:B1-P2,thelarche.Dysmorphicfeaturesreported: Materials and Methods: A 4-year-old boyfrom an low frontal hairline, low ears implant, hypertelorism, cubi- Iranian consanguineous family with muscle weakness, tus valgus, right convex scoliosis; signs of developmental walking difficulty, severe peripheral polyneuropathy, are- dyspraxia.Patient B, male, clinical diagnosis: “pervasive flexia and kyphoscoliosis, referred to Kawsar Human developmentaldisordernototherwisespecifiedwithspeech Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), was investigated in delay and stereotypies”, last follow-up at 10+6/12 years: this study. Whole exome sequencing was used to find the height: 10th pc; weight: 10th-25th pc; head circumference: genetic cause of the disease. Sanger sequencing was 50cm; intermammillarydistance:16cm; Tanner’s scale: G2 performed to confirm the NGS finding and genotyping the (testis 4cc). Dysmorphic features reported: asymmetric and parents. long head and face, low frontal hairline, hypotelorism, Result: A novel homozygous splice site mutation (c.579 enophthalmos, deviated nose, thin lips, high-arched palate, +5G>C)inGDAP1genewasidentifiedintheproband.The unusual voice’s pitch, stiff right elbow, 5th finger clin- results of family segregation analysis and in silico study odactyly; right genu valgum; internal foot rotation; no showed that this mutation cancause CMT disease type 2. scoliosis. SNP-arrays were obtained at 75kb resolution Discussion: Here we report a new mutation in the using a Cytoscan HD. Data was analyzed using ChAS and GDAP1 gene in an Iranian patient with CMT2. Despite the UCSC’shgLiftOverandgenomeBrowser.Bothpatientsare importance of the study on genetic causes of CMT in affected by a 492kb CNV in the same region located in countries with high rate of consanguineous marriages, only 2q13 cytoband. According to ISCN2013 and hg38, result limited studies have been performed on the molecular for patient A is arr[hg38]2q13(110116257-110608419)x1, geneticsofthedifferenttypesofCMTinIran.Itisclearthat andarr[hg38]2q13(110119299-110611687)x3forpatientB. identification of common causes of CMT in Iranian RT-PCR on NPHP1 was used to confirm results. Genes population can be helpful for genetic counseling and involved in both CNVs are NPHP1, LIMS3, RGPD5, and designing a cost effective molecular diagnostic algorithm RGPD6; there are also a miRNA, 3 LOCs and a lincRNA. for this disease in Iran. The CNV present in Patient B also comprises the final part Keywords: Charcot Marie Tooth Type 2, GDAP1gene, of MALL. novel mutation M.Vismara:None.F.Scionti:None.L.Pensabene:A. Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;MagnaGraecia M. Kouroshnia: None. E. Davoudi-Dehaghani: None. University. K. Roppa: None. G. Romano: None. M. M.Zafarghandi:None.S.Dabbagh-Bagheri:None. Ceravolo: None. D. Concolino: A. Employment (full or T. Shirzad: None. H. Bagherian: None. S. part-time); Significant; Magna Graecia University. Zeinali: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 963 E-P09.17 1Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Search of genetic markers associated with cognitive Timisoara, Romania, 2Louis Turcanu Children Emergency performance in the elderly by whole exome sequencing: a Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 3Dr. Bacos Cosma Medical pilot study Center, Timisoara, Romania, 4County Emergency Hospital Bacau, Bacau, Romania V. A.Stepanov1,2,K.Vagaitseva1, A.Zarubin1,A.Bocharova1, O.Makeeva1,3 Introduction: Dravet syndrome is a genetic severe myo- clonic epilepsy of childhood with worldwide birth pre- 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Medical valence is <1/40,000. Affected children present from the Research Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Tomsk State first year of life prolonged febrile and non-febrile, gen- University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Nebbiolo Cenere for eralized, clonicorhemiclonicepilepticseizures.85-90% of Clinical Trials, Tomsk, Russian Federation Dravetsyndrome cases are due toa mutation or deletion in the SCN1A gene. This disorder can be autosomal dominant Cognitive performance is an important endophenotype for inherited but most are due to de novo mutations. Moderate various neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases. to severe cognitive impairment and intractable epilepsy is The aim of the study was to find new genetic markers, common. Diagnosis is based on clinical and electro- located in the exome, associated with the variability of the encephalographic(EEG)findings.Themostcommoncause cognitive functions in the normal elderly. The cognitive of death is status epilepticus. functions were assessed using the Montreal Cognitive MaterialsandMethods:Wepresentaboyaged12years Assessment (MoCA) in 710 elderly from Tomsk, Russia. and 7 months diagnosed from the first year of life with The sample was subdivided into 4 quartiles according to Dravet syndrome. The patient’s clinical work-up included total MoCA score. Subsets of individuals from the 1st and neurologic,functionalandimagisticassessment(brainMRI, 4th quartiles were subjected to whole exome sequencing electroencephalogram). SCN1A gene sequencing was using SeqCap EZ MedExome kit which covers approxi- performed. mately 1.5% of the human genome. Four genetic markers Results: Our patient has often been hospitalized for locatedintheintronsofthreegenes(PKD1onchromosome severe recurrent febrile seizures, some accompanied by 16,ATAD5andDNAH17onchromosome17)werefound apnea requiring orotracheal intubation and assisted ventila- tobeexome-widesignificantlyassociatedwiththecognitive tion. The patient presents daily partial seizures under performance. All 4 SNPs as well as their respective genes antiepileptic treatment and tonic-clonic febrile generalized werenotfoundpreviouslyinanyassociationwithcognitive seizuresduringupper-tractrespiratorysimpleinfections.He functions, neurodegenerative or neuropsychiatric diseases. shows developmental regression (moderate cognitive PKD1 encodes polycystin 1, transient receptor potential impairment, lack of coordination, hyperactivity, difficulty channel interacting protein, involved in polycystic kidney in relating to others), restless sleep and requires constant disease. Genetic markers in ATAD5, encoding of ATPase care from his mother. The electroencephalogram showed family AAA domain containing protein 5, were found abnormal activity. SCN1A sequencing revealed associated with height and body mass index in previous c.4970_4971insATCG, p.Thr1658SerfsX14, a not yet GWA studies,whilegeneticvariabilityindyneinaxonemal reported small insertion. heavy chain 17 gene (DNAH17) contribute to triglyceride Conclusions: This is a typical case of Dravet syndrome levels. The associations found in this pilot study are now with difficult seizure management. The condition severely under replicative analysis in a wider sample from the nor- impacts the patient’s and family’s quality of life and the mal elderly population characterized by the battery of long-term prognosis is poor. cognitive tests. This work was supported by the Russian T.Marcovici:None.M.Puiu:None.C.Bacos:None.I. Science Foundation (project # 16-14-00020). Jurca-Simina: None. O. Belei: None. O. Marginean: V.A. Stepanov: None. K. Vagaitseva: None. A. None. A. Grozavu: None. Zarubin:None.A.Bocharova:None.O.Makeeva:None. E-P09.19 E-P09.18 NovelhomozygousKCNJ10mutationinapatientwithnon- Classic Dravet Syndrome in an adolescent male – case syndromic early-onset cerebellar ataxia report F. Nicita1, G.Tasca2,M.Nardella1,E. Bellacchio1,I. T. Marcovici1,2, M.Puiu1,2,C. Bacos3,I.Jurca-Simina1,2, O. Camponeschi1,G.Vasco1,T. Schirinzi1, E.Bertini1,G.Zanni1 Belei1,2,O.Marginean1,2,A. Grozavu4964 J.delPicchia 1Bambino Gesù Children’s Research Hospital, Rome, Italy, Results:Genepaneltestidentifiedaheterozygousvariant 2Fondazione Policlinico Universitario ‘A. Gemelli’, Rome, with uncertain significance in the AMT gene (c.893C>T) Italy suggesting a possible diagnosis of glycine encephalopathy, but clinical tests became negative. Exome sequencing Mutations in KCNJ10, which encodes the inwardly recti- revealed a heterozygous likely pathogenic premature stop fying potassium channel Kir4.1, a primary regulator of codon in GAL gene (c.7C>T). GAL gene is linked to membrane excitability and potassium homeostasis, cause a familial temporal lobe epilepsy (AD). The minor allele complex syndrome characterized by seizures, sensorineural frequency of the T allele is 0.00006 in ExAC. Family deafness, ataxia, intellectual disability and electrolyte analysisdiscoveredthat,thehealthyfatherisacarrierofthis imbalancecalledSeSAME/EASTsyndrome.Wedescribea mutation. 41 years old patient with non-syndromic, slowly pro- Conclusions: The heterozygous premature stop codon gressive early-onset ataxia. Targeted next generation mutation of the GAL gene may not the cause of epilepsy. sequencing identified a novel c.180T>G (p.Ile60Met) mis- K. Arvai: None. B. Kocsis-Deák: None. V. Klujber: sensehomozygousmutation.ThemutatedresidueIle60Met None.B.Balla:None.B.Tobias:None.J.Kosa:None.P. likelyimpairsphosphatidylinositol4,5bisphosphate(PIP2) Lakatos: None. bindingwhichisknowntoplayanessentialroleinchannel gating. Our study expands the clinical and mutational E-P09.21 spectrum of KCNJ10-related disorders and suggests that EXOSC3mutationininfantwithhypotoniaandcerebellar screening of this gene should be implemented in patients hypoplasia withearly-onsetataxia,withorwithoutsyndromicfeatures. F.Nicita:None.G.Tasca:None.M.Nardella:None.E. V. Maroulis1,E. Goula2,S. Mouskou3,M.Papadakis1, A. Bellacchio: None. I. Camponeschi: None. G. Vasco: Malama4 None. T. Schirinzi: None. E. Bertini: None. G. Zanni: None. 1NeolabSA,Athens,Greece,2PediatricIntensiveCareUnit,P. & A. Kyriakou General Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, E-P09.20 3Neurology Department, P.& A. Kyriakou General Children’s Heterozygous premature stop mutation in GAL gene may Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Radiology Department, Agia Sofia not the cause of epilepsy General Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece K.Arvai1,B.Kocsis-Deák2,V.Klujber1,B.Balla1,B.Tobias1,J. Α 2,5 months-old infant girl, was admitted to the ED in a Kosa1,P. Lakatos3 pre-arrest state and was resuscitated successfully, although she continued to present a very important respiratory dis- 1PentacoreLab Ltd., Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis tress syndrome that demanded intubation and mechanical University 1st Department of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, ventilationsubsequently.Thebabypresentedmicrocephaly, 31st Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University, generalized hypotonia with present tendon reflexes, ble- Budapest, Hungary pharoptosisandnystagmuswithnoeyecontact,noreaction to stimuli, and failure to thrive. From her medical history, Introduction: Epilepsy has a complex etiology. Despite she was a preterm baby (35w), IUGR (weight of birth evidencefortheparticipationofgeneticfactors,thegenetic 2180g), from healthy parents, who presented hypotonia at basis of epilepsy remains largely unknown. Here we are birth and had been hospitalized at the NICU for feeding presenting a case of a 8 year old girl, with healthy parents difficulties and swallowing insufficiency. She had also one and with epilepsy and mentalretardation. Dravetsyndrome more hospitalization because of reduced feeding, vomiting was rule out before our examination. and suspicion of aspiration. Infection and metabolic Materials and Methods: Total genomic DNA was screening, karyotype and gene test for Prader-Willi were extracted from her blood sample and first analyzed with a performed and were negative. comprehensiveepilepsygenepaneltest,whichcontains200 Cerebral MRI indicated an important cerebellar hypopla- most relevant genes for epilepsy. Capture based library sia with a predominant frontal lobe, hypoplasia of middle preparation(GeneSG)wasused.Second,exomesequencing cerebellar peduncles and vermis, as well as communication was performed using Agilent SureSelect V5 kit coupled of the 4th ventricle with mega cisterna magna. with Illumina HiSeq sequencing. Sequencing reads were During the last hospitalization at the PICU, the patient mapped to the reference genome (hg38) and after variant passed away due to severe respiratory failure and calling the variants were classified based on ESP, ExAc, cardiorespiratory arrest. A whole exome sequencing had ClinVar and HGMD information. already been demanded, that identified an homozygous p.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 965 Gly31Ala mutation in EXOSC3, posing the diagnosis of S. van Koningsbruggen: None. T. van Amelsvoort: Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1B. The p.Gly31Ala None. M. Marcelis: None. P. Martinez: None. M. mutation is well correlated with the severe phenotype of Mannens: None. the disease expressed in our patient, as well as with her Romaniorigin.Abloodsamplefromthemotherofthebaby E-P09.24 was requested and the analysis is in progress, in order to A case with Joubert syndrome with a new mutation in the provide genetic counseling. CEP290 gene V. Maroulis: None. E. Goula: None. S. Mouskou: None. M. Papadakis: None. A. Malama: None. M.Balasar1,Ö.Kırbıyık2, G.D.Emlik3,H.Yavuz4 E-P09.23 1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Detectionofinbornerrorsofmetabolism(IEMs)inpatients Department of Medical Genetics, KONYA, Turkey, 2İzmir with psychosis using NGS Tepecik Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, İzmir, Turkey, 3Necmettin Erbakan S. vanKoningsbruggen1,T. vanAmelsvoort2,M.Marcelis2,P. University,MeramMedicalFaculty,DepartmentofRadiology, Martinez2, M.Mannens1 Konya, Turkey, 4Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Konya, Turkey 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Psychiatry and Introduction: Joubert Syndrome is a rare genetic disease Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, with wide clinical and genetic heterogenity. The ‘‘molar Netherlands toothsign’attheneuroradiologicalimaging,hypotoniaand developmental delay are essential features for diagnosis of Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are a group of genetic this disease. Up till now, 34 different genes have been disordersinvolvingabnormalitiesinbiochemicalprocesses. identified and most of these demonstrate autosomal reces- The majority of IEMs are caused by defective enzymes, sive pattern. Here, two mutations on CEP290 gene, one of which often results in accumulation of toxic upstream which we firstly reporting in literature, are presented. substancesleadingtoproblems.IEMsareconsideredasrare Material-Methods:7monthsoldfemalepatientadmitted diseases occurring in less than 1/100.000 live births and to our clinic with developmental delay and upward motion presenting during early childhood. The true incidence is of eyes. She was second child of an unrelated parents. She thought to be much higher because of under recognition of was born at the 43th weeks of gestation with vaginal clinicalmanifestations,especiallyassymptomscanbequite delivery and she showed no complication postnatally. At aspecific and diverse. It is hypothesized that patients with thephysicalexaminationwide-prominentforehead,rotatory psychotic disorders can be present in the under diagnosed nystagmus, left upper eyelid ptosis, hypertelorism, ante- group of IEMs. It is important to recognize the (neuro) verted nares, wide philtrum and inverted nipples observed. psychiatric presentations of IEMs, since some IEMs are Fundoscopy revealed hypopigmented regions at the retina. easily treatable and since treatment is more efficacious at Cranial MRI showed ‘molar tooth sign’, characterized by early stages of psychiatric manifestations, before irrever- dysplasticappearanceofvermisandcerebellarhemispheres. sible neurological damage occurs. Unfortunately, diagnosis Results:Karyotypeanalysiswas46,XX.Nextgeneration is often missed or delayed resulting in poorer prognosis. sequence analysis of CEP290(NM_025114) gene showed The objective of this study is to investigate the diagnostic mutations of c.5493delA and c.5975_5976delGA. The yield of a NGS based gene panel for neurodegenerative variant of c.5493delA was previously reported as patho- metabolic disorders into a clinical psychiatric setting. We genic at ClinVar and HGMD databases, whereas aim to detect rare, treatable organic causes of psychotic c.5975_5976delGA variant was not reported at neither of disorders in patients at ‘’high risk’’. We’re fully analyzing these databases. Because of frameshift nature of this the coding regions of 67 IEM genes using a type-A gene deletion and patient’s consistent phenotype with Joubert panel in 100 patients with, preferably, a psychotic disorder syndrome, we assume this variation to be pathogenic. and additional criteria such as cognitive decline, treatment Conclusions: We report a novel mutation in CEP290 resistance or neurological symptoms. In addition, we pro- gene which may cause Joubert syndrome. vide pharmaco genetic informationby genotyping the most M. Balasar: None. Ö. Kırbıyık: None. G.D. Emlik: relevant anti-psychotic metabolizing sequence variants in None. H. Yavuz: None. cytotochrome p450 genes.966 J.delPicchia E-P09.25 neurological dysfunction, etc. LEPR gene variant A case with Kleefstra Syndrome derived from ring rs1137101 (c.668A>G, p.Gln223Arg) alters receptor bind- chromosome 9 ing activity. In this study, we aimed to investigate the association of LEPR rs1137101 gene variant with clinical B. S.Eklioglu1,P. Tasdemir2,L. Simsek2,M. E.Atabek1 parameters of MS. MaterialsandMethods:Thestudyincluded475patients 1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, with relapsing-remitting (RR) MS: female to male Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Konya, Turkey, ratio=1,6, age(mean±SD)=38,1±10,4 years, disease onset 2Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, age(mean±SD)=30,8±9,0 years, EDSS(mean±SD)=3,1 Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey ±1,8, MSSS(mean±SD)=4,8±2,4. Genotyping was per- formed using TaqMan® technology. Statistical analysis Kleefstra Syndrome (KS,OMIM 610253) is a rare neuro- was done using SPSS software (SPSS 17.0). genetic disorder estimated to affect at least 1:200,000 Results:Wefoundasignificantlydifferentdistributionof individuals.KSismostcommonlycausedbydeletioninthe rs1137101genotypesbyrecessivemodel,GGvs.AA+AG, 9q34.3chromosomalregionthatincludesEHMT1geneand accordingtoMSonsetagecutoffof30years(MSonsetage characterized by intellectual disability, childhood hypoto- ≤30:AA+AG=75,6%andGG=24,4%,MSonsetage˃30: nia, and distinctive facial features (arched eyebrows, mid- AA+AG=84,9% and GG=15,1%; Fisher's exact test p= face hypoplasia, anteverted nares, full everted lower lip). 0,015). Carriers of A allele had a more frequent MS Also clinical features include congenital heart and urogen- occurrence after the age of 30, in comparison to GG ital defects, epilepsy, behavioral and psychiatric disorders. genotype carriers, and this association remained significant The proband, a 2 years old girl, was the second-born child after the adjustment for gender (adjusted OR=1,82, ±95% of nonconsanguineous marriage. She was born at term CI=1,13-2,91, p=0,013). weighed 2500 gr. On examination, facial dysmorphic fea- Conclusions:LEPRgenevariantrs1137101isassociated turesincludingarchedeyebrows,low-setearsandthickened with onset of RR MS in an age-dependent manner. The ear helices, microcephaly, thickened lips were observed. current finding should be verified in a larger study group. Cytogenetic analysis revealed ring chromosome formation Acknowledgements: This study was conducted as part of derivedfromchromosome9.Thekaryotypewasinterpreted thegrantsOI175085andIII41028,financedbytheMinistry as 46,XX,r(9)(p24q34). DNA microarray analysis was of Education, Science and Technological Development, performed by Affymetrix Cytoscan Optima (Affymetrix, Republic of Serbia. USA) and the result was arr[hg19] 9p24.3p24.1 (203,861- I.Kolic:None.M.Zivkovic:None.A.Stankovic:None. 8,348,602)x3 arr[hg19] 9q34.3(140,719,389-141,020,389) E.Dincic:None.D.Alavantic:None.L.Stojkovic:None. x1. Here we present a girl that present distinctive facial features with Kleefstra Syndrome resulted from ring E-P09.30 chromosome 9. MYH7-related myopathy in а Bulgarian family: a novel B.S. Eklioglu: None. P. Tasdemir: None. L. Simsek: splice acceptor variant in patients with late onset clinical None. M.E. Atabek: None. manifestation established by NGS E-P09.26 S. Tsaneva1,2,T. Todorov1, A.Maver3,B. Peterlin3,V. Leptin receptor gene variant rs1137101 is associated with Guergueltcheva4, A.Todorova1,2,V.Mitev2 multiple sclerosis onset age 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, I.Kolic1,M.Zivkovic1,A.Stankovic1,E.Dincic2,D.Alavantic1, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Chemistry and L. Stojkovic1 Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Division of Obstetrics 1Laboratory for Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, Vinca and Gynecology, University Medical Center, Ljubljana, InstituteofNuclearSciences,UniversityofBelgrade,Belgrade, Slovenia, 4Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital Sofiamed, Serbia, 2Clinic for Neurology, Military Medical Academy, Sofia, Bulgaria Belgrade, Serbia ApatientfromBulgariawithsuspectedclinicaldiagnosisof Introduction: Changes in leptin receptor (LEPR) activity Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1A was tested for arerelatedtopathogenesisofmultiplesclerosis(MS).MSis mutations in the MYOT gene [OMIM *604103], unfortu- a complex neurological disease whose prognosis depends nately with a negative result. The patient has a positive onvariousfactorssuchasdiseaseonsetage,gender,typeof family history - father, two aunts and sister with the sameAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 967 clinical manifestations. Based on the clinical symptoms of CytoScanHDTM array was done for patients who had the patent: muscle pain in the legs and hands, difficulty in normal results in karyotype and PCR. climbingstairs,EMGwhichshowedmyogenicdamage,we Results: The behavioral phenotypes for all participants performed NGS (Illumina TruSight One). Targeted eva- were classified in the ASD according to ADI-R results luation of genes associated with the clinical symptoms of whose karyotypes showed neither visible numerical nor the patient showed a heterozygous splice acceptor variant structural chromosomal aberrations. FMR1 analysis c.5560-2A>C(NM_000257.3)inMYH7gene.Thedetected revealed two children affected by Fragile-X Syndrome. variantwasconfirmedbySangersequencing.c.5560-2A>C CMAshowedatotalof21CNVsidentifiedin12/14(86%) is not recorded in the database dbSNP and was not present patients. A total of 13/21 pathogenic CNVs were observed among 60000 controls subjects of the ExAC project. The in8patients,alllocatedatgeneticASDhotspots,including detectedvariantispredictedtoresultinanin-framedeletion 22q11.23, Xp22.33 (2/13), 16p11.2 (3/13), harboring no of exon 38 of the MYH7 transcript. A variant with similar OMIM genes. However, the hotspots at 15q13.3, 15q11.2 effect was identified in patients with MYH7-related myo- (2/13),andXp11.23(2/13)harboredCHRNA7,PWRN2and pathies.Segregationanalysisofthefamilyshowedthesame ZNF630 genes, respectively, associated with ASD. The variantsinthepatient’ssisterandhertwochildren(whodo remaining CNVs were classified as having unknown not have clinical presentation at the moment). The mother clinical significance, distributed at loci: 2q12.2, 3p22.1, of the patient with a congenital heart defect is not a carrier 9p21.1 (3/8), Xp22.32, Xq21.1, and Xq24. Two patients of the detected variant. In conclusion, we present a novel showed no alterations in CMA. splice acceptor variant which can lead to skipping of exon Conclusions: Identify CNVs and genes using CMA in 38oftheMYH7gene.Thedetectedvariantwasestablished our patients was very important to understand the hetero- only in the family members with muscular clinical mani- geneous spectrum of ASD. The results helped the clinical festations problems. management of all patients. S.Tsaneva:None.T.Todorov:None.A.Maver:None. A.D. da Cruz: None. I.P. Pinto: None. G.R. Nasci- B. Peterlin: None. V. Guergueltcheva: None. A. Todor- mento:None.M.A.Gigonzac:None.A.S.daCruz:None. ova: None. V. Mitev: None. T.C. Vieira: None. D.M. Cunha: None. C.L. Ribeiro: None. C.C. da Silva: None. L.B. Minasi: None. E-P09.31 CNVsassociatedwithautismspectrumdisorderinacohort E-P09.32 of children from Goiás (Brazil) Ruptureofabdominalaorticaneurysmandrenalfailurein an adult patient with undiagnosed Neurofibromatosis type A. D.daCruz1,2,3,I. P.Pinto1,2,G.R. Nascimento1,M. A. 1 (NF1) Gigonzac1,3,A.S.daCruz1,T.C.Vieira1,3,D.M.Cunha1,C.L. Ribeiro1,2,C.C. daSilva1,2,3, L.B. Minasi1 M.Tzetis1,S. Koutsias2,E. Mourmoura3,A. Mitrakos4,I. Fylaktou4,I.Papathanasiou3,M.Tsipi4,M.Poulou4,K.Kosma1, 1PontificalCatholicUniversityofGoiás,SchoolofAgricultural A. Giannoukas5,A.Tsezou6 andBiologicalSciences,GeneticsMaster’sProgram,Replicon Research Group, Goiânia, Brazil, 2Federal University of 1National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Department Goiás, Biotechnology and Biodiversity PhD Program, of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2University of Thessaly, Goiânia,Brazil,3HumanCytogeneticsandMolecularGenetics FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofVascularSurgery,Larissa, Laboratory, Secretary of Goias State for Public Health, Greece, 3University of Thessaly, Faculty of Medicine, Goiânia, Brazil Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Larissa, Greece, 4National and Kapodistrian University Athens, Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neu- Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 5University rodevelopmental disorder with a complex genetic archi- of Thessaly, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Vascular tecture. The worldwide prevalence of autism is increasing. Surgery, Larissa,, Greece, 6University of Thessaly, Faculty of However,autismprevalenceislow(0.27%)inBrazildueto Medicine, Department of Biology, Larissa, Greece misdiagnosis of the disorder. Material and Methods: We report on 16 probands with Introduction: Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is an ASD referred by the public health system of Goiás. ASD autosomal dominant disorder affecting 1/ 3000 individuals assessment using Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised and caused by SNVs, deletions and duplications affecting (ADI-R), G-band karyotyping, and PCR of FMR1 using the NF1 gene. Vascular lesions of medium and large size ® Amplidex kit were carried out for all patients. Chromoso- arteries and veins are a well recognized, albeit rare, mani- ® mal Microarray Analysis (CMA) using GeneChip festation of NF1. We report on an adult patient968 J.delPicchia retrospectively diagnosed (clinically and molecularly) with G139C:p.G47R in exon 1 of PINK1. The Maltese NF1aftersurgeryforarupturedabdominalaorticaneurysm Geoparkinson collection (158 patients, 378 matched con- and renal failure. trols) was genotyped for this variant by PCR and RFLP Materials and Methods: A 37 year old female patient using Hpy166II. was admitted for emergency surgery due to a ruptured Results: The variant (gnomAD maf < 1:10,000) was abdominal aortic aneurysm, renovascular hypertension and identified in heterozygosity in a 73 year old male patient renal failure. Signs of NF1: multiple café-au-lait macules, with two affected first degree relatives. p.G47R results in axillaryfleckling,multiplecutaneousneurofibromas,andan the replacement of glycine, a small amino acid with a non- external vaginal plexiform neurofibroma, became evident polar,aliphaticsidechain,witharginine,anaminoacidwith upon patient examination. DNA was extracted from a large positively charged side chain. G47 is found in the peripheral blood and was analyzed by NGS with a mitochondrialtransitdomain(MTD)ofPINK1,whichisthe customized NF1 gene panel (QIAseq, Qiagen GmBh, partoftheproteinresponsibleforthetransportofPINK1to Hilden Germany) that covers 100% of the coding exons, the mitochondrion. Data analysis of 101 HTS datasets and as well as the intron-exon boundaries. Additionally, PCR-RFLP of theMaltese Geoparkinson collection didnot ChromosomalMicroarray Analysis(CMA)wasdoneusing identify any other individual with this variant. the high resolution 2x400K G3 CGH+SNP microarray Conclusion: This is the first report of the rare variant p. platform (G4842A, Design ID 028081, Agilent Technolo- G47Rinalate-onsetPDpatientwithafamilyhistoryofthe gies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). condition. Results: NGS did not reveal a pathological SNV for the Funding:Patientdataandsampleswerecollectedaspart NF1 gene but the CMA revealed a novel duplication ofthe5thframework(FP5)EUfundedGeoParkinsonstudy, covering exons 19-27 of the NF1 gene [arr[GRCh37] project number QLK4-CT-1999-01133. HTS was funded 17q11.2(29553704_29562744)x3]. through the NGS Project funded by the National Research Conclusions: We have identified a novel NF1 gene and Innovation Programme (2012). duplication (exons 19-27) in a 37 years old female patient Y. Muscat: None. G. Camilleri: None. F. Borg presenting with mild NF1 but spontaneously ruptured Carbott: None. C. Karen: None. M. Mallia: None. N. abdominal aortic aneurysm. The rare presentation of cases Vella: None. S. Bezzina Wettinger: None. R. with NF1 vasculopathy could be due to an under- Farrugia: None. appreciation of its recurrence. M. Tzetis: None. S. Koutsias: None. E. Mourmoura: E-P09.35 None. A. Mitrakos: None. I. Fylaktou: None. I. NovelCOL4A1mutationinafetuswithearlyprenatalonset Papathanasiou:None.M.Tsipi:None.M.Poulou:None. of schizencephaly K. Kosma: None. A. Giannoukas: None. A. Tsezou: None. Y. Tsurusaki,Y. Sato,J. Shibasaki,N.Aida, K.Hiiragi, Y. Kimura, M.Akahira-Azuma, Y.Enomoto, K. Kurosawa E-P09.33 High Throughput Sequencing identifies PINK1 p.G47R: A Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan rare mutation identified in a Parkinson’s disease patient Introduction: Schizencephaly is a congenital anomaly Y. Muscat1, G.Camilleri1,F. BorgCarbott1,C. Karen1, M. characterized by an abnormal gray matter-lined defect Mallia2,N.Vella2,S.Bezzina Wettinger1,R. Farrugia1 extending from the pial surface to the lateral ventricles. Moreover, porencephaly is a congenital brain disorder 1University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Mater Dei Hospital, characterized by cavitation or a cerebrospinal fluid-filled Msida, Malta cyst in the brain without gray matter lining. To date, mutations in COL4A1 have been reported to cause por- Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in PTEN induced encephaly or schizencephaly. Here, we report a Japanese kinase-1 (PINK1) reportedly increase risk for late-onset patient with schizencephaly, determined by serial fetal Parkinson disease (PD). PINK1 localises to the mitochon- ultrasonography, fetal magnetic resonance imaging, and de dria, recruiting and phosphorylating Parkin leading to novo novel mutation in COL4A1. mitophagy of damaged mitochondria. Mutations in PINK1 Materials and Methods: To investigate the molecular abolish such effect, increasing the vulnerability of cells to basis of a Japanese patient with schizencephaly, genomic oxidative stress. DNA from the patient and his parents was isolated from Methods: High throughput sequencing (HTS) of PD peripheral blood by standard protocols after receiving related genes identified an extremely rare mutation, c. written informed consent. Genomic DNA was capturedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 969 using the TruSight One Sequencing Panel (Illumina, Inc., emotions in SZ patients (c.1-98A>G); while p.Val158Met SanDiego,CA,USA).CapturedDNAwassequencedona and c.-225T>C were associated with lower scores in MiSeq platform (Illumina) with 151 bp paired-end reads. attention processes. The allele Val158 of COMT degrades Results: Average coverage depth of the entire panel was catecholamines faster than the risk allele and has been 58.51 reads, with 97.7 % of targeted bases covered at 10× related to efficiency in attention tasks and other cognitive sequence reads. Targeted resequencing identified a novel abilities. heterozygous mutation in COL4A1, which is a known Conclusions: variants of these genes were confirmed schizencephaly-causing gene (NM_001845; c.2645G>A with SZ risk. COMT variants were associated with and c.2646C>A, p.Gly882Glu). Sanger sequencing con- alterations in tests assessing social-cognition and working- firmed this variant occurred as a de novo event. memory in SZ patients, but these results should be later Conclusions: Our report may be useful for determining confirmed. COMT could be a marker of cognitive the mechanism and developmental process of COL4A1- impairment and candidate for therapeutic interventions in related disease. SZ patients. CONACyT_233695. Y. Tsurusaki: None. Y. Sato: None. J. Shibasaki: N. Monroy-Jaramillo: None. D. Dávila Ortiz de None. N. Aida: None. K. Hiiragi: None. Y. Kimura: Montellano: None. I. Fricke-Galindo: None. B. Pérez- None.M.Akahira-Azuma: None.Y.Enomoto: None.K. Aldana: None. S. González-Arredondo: None. E. Her- Kurosawa: None. nández-Mondragón: None. M. López-López: None. C. Aviña-Cervantes: None. Y. Rodríguez-Agudelo: None. E-P09.36 ContributionofgeneticvariantsinthecognitionofMexican E-P09.37 patients with schizophrenia: a pilot study Association study of COMT and MAOA genes polymorphisms on a risk of schizophrenia development in N.Monroy-Jaramillo1, D.DávilaOrtiz deMontellano1, I. the Southern Russian patients Fricke-Galindo2,B. Pérez-Aldana2,S.González-Arredondo1,E. Hernández-Mondragón1,M.López-López2,C.Aviña-Cervantes1, V. Kushchenko1,E. Mashkina1,V. Soldatkin2, A.Bouleiko2 Y. Rodríguez-Agudelo1 1Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian 1National Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Mexico, Federation,2RostovState MedicalUniversity, Rostov-on-Don, Mexico, 2Metropolitan Autonomous University, Mexico, Russian Federation Mexico Introduction: For a long time, the dysregulation in dopa- Introduction:Cognitive impairment isacardinalsymptom mine signaling was considered a major mechanism of ofschizophrenia(SZ),relevantforprognosisandfunctional schizophrenia development. It is proposed that the increase capacityofpatients.VariantsofCOMT,PRODHandDISC- of dopamine production results in a psychiatric phenom- 1 are risk factors for SZ and individually associated with enon called aberrant salience, which forces the brain to executive-functions and social-cognition. Their combina- detect various external stimuli as important or life- tion may have epistaxis with significant effects on affected threatening. Polymorphisms of the dopamine metabolism brain regions in SZ. Herein, we describe a cognitive- genesMAOAandCOMTwerestudiedinordertoassessthis molecular evaluation in Mexican SZ patients. hypothesis. Material and Methods: 9 variants of COMT, 15 of Materials and Methods: The patient group consisted of PRODH and 4 of DISC-1 were genotyped in 150 patients 100 male and 98 female individuals who suffered from and 150 controls matched for age-gender-ethnicity. The schizophrenia. The control group consisted of 71 indivi- association between alleles/genotypes/haplotypes and the duals. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood score in cognitive domains was evaluated by the battery samples. The potential influence ofthe rs4680 COMT gene MATRICS in a subgroup of 40 participants/group. polymorphism and the MAOA-LPR polymorphism on Results: p.Val158Met COMT (p=0.0006, OR=2.80, schizophrenia development was studied using PCR. IC95%=1.54-5.09); p.Asp426Asn PRODH (p=0.02, Results: The study showed a lack of any significant OR=1.58, IC95%=1.04-2.42) and p.Ser704Cys DISC-1 differences between both groups studied in regard to the (p=0.0198, OR=1.8, IC95%=1.68-1.92) were associated Val158Met COMT gene polymorphism. In case of the with SZ. Risk alleles of COMT and PRODH in this MAOA-LPR polymorphism, there were significant differ- subgroup were related to lower scores in MATRICS encesbetweenthegroupsregardingallelicfrequencies.The (p<0.01). The multivariate analysis suggested that COMT control group exhibited a higher frequency of 4-tandem variantsmightparticipateinperceptionandmanagementof repeats in the promoter region of the gene (p<0,001). In970 J.delPicchia addition, the female patients demonstrated a higher rate of Conclusion:WehaveobservedthatonlymiR-181bdiffer the 3-tandem repeats polymorphism than other gendered in schizophrenia cases. It is also important that miR-181b groups (p<0.05). upregulation found to be significant in all family cases. Conclusions:Wefailedtoestablishtheassociationofthe Significantly, these changes in miRNA expression may Val158Met COMT gene polymorphism with an increased have the potential of new biomarkers and this miR-181b risk of schizophrenia. On the other hand, the alleles upregulationinschizophreniamayalsoprovidethebasisfor associated with a decreased activity of the MAOA gene new clinical diagnostics. may potentially contribute to the disorder development. A S. Eroglu: None. O. Eroglu: None. further research on the dopamine metabolism genes in relation to the schizophrenia development is required. E-P09.39 V. Kushchenko: None. E. Mashkina: None. V. The identifying in SCN1A gene a novel variants associated Soldatkin: None. A. Bouleiko: None. with epilepsy E-P09.38 M.Belenikin1, A.Slavokhotova2 The prevalence of miR-181b & let-7g expression in schizophrenia cases 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, 2Vavilov S. EROGLU1,O.EROGLU2 Institute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation 1Bilecik State Hospital, Provincial Directorate of Health, Background: Mutations in SCN1A gene are the most Bilecik, Turkey, 2Bilecik Şeyh Edebali University, Faculty of commoncauseofGEFS+(generalizedepilepsywithfebrile Science and Letters, Department of Molecular Biology and seizures plus), SMEI/Dravet syndrome (severe myoclonic Genetics, Bilecik, Turkey epilepsy of infancy). Currently more than six hundred clinicallyimportantvariantsareknowninSCN1Agene(710 Introduction: The aim of this study is to examine the pathogenic in according ClinVar database). diagnosticcompetenceofmiR-181bandlet-7gbloodlevels The aims of study: Here, we report mainly for a novel in schizophrenia cases. missense and nonsense mutations found in SCN1A, Materials and Methods: 60 patients who are diagnosed associated with SMEI or GEFS+, according to our clinical in psychiatry clinic in Bilecik State Hospital were included research study. in the study. In addition, 6 people who are diagnosed with Methods: DNA isolation was performed by MagNAPur- schizophreniabelongingto3differentfamiliesareincluded eLC2;90biologicalsamples(includingprobands,parents,a in the study group. RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and fewcontrols)weretestedbyNGS(454GSJuniorsequencer qRT-PCR steps were performed with Qiagen branded kits (we have conducted research in 2014-2015), NimbleGen based on SYBR Green method, using the protocol of the SeqCap target enrichment) for genes associated with commercial company. For statistical analysis, -ΔCt values, epileptic encephalopathy (34 genes)). Informed consents obtained from the use of ce-miR-39 Ct values in normal- were obtained from legal representatives of patients ization, were used.Differences between groups were tested according local ethical approval. All steps of the sample by independent sample t test and variance analysis. ROC preparation or sequencing were performed in according to analysis was performed to calculate the diagnostic compe- the manufacturer's protocols. tence."Foldchange"calculationswereperformedonlineon Results: We identified a number of heterozygous Qiagen webpage. In all analyzes, alpha error level was missense and nonsense mutations (hg19 genome assem- accepted as 0.05. bly) in SCN1A gene: chr2:g.166847972G>A (p.Ala>Val); Results: The results are summarized in Table 1 chr2:g.166848441T>G (p.Ile>Leu); chr2: g.166859155C>T (p.Gly>Ser); chr2:g.166897905A>G ComparedGroups miRNA Pvalue FoldChange AUC Specificity Sensitivity (p.Ser>Pro); chr2:g.166904163C>A (p.Asp>Tyr); chr2: g.166909412A>G (p.Leu>Ser); chr2:g.166901591G>A Schizophrenia(54 miR- <0.001 -7.89 0.817 89% 72% patients) 181b (p.Arg>Ter); chr2:g.166912936C>T (p.Trp>Ter); chr2: let-7g 0.895 g.166930011T>A (p.Lys>Ter). Family(6patients) miR- <0.001 -9.75 0.880 93% 86% Conclusions: The authors are grateful to Mds Ananyeva 181b T., Ayvazyan S., Lukyuanova E., and Zhilina S. from let-7g 0.746 Research Center for Children Medical Care for clinical selection of patients. The research was supported by the Department of Health of Moscow (project 2014-2015).Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 971 M. Belenikin: None. A. Slavokhotova: None. S. MIURA1, K.Kosaka2,R. Fujioka3,Y. Uchiyama4, T. Taniwaki1, T.Shimojo2,H.Shibata2 E-P09.40 A novel variation in SCN2A gene in a patient with Dravet 1Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, syndrome Department of Medicine, Kurume University Schoo, Kurume, Japan, 2Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of A. G.Zamani1,L. Simsek1,H.Caksen2,M.S. Yildirim1 Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 3Department of Food and Nutrition, Beppu University Junior 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, College, Beppu, Japan, 4Department of Radiology, Kurume NecmettinErbakanUniversity,Konya,Turkey,2Departmentof University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan Pediatric Neurology, Meram Medical Faculty,Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey Spinocerebellar ataxia 27 (SCA27) is an autosomal domi- nantSCAcausedbyvariationsintheFGF14geneencoding Introduction: Dravet syndrome, also known as severe fibroblast growth factor 14. We examined a Japanese SCA myoclonic epilepsy in infancy(SMEI), is an epileptic patientwhosedeceasedfatheralsosufferedfromSCA.The encephalopathy and a component of genetic epilepsy with patient was a 63-year-old male. He had completed junior febrile seizures plus(GEFS+) spectrum. Although patho- high school without further education. The chief complaint genic variants of SCN1A is most common in etiology, was slowly progressive dysarthria and gait disturbance plenty of other genes including SCN2A, held responsible those appeared at age 47. He showed pathological saccadic for this disease. SCN2A encodes the brain sodium channel dysmetria, saccadic intrusions into smooth pursuit eye NaV1.2 which plays a significant role in generation and movements, dysarthria, and limb and truncal ataxia. There propagation of action potential in nerve cell. was a wide-based gait without cane. Limb muscle strength Materials and Methods: 13 years old female patient was intact. Deep tendon reflexes were normal or slightly referred to our clinic with epilepsy, intellectual disability and reduced. Pathological reflexes were not shown. He excessive sweating. The patient had febrile convulsion demonstrated mildly impaired vibration sense in the lower subsequent to routine vaccination at 5 months old. At age 3, limbs. There were no urinary dysfunctions. Brain MRI she developed afebrile convulsions and followed by anti- showed cerebellar atrophy without brainstem involvement. epileptics thereafter. Motor milestones were delayed. Her We first confirmed the absence of repeat expansion in family history was uneventful except death of her father known genes responsible for SCAs1-3, 6-8, 12, 17 and because of colon cancer at 28 years of age. In physical dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy. By the exome analy- examination; tremor and avoidance of eye contact observed. sis, we identified a novel heterozygous missense variant Cranial MRI and genitourinary USG findings were (NM_004115, c.529A>T; Lys 177 X) in exon 4 of the insignificant. FGF14 gene. FGF14 is known to interact with voltage- Results:SequenceanalysisusingNGStechnology,showed gated sodium channels. The variant is expected to generate no significant variation in SCN1A, SCN1B, GABRG2 and premature FGF14 proteins lacking the heparin binding site SCN9A. Whereas in SCN2A(NM_001040142), we found a in FGF domain which could modulate the activity of substitution(c.3454G>A, p.Ala1152Thr) that changes amino FGF14. We confirmed the absence of the variant in 502 acid sequence. This variation have not been reported in healthy Japanese individuals by Sanger sequencing. There Ensemble(Grch38) and CLINVAR databases. wasnorecordofthevariantinExAC.Weconcludethatthe Conclusion:Becauseofbiochemicaldifferencesbetween novel variation in FGF14 is the causative variant for the alanine and threonine, it seems likely that this variation SCA27 patient. couldeffectsecondaryandtertiarystructureofbrainsodium S. Miura: None. K. Kosaka: None. R. Fujioka: None. channelNaV1.2whichinturncouldendupwithphenotype Y. Uchiyama: None. T. Taniwaki: None. T. Shimojo: described above. Further studies are needed to determine None. H. Shibata: None. the exact effect of this variation on severity of disease and prognosis of patients. E-P09.42 A.G. Zamani: None. L. Simsek: None. H. Caksen: Genetic and clinical analysis of spinocerebellar ataxia type None. M.S. Yildirim: None. 36 in a Turkish Family with review of literature E-P09.41 M.Elmas1,A.Gündoğdu2,I.Şahbaz2,C.Koçoğlu2,T.Kalkan3, A novel nonsense variant (Lys177X) of FGF14 in a H.Toktaş4,B.Değirmenci1,B.Göğüş1, H.Demirbaş5,&. Japanesepatient withautosomal dominantspinocerebellar Öztürk5,M. Solak1,N.Başak2 ataxia972 J.delPicchia 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Medical Genetic Department, 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Boğaziçi University, Suna and İnan Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Chemistry and Kıraç Foundation, Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Istanbul,Turkey,3AntalyaResearchHospital,Antalya,Turkey, 3University Hospital “St. George”, Medical University, 4Afyon Kocatepe University, Physical theraphy rehabilitation Plovdiv, Bulgaria Department, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 5Afyon Kocatepe University, Neurology Department, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey Stickler syndrome is a hereditary autosomal dominant dis- orderaffecting1in7,500to9,000newborns.Thecondition ExpansionofGGCCTGhexanucleotiderepeatintheintron is characterized by typical facial, ocular and auditory fea- 1 of NOP56 was identified as the cause spinocerebellar tures. Similar features arealsofound inMarshallsyndrome ataxia type 36 (SCA36), a rare SCA subtype accompanied leading to a continuing debate whether these are distinct bymotorneuroninvolvement.Firstofall,itwasdetermined entities or different manifestations of a single syndrome. that these two patients were related to each other. After the Several mutations causing Stickler syndrome have been affected individuals were identified in their families. In the found in the COL2A1 gene, also mutations have been pedigree analysis, it was found that the disease was trans- detected in the COL11A1 causing Stickler and Marshall mitted dominantly. The inheritance pattern of the disease syndrome.Herewepresentthefirstgeneticallyverifiedcase has been determined. A neurological examination was ofMarshall-SticklersyndromeinBulgaria-afamilialcase performed to patients. Three major findings were identified spread through at least three generations. The proband is a as a result of the neurological examination performed.1) 2-years old girl with ocular hypertelorism, midface hypo- both upper and lower motor neurons deficit (tongue fasi- plasia, small saddle nose with flat bridge and craniofacial culation, clonus, babinski extensions)2) loss of muscle dysplasia. The proband’s father has the same clinical power in both upper and lower extremities (3/5) 3) unre- manifestations like the proband, but with a tall and thin sponsivenessatcerebellarphysicialexamination(dysmetry, stature and mild hearing loss. The same dysmorphology is dysdiadochokinesia). Mild cognitive retardation was presented also by the grandfather. Both the father and the detected in the mental examination of the patients. Dysar- proband are clinically diagnosed as Marshall-Stickler syn- thria and tongue fasiculation was a severe finding in both drome. After a negative COL2A1 result, we provided a patients.As the disease progressed, walking and balance mutationscreeningoftheCOL11A1geneandfoundanovel loss increased, resulting in wheelchair movement. Sig- splicе-site mutation c.3474+1G>A in intron 45. This var- nificant enlargement of cerebellar follicles, which were iant is related to the clinical presentation in the patient and compatiblewithcerebellaratrophy,wasfoundinbrainMR his father. The variant c.3474+1G>A affects the donor images of patients. In EMG, absence of sensory response splice site of intron 45 resulting in altered splicing, which was detected with lower motor neuron deficit. Bilateral leadstoproductionofanonfunctionalprotein.Themutation sensorineural hearing loss was detected in the hearing affects the region coding the major triple-helical domain, examinations of the patients and the patient was given which represents a mutation “hot spot” for the gene. hearing aid. Diplopia was detected in the eye examinations M. Mladenova: None. T. Todorov: None. L. Grozda- performed by the patients. As a result of all these physical nova: None. V. Mitev: None. A. Todorova: None. examination findings and imaging findings, SCA type 36 was suspected in the patients and the molecular test E-P09.45 performed. Wholeexomesequencinghelpsthediagnosisoftwosiblings M. Elmas: None. A. Gündoğdu: None. I. Şahbaz: with SLC19A3 mutation None. C. Koçoğlu: None. T. Kalkan: None. H. Toktaş: None. B. Değirmenci: None. B. Göğüş: None. H. A.H.Cebi,T.Kamasak,S.Seyhan,H.OnderYilmaz,A.Cansu Demirbaş: None. &. Öztürk: None. M. Solak: None. N. Başak: None. Karadeniz Technical Universiry, Trabzon, Turkey E-P09.43 The diagnosis of potentially treatable disorders are very Anovelsplice-sitevariantinCOL11A1gene-familialcase important for the patient and the family. One of these dis- of genetically verified Marshall- Stickler syndrome in easeisbiotinorthiamineresponsiveencephalopathytype2. Bulgaria Early usage of the thiamine and biotin has a dramatic clinical effect. Herewereport twosiblings with earlyonset M.Mladenova1,2,T. Todorov1, L.Grozdanova3,V. Mitev2, A. encephalopathy and epilepsy. One of them was a boy. He Todorova1,2 was one and half years old and the other was three months old girl when they were sent to our clinic. Brain MRIAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 973 findings of the boy shows the atrophy of frontoparietal and effects on different phenotypes for SNPs in SLC36A1, occipital cortex. He had seizures since three months. His andtrade-offdynamicsforaSNPinSLC38A9,conferringa sisters MRI findings was active demyelinating neuronal survival advantage before 90 years of age and loss. She hasn’t got seizures. Their metabolic screening disadvantage later. were normal. The parents were first degree relatives. We On the whole, our findings support the hypothesis that sent the patients and parents blood for whole exome amino acid transporters may impact on the age-related sequencing. Both of the siblings has a homozygous muta- physical decline and survival at old age in a complex way, tionatSLC19A3genep.Lys290Glufs*16(c.623_624insA). likelythroughamechanisminvolvingmTORC1signalling. When we look at the parents they were heterozygous car- F. Iannone: None. P. Crocco: None. S. Dato: None. E. riers. We confirm the results with sanger sequencing. We Hoxha:None.A.Montesanto:None.G.Passarino:None. startedtheirtreatmentaftertheresults.Wearefollowingthe G. Rose: None. patients for two months. Before treatment the brother nee- dedtheventilationmachinefromhistracheostomy.Nowhe E-P10.03 can breath without ventilation machine. We expect them to The first patient homozygous for c.197G>T p.G66V be better in time. mutation in CHCHD10 A.H.Cebi:None.T.Kamasak:None.S.Seyhan:None. H. Onder Yilmaz: None. A. Cansu: None. S. Penttilä1,M. Jokela1, S.Porre2,O.Raheem3,1, B.Udd1,4,5 1Neuromuscular Research Center, University of Tampere and E-P10 Neuromuscular disorders TampereUniversity Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 2Department of Pathology, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland, E-P10.01 3Division of Pathology, HUSLAB, Helsinki University Genetic variability of amino acid transporter genes affects Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics physical decline after the fifth decade of life and human and Department of Medical Genetics, Medicum, University of survival Helsinki, Helsinki,Finland, 5Departmentof Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland F. Iannone,P. Crocco,S.Dato, E. Hoxha, A.Montesanto, G. Passarino, G.Rose Introduction: Dominant mutations in CHCHD10 have been reported to cause a wide range of neurological dis- Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, orders.ThemostcommonCHCHD10-relateddiseaseinthe University of Calabria, Rende (Cs), Italy world is spinal muscular atrophy Jokela type (SMAJ, OMIM #615048), that is caused by mutation c.197G>T p. Physical function impairment with increasing age has been G66V. SMAJ is a relatively benign adult-onset disorder, associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Amino characterizedbypainfulcrampsandfasciculationsaffecting acid availabilityisarate-limiting factorintheregulationof the proximal and distal muscles of the upper and lower muscleproteinmetabolism,andhenceariskfactorforage- limbs. The disease is slowly progressive, resulting in related decline in muscle performance. Amino acid trans- weaknessandmuscleatrophylater inlife.InFinland,there porters are emerging as sensors of amino acid availability are approximately 200 SMAJ patients due to a Finnish and activators of mTORC1 signalling, acting as founder mutation c.197G>T p.G66V. transceptors. Aims: We describe the first patient homozygous for Hence,wesoughttoevaluatetheassociationof58single c.197G>T p.G66V. nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10 selected amino Results: The onset of the disease was already in acid transporter genes with parameters of physical perfor- childhood and at the age of 36 the patient became wheel- mance (Hand Grip, Activity of Daily Living, and Walking chair bound. In contrast to heterozygous SMAJ, muscle time). By analysing a sample of 458 subjects aged 50-89 biopsy shows clear mitochondrial pathology and the years, we found significant associations with SLC7A5, degenerative muscle changes on MRI are extensive. The SLC7A8, SLC36A1, SLC38A2, SLC3A2, SLC38A7 parents of the homozygous patient both belong to genes. Further investigation of the SNPs in a cross- previouslyknownSMAJfamiliesandhavearegularSMAJ sectional study including 271 subjects aged 90-107 years phenotype. revealed associations of SLC3A2, SLC38A2, SLC38A3, Conclusions: The phenotype of the homozygous patient SLC38A9variabilitywithlongevity.Finally,alongitudinal is much more severe compared to conventional hetero- study examining the survival rate over 10 years showed zygous patients. This is the first reported individual in the age-dependent complexity due to possible pleiotropic974 J.delPicchia world who carries confirmed pathogenic CHCHD10 muta- U. Grasshoff: None. S. Beck-Woedl: None. T. Haack: tions on both alleles. None. K. Kagan: None. S. Haen: None. E. S.Penttilä:None.M.Jokela:None.S.Porre:None.O. Botzenhart: None. Raheem: None. B. Udd: None. E-P10.09 E-P10.08 A novel pathogenic MYH3 mutation in a child with A new case with GLYT1 encephalopathy and sequence Sheldon-Hall syndrome and vertebral fusion variant in the SLC6A9 gene M.Scala1,A. Accogli1,E. DeGrandis1,A. Allegri1,C. U.Grasshoff1,S.Beck-Woedl1,T.Haack1,K.Kagan2,S.Haen3, Bagowski2,M. Shoukier2,M.Maghnie1, V.Capra1 E. Botzenhart4 1Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Prenatal Medicine 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Rare Munich, Munich, Germany Disease Center, Tuebingen University, Tübingen, Germany, 2University Women's Hospital, Tübingen, Germany, Introduction: Sheldon–Hall syndrome (SHS), also named 3University Hospital, Institute of Pathology, Tübingen, distal arthrogryposis (DA) 2B, is characterized by con- Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Center, genital non-progressive contractures. Causative mutations Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, in four genes have been described: MYH3, TNNI2,TPM2, Germany and TNNT3. We report the first patient with typical SHS phenotype and exceptional vertebral fusions. Introduction: Glycine encephalopathy with normal serum Materials and Methods: An 8.5-year-old boy was glycin (OMIM #617301, also known as GLYT1 encepha- evaluated for dysmorphic facial features (triangular face with lopathy) is a very rare autosomal-recessive disorder only prominent nasolabial folds and chin, arched eyebrows, and reported in a few families of Arab descend so far. The downslantingpalpebralfissures),camptodactylyofbothhands patients usually present at birth with severe hypotonia, combined with clinodactyly of toes, and several tendon respiratory failure and facial dysmorphism. Increased fetal retractions. Left hand X-ray showed a complete bony luno- nuchal translucency (NT) and arthrogryposis were pre- triquetral coalition. Spine MRIand CTscanrevealed multiple viously reported. Homozygous SLC6A9 mutations (solute cervical and dorsal vertebral fusions. Patient's karyotype and carrier family 6 (neurotransmitter transporter, glycine), CGH-arraywerenormal.OnsuspicionofSHS,allthecoding member9orglycinetransporter,type1)aretheonlyknown exons of MYH3 and of the adjacent intronic regions were cause of GLYT1 encephalopathy. investigated by high throughput next generation Case report: We report on a young healthy and non- sequencing (NGS). consanguineous couple of German origin. They had two Results: The novel, very rare heterozygous variation consecutive pregnancies with multiple fetal abnormalities. c.859T>G, p.Phe287Val was identified. This mutation The first fetus was female (46,XX) and presented with an produces a substitution of a Phenylalanine with a Valine increased NT >6mm, arthrogryposis and polyhydramnion at the position 287 and was predicted to be pathogenic by (week 13 and 16). The pregnancy was terminated at 21 all the prediction programs used. +weeks. The fetus in the second pregnancy was male (46, Conclusions: MYH3 mutations are responsible for MYH3- XY)andshowedaverysimilarphenotypewithearlynuchal related disorders: DA1, DA2A, DA2B, DA8, and autosomal translucency(4,8mm)andseverearthrogryposisonfollow- dominant spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (Table). Our up scans. This pregnancy was also terminated. Exome patient’s phenotype suggests the existence of a phenotypic analysis revealed a homozygous missense variant in the continuumforthesedisordersandapivotalroleforMYH3in SLC6A9 gene (c.352G>A,p.Val118Met) in both children, regulating muscular and bone morphogenesis. both parents being heterozygous carriers. The variant is locatedinthefirsttransmembranedomainofthetransporter. AcronymsAlias OMIM#Mainclinicalfeatures ResponsiblegenesAffected Several in vitro tools predict the exchange of a highly MYH3 domains conserved amino acid. DA1 Digitotalar 108120 Camptodactylyand MYH3,TNNI2, Head Conclusion: We postulate that this is the first described dysmorphism clubfoot,hypoplastic TNNT3,TPM2 interphalangealcreases famliyofnon-AraboriginwithGLYT1encephalopathyand DA2A Freeman-Sheldon 193700 Contracturesofhands MYH3 Head, the first family with a severe prenatal phenotype with syndrome andfeet,scoliosis, coiledcoil oropharyngeal (IQmotif) increasednuchaltranslucencyandarthrogryposiscausedby abnormalitieswith distinctive“whistling- a missense variant in SLC6A9. face”Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 975 Table (continued) showed thatboth parents had the same mutation heterozygously. AcronymsAlias OMIM#Mainclinicalfeatures ResponsiblegenesAffected MYH3 Conclusion: Uptodate, more than 90 different mutations domains ofALDH3A2inSLSpatientspublished.Sincethelocation DA2B Sheldon-Hall 601680 Distinctiveface, MYH3,TNNI2, Head, of the variant we are presenting, is on the splice site, it is syndrome calcaneovalgus TNNT3,TPM2 neck- deformity, coiledcoil probablethatthevariantcancausemisregulationofsplicing camptodactyly,ulnar deviation and can have effects on mRNA or protein products of the DA8 Autosomal 178110 Multiplepterygia, MYH3 Head,tail dominantmultiple congenitalcontractures gene or the regulatory elements binding introns. According pterygiumsyndrome oflimbs,severe scoliosis,vertebral to databases, this variant might affect the protein features fusions because of the alteration within splice site, likely to disrupt ADSS Autosomal 272460 Progressivevertebral MYH3 Head, dominant fusions,carpaland coiledcoil normal splicing. spondylocarpotarsal tarsalcoalitions, synostosis clinodactyly,short K. Metli: None. A.G. Zamani: None. S. Ceylaner: stature None. M.S. Yildirim: None. AmJMedGenetA.2018Jan5.https://doi.org/10.1002/a E-P10.11 jmg.a.38593. A novel frameshift variant in TNPO3 - a report of the M. Scala: None. A. Accogli: None. E. De Grandis: second LGMD1F family None. A. Allegri: None. C. Bagowski: None. M. Shoukier: None. M. Maghnie: None. V. Capra: None. A. Väisänen1,O.Danielsson2,S.Penttilä1,A. Vihola1,3,B. Udd3,4,5 E-P10.10 A novel variation in a patient with Sjogren-Larsson 1Neuromuscular Research Unit, University of Tampere, syndrome Tampere, Finland, 2Neuromuscular Unit, Division of Neurology, Department of Clinical and Experimental K. Metli1,A. G.Zamani1, S.Ceylaner2,M.S. Yildirim1 Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 3Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey, 2Intergen 4Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Genetics Center, Ankara, Turkey Finland, 5Neuromuscular Research Center, Department of Neurology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland Introduction: Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with neurocutaneous symp- Introduction: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, type 1F toms. Mental retardation and spasticity are among major (LGMD1F) is an ultra-rare autosomal dominant myopathy clinic symptoms followed by less frequently symptoms causedbyheterozygousmutationsintheTNPO3gene.The such as seizures, retinal abnormalities and photophobia. solepreviouslyreportedLGMD1Ffamilymanifestsnotable SLSiscausedbymutationsinthealdehydedehydrogenase variation of the phenotype regarding the age of onset, pre- family3memberA2(ALDH3A2)genethatencodesafatty sentation and progression of muscle weakness affecting aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH). pelvicandshouldermuscles.Owingtothewidevariationin Material and Methods: In this case, six years old boy the clinical picture of LGMDs, the precise diagnosis of consulted to our clinic with complaints of ichthyosis and these disorders is challenging. With the implementation of inability to walk. The patient is son of a consanguineous massivelyparallel sequencing(MPS) assays,thediagnostic couple who are first cousins. Brain MRI had demonstrated accuracy and clarification of the genetic background of bilateral periventricular subcortical white matter leukoma- these diseases has been significantly improved. lacia.KaryotypeandALDH3A2geneanalysisplanneddue MaterialandMethods:Weusedapreviouslydeveloped to these results. targeted gene panel, MYOcap, to screen for possible Results: Karyotype analysis showed no constitutional pathogenic variants in two affected members of a Swedish abnormality. Next generation sequencing analysis of family with a childhood-onset muscle weakness affecting ALDH3A2(NM_001031806.1) gene showed homozygous proximal as well as distal muscles. The MYOcap assay substitutionof c.799-1G>A(IVS5-1G>A) at the last nucleo- consists of 265 genes and 5394 exons that are known or tide of the 4th intron. This variant, is analysed in silica suspected to cause muscular dystrophy or myopathy. databases of ‘Mutation Taster’ and ‘Human Splicing Results: Our MYOcap assay identified a novel hetero- Finder’andsuggestedtobepathogenic.Parentalgenotypes zygoussinglenucleotidedeletionc.2757delCintheaffected members of the family. The deletion causes a frameshift in976 J.delPicchia exon 22 of the TNPO3 gene and is predicted to result in E-P11.04 extension of the reading frame by 20 codons downstream Report of a child with a nearly complete 17p duplication (p.R920GfsX20). Conclusions: The predicted consequence of c.2757delC M.GOKCU, G.KAYA, M.H. YARAR,A. H.CEBI mutationisverysimilartothepreviouslyreportedmutation in the published LGMD1F family (c.2771delA p. Karadeniz Teknik University, Trabzon, Turkey *924Cext15). In the family reported here, the phenotype was more compatible with congenital myopathy with slow Introduction: The phenotypic characteristics of the dupli- progression during adult and late life. cations are variable according to their size and the gene A. Väisänen: None. O. Danielsson: None. S. Penttilä: regionstheycontain.Suchchromosomalgainsthatgenerate None. A. Vihola: None. B. Udd: None. suspicious images at chromosome analysis can be fully demonstrated by the array CGH method.Materials and Method:Firstlychromosomeanalysiswasperformedanda E-P11 Multiple Malformation/anomalies syndromes chromosomalchangewasfound.Toinvestigatethebasisof the change, chromosome analysis in the parent and array E-P11.01 CGH for the patient were performed. Distal11qmonosomy-clinical,endocrinological,molecular Results: A 2.5-month-old girl was referred to our clinic data for a patient becauseofthegrowthretardationandpresenceoftriangular face, high palate, and low ear. Patent Foramen Ovale, E. Braha1,I.Gherlan2,V. Plaiasu3, O.Popa4,E. Gorduza5 secundum ASD and right cerebellomedullary cervical cyst, myelination delay, slit ventriculs and corpus callosum 1National Institute of Endocrinology "CI Parhon", Bucuresti, partial agenesis were present in the brain MRI of the SGA Romania, 2National Institute of Endocrinology "C.I. Parhon", baby with hypotonia, feeding difficulty, apnea, GER. The Bucuresti, Romania, 3Alfred Rusescu Institute for Mother and chromosomeanalysisofthepatientwasfoundas46,XX,der Child Care, Bucuresti, Romania, 4National Institute of (15)add(15)(p13) subsequently to clarify the infrastructure Endocrinology, Bucuresti, Romania, 5University of Medicine of this change, parents’ chromosome analysis and patient’s and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania arrayCGHwereperformed.Motherwasdetectedas46,XX, t(15;17)(p13p11.2).InarrayCGH,thepatientwasfoundto Jacobsen syndrome (JS), a rare contiguous gene syndrome have 3 copies in the short arm of chromosome 17 at the is due to partial 11q deletion. There is a wide severity nucleotides between chr17: 525-22,084,950 in size spectrum of the clinical phenotype but typical features 22084.425 kbp, 17p13.3p11.2. include growth and psychomotor retardation, facial dys- Conclusions: Although balanced translocation result in morphism and thrombocytopenia. The deletion size ranges normal phenotype in carriers, it is important that these from ~7 to 20Mb, with the proximal breakpoint subband changescouldcausebothbalancedandunbalancedchanges 11q23.3totelomeric11q.Theliteraturedatashowsthatthe in their children. Evaluation of the array CGH method severityofclinicalfeaturesinpatientswithJSisnotclearly together with chromosome analysis is an effective method correlatedwithdeletionsize.Thedeletionoccursdenovoin for detecting such uncommon chromosomal anomalies so 85% of reported cases. We have evaluated a 7 years that unbalanced abnormalities can be fully demonstrated. 11 months old patient with thrombocytopenia, facial dys- M. Gokcu: None. G. Kaya: None. M.H. Yarar: None. morphism, failure to thrive, dwarfism, microcephaly, long A.H. Cebi: None. flat philtrum with thin lips, prominent columella, psycho- motor retardation. Familial anamnesis revealed only catar- E-P11.05 act for patient’s father. The karyotype was normal. Array- Prenatal analysis of hypoplastic left heart Syndrome CGH notice a 6 Mb deletion on 11q24-q25. The genetic associated with a 22q11 microdeletion tests for parents are in work. We identified only a level of IGF1 at the lower limit of normal, although the literature Y. Stratis, C.Müller-Hofstede, P. Wieacker,A. Röpke data indicated GHdeficiency orprimary hypothyroidismin patients with JS. Special attention should be focused on Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany bleeding concerns related to platelet number. This patient's development will be observed multi-disciplinary to review The 22q11 deletion syndrome is one of the most common the progress. microdeletions associated with a broad spectrum of E. Braha: None. I. Gherlan: None. V. Plaiasu: None. abnormalities. Thefetalphenotypeassociatedwitha22q11 O. Popa: None. E. Gorduza: None. deletionispoorlydescribedinliteraturebutgeneticanalysisAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 977 is usually indicated when a congenital conotruncal heart transcriptional regulation interacting with e.g. MECP2. defect is detected. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome asso- Symptoms of isolated MBD5 alterations and 2q23.1 dele- ciated with a 22q11 deletion syndrome is very rarely tions overlap but some features (e.g. microcephaly, hyper- reported, while mutations in the GJA1- and the NKX2gene phagia,open mouth with downturned corners,small hands/ are known to be associated with this heart malformation. feet) are observed predominantly in 2q23.1 deletion, sug- Here we report on a 35 year old pregnant woman who was gesting further deleted genes contribute to an extended referred to our institute for prenatal cytogenetic analysis phenotype.Ourcasesuggeststhatarecognizablephenotype because ultrasound examination showed a hypoplastic left and facial gestalt can be defined in patients with a 2q23.1 heart syndrome with an atresia of the aorta and the mitral deletion. valves. Conventional karyotyping revealed an apparently C.B. Mueller-Hofstede: None. A. Röpke: None. P. normal female karyotype. After genetic counselling, array- Wieacker: None. CGH was performed and revealed a deletion of 1,3 Mb in the critical region of the 22q11 deletion syndrome. This E-P11.08 deletion was confirmed by FISH. Cytogenetic analysis of A de novo 8q22.2q22.3 interstitial microdeletion in a girl the patient and the childfather must be performed to reveal with developmental delay and congenital defects if the deletion is familial or de novo.This case clearly illustrates the importance of performing prenatal Array- R.Marcinkute1,D.Brazdziunaite1,N.Burokiene2,V.Dirse2,E. CGHincasesofsevereheartmalformations,andshowsthat Preiksaitiene3,A. Utkus3 geneticanalysisfora22q11deletionmightbealsousefulin cases of hypoplastic left heart Syndrome. 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Institute of Clinical Y. Stratis: None. C. Müller-Hofstede: None. P. Medicine, Clinic of Internal Diseases, Family Medicine and Wieacker: None. A. Röpke: None. Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of E-P11.07 Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania De novo interstitial deletion of 2q22.3-24.1 Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 8 are C. B.Mueller-Hofstede, A. Röpke,P. Wieacker rare. We present a 3.5-year-old girl with developmental delay and congenital abnormalities due to de novo Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany 8q22.2q22.3 microdeletion. The girl was born to healthy non-consanguineous parents at full term. Fetal ultrasound We report on a nineteen months old boy with develop- showed mild growth retardation. Birth weight was 2670 g, mental delay, epilepsy and hydronephrosis. Birth-weight, height 50 cm, OFC 31 cm. The patient had congenital hip lengthandheadcircumference werebelow3rdcentile.After dysplasia, bilateral foot deformity, and radioulnar synos- birth, hypotonia, feeding difficulties and a neonatal seizure tosis. Dysmorphic features included up-slanting palpebral occured. At presentation he crawled without any speech fissures, wide eyebrows, altered dermatoglyphics, short development. Length and head circumference were below halluces,andhypertrichosisontheback,armsandforehead. 3rdcentile, weight 75th-90th centile. He showed narrow and Echocardiogram showed open foramen ovale and small short palpebral fissures, an epicanthus, long eyelashes, secondary atrial septal defect. The psychomotor and lan- small nose, broad nasal bridge, low-set ears with large guage development was severely delayed. She had stereo- lobes, open-mouth with tented upper lip, small chin, small typicmovements,includinghandwavingandheadtwisting. hands and feet with 2/3-syndaktyly. Array CGH analysis Thepatienthadaseizureepisodeatage2.5years,butEEG uncovered an interstitial 6.5 Mb deletion of 2q22.3-q24.1 showed no epileptic activity. The girl had hypermetropia confirmed in the child and excluded in parents by FISH and atopic dermatitis. 8q22.2q22.3 deletion, 4.9 Mb in size analyses. In literature the 2q23.1 deletion syndrome is (arr[hg19] 8q22.2q22.3 (99,938,470-104,936,546)x1) was characterized by intellectual disability, speech-impairment, identified by SNP-array analysis. De novo origin of the autistic-like behavior, sleep abnormalities, seizures, ataxia, deletion was confirmed by RT-PCR as both parentsare not microcephaly, hypotonia, initially feeding difficulties, later the carriers of the deletion. Our patient shares the majority hyperphagia, coarse face, abnormalities of the ears and the of the features described in previously reported seven eyes, open mouth, prominent incisors, tented upper lip, patients with overlapping deletions, including radioulnar short hands and feet. The size of the described deletions synostosis, previously described in one of these patients. varies(38kbto19Mb)withthesmallestregionofoverlap We conclude, that the 8q22.2q22.3 microdeletion results in contains only the MBD5-gene. The protein encoded by a recognizable phenotype with specific facial features and MBD5 is expressed in brain and is involved in congenital abnormalities. More patients have to be978 J.delPicchia evaluatedtoestablishaphenotype-genotypecorrelationand syndrome with additional cardiac phenotype presumably variability ofclinical features. Thisresearchwas funded by due to haploinsufficiency of TRNAU1AP gene. a grant (No. S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179) from the B. Aleksiūnienė: None. B. Tumienė: None. A. Research Council of Lithuania. Utkus: None. R. Marcinkute: None. D. Brazdziunaite: None. N. Burokiene:None.V.Dirse:None.E.Preiksaitiene:None. E-P11.10 A. Utkus: None. A 3-year-old girl with Aicardi syndrome phenotype and MECP2 gene duplication E-P11.09 AHDC1 gene truncating 1p36.11p35.3 microdeletion in a A. Ivankov,A.Bobinec, I.Sansović,M.Kero, I.Barisic patientwithdevelopmentaldelay,dysmorphicfeaturesand congenital heart defects Children's hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia B. Aleksiūnienė1,2,B. Tumienė1,2,A.Utkus1,2 Introduction: Aicardi syndrome (AIS) is a rare disorder characterized by agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of distinctive chorioretinal lacunae and infantile spasms. It Biomedical Sciences of the Faculty of Medicine of Vilnius occursalmostexclusivelyinfemales.Thecauseisprobably University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, a de novo dominant X-linked mutation, lethal in 46,XY Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, males. Here we report a case of a 3-year-old girl with Lithuania typical AIS phenotype and MECP2 duplication. Results: Our patient, a 3-year-old girl, has moderate Xia-Gibbs syndrome is a recently described genetic syn- global developmental delay. In infancy she developed dromeduetoheterozygoustruncatingmutationsinAHDC1 infantile spasms and later on myoclonic seizures. She has gene on chromosome 1p36.11. The syndrome is char- axial hypotonia and wide gait with a pronounced spastic acterized by global developmental delay, hypotonia, pattern. Brain MRI revealed ACC with additional anoma- obstructive sleep apnea, intellectual disability and seizures. lies. Ophthalmologic exam showed two chorioretinal Congenitalheartdefectswerenotdescribedinpatientswith lacunae in the left eye. She is prone to viral infections Xia-Gibbs syndrome. The patient was a 1,5-years-old girl, and has mild facial dysmorphia. Chromosomal microarray the first child of healthy non-consanguineous parents, born revealed 254 kb long de novo Xq28 duplication, which from the fifth pregnancy (there were four miscarriages) encompasses six genes, including MECP2 and IRAK1. complicated by polyhydramnios with small birth weight Conclusion: In males, MECP2 duplication features are (3‰). Pulmonary artery stenosis with atrial septal defect, infantile hypotonia, developmental delay/intellectual dis- transient congenital stridor with laryngeal hypokinesis, ability,poor/absentspeech,progressivespasticity,recurrent corpus callosum hypoplasia with ventriculomegaly were infections and seizures. Most female carriers are asympto- diagnosed in the neonatal period. Feeding difficulties with matic due to skewed X-inactivation. Only 19 symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux and failure to thrive, strabismus females have been reported so far. Our patient’s phenotype divergens with hypermetropia, muscular hypotonia, psy- is consistent with MECP2 duplication, except chorioretinal chomotorretardationanddysmorphicfeatureswereevident lacunaethatareahallmarkoftheAIS.Thisisthefirstcase from the first months of age. Whole-genome SNP array linkingthesetwoconditions,pointingtothepossibilitythat analysis revealed a 1.1 Mb deletion in the 1p36.11p35.3 thegeneforAISmightbewithintheXq28region.Thegene region, arr[GRCh37]1p36.11p35.3(27862451_29004746) ofinterestisFLNA,locateddistallyoftheduplicationinour x1.The mother’s SNP array revealed no abnormalities, patient. FLNA causes periventricular heterotopia often seen while the father was not available for testing. The deleted in AIS cases which makes him a good candidate for AIS region involves 22 OMIM genes including one OMIM phenotype. morbid gene, AHDC1, with the distal breakpoint of the A. Ivankov: None. A. Bobinec: None. I. Sansović: deletion disrupting AHDC1 introns 5-6 in the 3’ untrans- None. M. Kero: None. I. Barisic: None. lated region. Other genes with presumable haploinsuffi- ciency (HI< 20; FGR, RCC1, PPP1R8, MED18, EYA3, E-P11.11 TAF12, DNAJC8) do not have described functions in heart Highly frequent mutations in a Spanish Alström cohort development except from TRNAU1AP, a transfer RNA selenocysteine 1 associated protein 1, that has an essential B. BeaMascato1, M.Álvarez-Satta1,C. Ayuso2,M. Corton2, D. role in the synthesis of selenoproteins. In conclusion, pre- Valverde1 sentedpatientexhibitstypicalclinicalfeaturesofXia-GibbsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 979 1Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, enlargement, as oral findings, in addition to nephrocalci- Faculty of Biology, University of Vigo. Institute of Health nosis, are the diagnostic clues for the syndrome. In this Research Galicia Sur (IIS-Galicia South). Center for research, we present the clinical and oral findings in two Biomedical Research (CINBIO)., Vigo, Spain, 2Center for patients with enamel renal syndrome. Biomedical Research in the Rare Diseases Network Material and Methods: The two patients were com- (CIBERER), Department of Genetics, Sanitary Research plaining primarily of amelogenesis imperfecta and gingival Institute-Jiménez Díaz Foundation University Hospital- enlargement. A gingival biopsy was taken, Abdomen Autonomous University of Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, ultrasound was requested, and molecular studies were Spain performed. Results: Gingival biopsy revealed fibro-osseous lesions, Alström syndrome (ALMS) is a rare disease whose symp- renal calculi were found by ultrasonography, and Fam20A tomsincludedefectsofcardiacfunction,progressivelossof mutation was detected. The collective findings confirmed vision, early onset diabetes mellitus type 2, obesity, deaf- the enamel renal syndrome. ness, growth retardation and renal failure. It is caused by Conclusion: Amelogenesis imperfecta as a dental mutations in the ALMS1 gene which encodes the ALMS1 anomalycouldbeapowerfuldiagnosticevidencetocertain protein, a structural component of centrosome involved in rare diseases. Dentistsshould be aware ofdental anomalies intracellular transport among many other roles. associated with different syndromes. We analyzed the sequence of ALMS1 in a cohort of 11 N.F. Hassib: None. M.I. Mostafa: None. H. ElSadek: unrelatedALMSfamilies.Severalmutationswereidentified None. U.S. Hellal: None. M.S. Abdel-Hamid: None. inexons7,8,16and17.Mostofthemutationswerefound in exon 8. Two mutations had a high incidence in the E-P11.14 cohort:p.(Tyr1714*)(exon8;rs772136379)with36%and Detection of Chromosomal Imbalances in an Argentinean p.(Ser3872Tyrfs * 19) (exon 17), with 27%. We described group of patients with Intellectual Disability or Multiple one homozygote for p.(Tyr1714 *) mutation and one for p. Congenital Anomalies (Ser3872Tyrfs * 19), all the other families with this mutations were compound heterozygotes. Segregation L. D.Espeche1,M. Delea1,S. Massara2,A. Solari1,M. P. analysis showed that the p.(Tyr1714 *) mutation is linked Bidondo1,P. Barbero1,J. Oliveri2, M.Ritler3,P. Brun2, V. to the SNP rs45608038 which presents a low frequency Cosentino4,R.Martin5,M.A.Mori5,M.Palomares5,J.Nevado5, (≈2%) in European populations. L. B.Dain1,S.Rozental1 ALMSpatientsusuallyaccountforprivatemutations.For thefirsttimewecanseemutationswithalargeincidencein 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, Ciudad autonoma de an ALMS cohort. Additional analyzes are underway to Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Hospital de Alta Complejidad en decipher whether these families maintain a genealogical Red El Cruce, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Hospital Materno relationship, although families have been recruited from Infantil Ramón Sardá, Ciudad autonoma de Buenos Aires, different national geographic areas and none of them Argentina, 4Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos Luisa reported to have kinship relations with the other ones. If Cravenna de Gandulfo, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 5Instituto the common heritage of mutation p.(Tyr1714 *) were Nacional de Genetica Medica y Molecular, Madrid, Spain demonstrated,wecouldbetalkingaboutafounderallelefor Spanish patients. Introduction: ArrayCGH is a significantly high resolution B. Bea Mascato: None. M. Álvarez-Satta: None. C. method to scan the genome for gains and losses of chro- Ayuso: None. M. Corton: None. D. Valverde: None. mosomalmaterial.Althoughinseveralcountriesitisafirst- tier test for patients with intellectual disability (ID) or with E-P11.12 multiple congenital anomalies (MCA), in our country it Amelogenesis imperfecta as a pathognomonic oral finding represents an expensive technique and a very few labora- in enamel renal syndrome tories have begun to implement it. Karyotyping remains to be the routine study in public health. N.F. Hassib, M.I.Mostafa,H.ElSadek, U.S. Hellal, M.S. Aim: To report the findings in an Argentinean cohort of Abdel-Hamid patients with ID and patients with MCA. Materials and Methods: we studied 165 patients with National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt two arrayCGH plataforms (Agilent ISCA-v2-60K and KaryoArray®v3.0-8x60K): 125 had ID and 40 had MCA. Introduction: Enamel renal syndrome is an autosomal They did not show a cytogenetic anomaly or had a failed recessive disorder. Amelogenesis imperfecta and gingival karyotype test.980 J.delPicchia Results: We found that 14/125 (11%) ID patients had is described implicated in Shaaf-Yang syndrome with a causal or potentially causal CNVs: 11 were recognizable Prader Willi-like phenotype. MAGEL2 is maternally syndromes and 2 had an imbalance associated with a imprintedgeneandmutationoccurredonthepaternalallele. microdeletion syndrome accompanied with other patho- With the presented case we would like to highlight the genic imbalance. Besides, 10/40 (26%) MCA patients importancethatMAGEL2isincludedinthepanelofgenes presented causal or potentially causal CNVs: 2 were tested in patients presenting a neonatal hypotonia with or chromosomal anomalies, 3 were recognizable syndromes without arthrogryposis or polyhydramnios. and 1 had a microdeletion syndrome accompanied with R. Stoeva: None. V. Flurin: None. H. Denoual: None. other pathogenic imbalance. A. Ziegler: None. A. Mantel: None. J. Bouligand: None. Conclusion: ArrayCGH was useful to perform an J. Melki: None. D. Martin Coignard: None. accurate analysis of microdeletions or duplications that could not be detected by standard karyotyping. The E-P11.16 percentageofpathogenicimbalanceswashigherinpatients A novel ECEL1 mutation expands the phenotype of distal withMCAthaninthosewithIDinaccordancewiththedata arthrogryposis multiplex congenita type 5D to include reported in the literature. pretibial vertical skin creases L.D. Espeche: None. M. Delea: None. S. Massara: None.A.Solari:None.M.P.Bidondo:None.P.Barbero: E. Stattin1,J.Johansson1,S. Gudmundsson1,A. Ameur1,S. None. J. Oliveri: None. M. Ritler: None. P. Brun: None. Lundberg2,M.Bondeson1,M.Wilbe1 V.Cosentino:None.R.Martin:None.M.A.Mori:None. M.Palomares:None.J.Nevado:None.L.B.Dain:None. 1Immunology, genetics and pathology, Uppsala University, S. Rozental: None. Uppsala, Sweden, 2Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden E-P11.15 A case of MAGEL2 mutation in a patient with prenatally Background: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) diagnosed distal arthrogryposis and severe neonatal is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by multiple joint hypotonia contractures often in association with other congenital abnormalities. Pretibial linear vertical creases are a rare R. Stoeva1,V.Flurin2, H.Denoual2, A.Ziegler3,A. Mantel4,J. finding associated with arthrogryposis, and the etiology of Bouligand4,J. Melki5,D.Martin Coignard1 the specific condition is unknown. Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing, 1Service of Medical Genetics, Le Mans Hospital, Le Mans, segregation analysis and bioinformatics analysis were used France, 2Service of Pediatrics, Le Mans Hospital, Le Mans, to genetically characterize a boy from a consanguineous France, 3Service of Medical Genetics, University Hospital family, presenting with AMC and pretibial vertical linear Angers, Angers, France, 4Service of Molecular Genetics, creases on the shins. Bicetre Hospital, Paris, France, 5UMR 1169, INSERM and Results: Whole exome sequencing and variant analysis University of Paris South, Paris, France revealed homozygous novel missense variants of ECEL1 (c.1163T>C, p.Leu388Pro, NM_004826), and MUSK Here we present a case of 6-months-old girl with prenatal (c.2572C>T, p.Arg858Cys, NM_005592). Both variants signs of distal arthrogryposis, severe neonatal hypotonia are predicted to have deleterious effects on the protein andde novomutationintheMAGEL2gene.Shewas born function, with amino acid positions highly conserved after first pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents. among species. The variants segregated in the family, with Decreasedfoetalmovementsandanomalyinfingersflexion healthymother,fatherandsisterbeingheterozygouscarriers withoutpolyhydramnioswerenoticedprenatally.Thefoetal andtheindexpatientbeinghomozygousforbothmutations. karyotypeand8x60KAgilentarrayCGHwerenormal.The Conclusion: We report on a unique patient with a novel birth was at term with weight and high on the 75th per- ECEL1 homozygous mutation, expanding the phenotypic centile. Severe axial hypotonia and flexed 3rd, 4th and 5th spectrum of Distal Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita fingers were noticed. There were feeding difficulties and Type 5D to include vertical linear skin creases. The vesicoureteralrefluxwithmoderaterenalinsufficiency.The homozygous mutation in MUSK is of unknown clinical dysmorphologyexaminationshowedbilateralsinglepalmar significance. MUSK mutations have previously shown to crease, frontal bossing and prominent ears. The panel of cause Congenital myasthenic syndrome, a neuromuscular arthrogryposis multiplex congenita genes detected a de disorder with defects in the neuromuscular junction. novo heterozygous frameshift mutation in the MAGEL2 Grant references: Marcus Borgströms Foundation, gene (15q11.2), c.1996dup, p.(Gln666Prfs*47). This gene Magnus Bergvalls Foundation, The Royal PhysiographicAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 981 SocietyinLundandSwedishSocietyforMedicalResearch Chałupczyńska1,A. Gutkowska1,M.Krajewska-Walasek1, K. (SSMF). Chrzanowska1 E. Stattin: None. J. Johansson: None. S. Gudmunds- son: None. A. Ameur: None. S. Lundberg: None. M. 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Bondeson: None. M. Wilbe: None. Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, E-P11.17 Warsaw,Poland,3DepartmentofPediatrics,WroclawMedical Baraitser-Winter Syndome: A Turkish boy with a novel University, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Clinical Department of ACTB variant Pediatrics, Clinical Central Hospital No 2, Rzeszow, Poland K. Karaer Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is characterizedbyovergrowth,macroglossia,abdominalwall Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of defects,andahighriskofchildhoodtumors.BWSiscaused Medical Genetic, Gaziantep, Turkey by various 11p15 genetic or epigenetic defects leading to abnormal expression of imprinted genes. The genes in the Introduction: Baraitser-Winter syndrome is a rare devel- 11p15 region are organized into two imprinted domains: opmental disorder characterized by hypertelorism, ptosis, ICR1andICR2.AsmallnumberofBWScases(2-8%)are ridged metopic suture, high-arched eyebrows and brain due to copy number variations (CNVs) in the malformations. Other common manifestations include chromosome 11p15. hearing loss, short stature, seizures, intellectual deficit of Materials and Methods: We present epigenetic/genetic/ variable severity, and abnormalities of the urinary system. clinical profiles of three patients with BWS. Molecular ThissyndromeiscausedbymissensevariationsinACTBor analyses were performed on leukocyte DNA and com- ACTG1. prised: MS-MLPA, SNuPE, arrayCGH and FISH. Materials and Methods: We diagnosed a 5-year-old Results: In all patients aberrant methylation was Turkish boy as Baraitser Winter syndrome with typical associated with the presence of paternal origin CNVs, clinical features.Allcodingexonsandtheflankingintronic including: duplication of the whole 11p15 region (unba- regions of the ACTB and ACTG1 genes were amplified by lanced translocation with involvement of 7p22.3 deletion), PCR followed by bidirectional direct sequencing. Varia- duplication of ICR1 and part of ICR2, and duplication of tions were detected by comparing the reference sequences ICR1. Patients demonstrated typical features for BWS, and interpreted by in silico predictive programs. additionally, the patient with duplication of the whole Results: We identified a novel heterozygous sequence 11p15 region had developmental delay and facial dys- change, c.332A>G [p.(Asn111Ser)] which is located at the morphism. All identified CNVs were present on maternal exon 3 of ACTB. This variation is not present in single alleles of the patients’ healthy fathers. nucleotide polymorphism and 1000 genomes databases; Conclusions:Thestudyshowsthatinterpretingof11p15 moreover, in silico analysis using SIFT, PolyPhen2 and CNVs is challenging and phenotypic consequences may MutationTaster predictsaspotentiallydeleterious.Parental depend on the localization, size, as well as the parental carrier testings confirmed that these variants occured as de origin of the aberrant segment. A complex molecular novo events which confirmed a de novo event. approach to analyze 11p15 region is required for accurate Conclusions: The aim of this paper is to highlight the diagnosis of BWS allowing the recurrence risk determina- importanceofthegenotype-phenotypevariabilitythatneeds tion and proper genetic counseling. to be considered during clinical assessment. Fuctional The study was partly financed by CMHI project 241/16. studies and additional case reports are required to under- D. Jurkiewicz: None. E. Ciara: None. M. Kugaudo: stand the affect of the mutation and genotype-phenotype None. R. Śmigiel: None. M. Klimkowska-Boczoń: None. correlation. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. M. Pelc: None. P. K. Karaer: None. Halat-Wolska: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. P. Kowalski: None. B. Chałupczyńska: None. A. Gut- E-P11.18 kowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. K. Duplicationsinthe11p15imprintedregion:reportofthree Chrzanowska: None. patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome E-P11.20 D.Jurkiewicz1,E. Ciara1, M.Kugaudo1,2, R.Śmigiel3,M. Afemalewithamaternallyinheritednonsensemutationin Klimkowska-Boczoń4,D.Piekutowska-Abramczuk1,M.Pelc1,P. PHF6 with expanded phenotypes of Borjeson-Forssman- Halat-Wolska1,D.Siestrzykowska1,P. Kowalski1,B. Lehmann syndrome982 J.delPicchia X. Zhang,Y. Fan,Y. Yu Introduction:Branchio-oto-renal syndrome (BOR), is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the coex- Shanghai institute for pediatric research, Xinhua Hospital istence anomalies of the external,middle or inner ear mal- affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong Univ, Shanghai, China formations with pre-auricular pits or tags, conductive, sensorineural or mixed hearing loss, branchial cleft Introduction: Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome anomalies, and renal anomalies ranging from mild, (BFLS) is a rare X-linked disease caused by PHF6 varia- asymptomatic hypoplasia to complete renal agenesis. tions. Patients with BFLS present moderate to severe ClinicalReport:A38yearsoldmalepatientwasreferred intellectual disability, developmental disorders, obesity, us because of chronic renal insufficiency and hearing epilepsy,hypogonadism,characteristic faces andanomalies impairment. Clinical examination showed auricular defor- of fingers and toes. However, the genetic findings and mity, pre/post-auricular pits, operated bilateral branchial clinical observations are exclusively based on patients of fistulae and unilateral peripheral facial nerve palsy. European ancestry. Phenotypic spectrum in other popula- Abdominal ultrasound revealed unilateral kidney hypopla- tions is not well delineated. sia.Anaudiogramshowedrightsidedmoderatemixhearing Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was loss and left sided sensorineural hearing loss. Laboratory conducted in a female Chinese patient with major features tests resulted in high blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 23 mg/dL of BFLS. Sanger sequencing was performed to validate the and serum creatinine 1.81 mg/dL; low glomerular filtration mutation and inheritance. The pattern of X-chromosome rate(GFR)46mL/min.Weperformedsequenceanalysisfor inactivation was evaluated by assays of differential theEYA1genewhichisresponsiblefor40%oftheetiology. methylation in the genes between the active and the Results:Wefoundaprematurestopcodonmutationonp. inactive chromosome X based on Methylation-specific Tyr182* (c.546C>G) of the EYA1 gene. It is a novel PCR. Phenotypic comparison was conducted based on this mutation and based on ACMG 2015 criteria, it was patient and cases in literature. considered as a pathogenic variant that clearly causes Results: A novel nonsense heterozygous mutation of severe damage on protein function. c.673C>T; p.R225X was identified in the patient, which is Conclusion:WepresentthiscaseofBORsyndromewith inherited from her unaffected mother. Both the patient and anovelmutationatEYA1geneinorder tocontributetothe her mother showed highly skewed X-inactivation. This literatüre. Reference Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S et al, patient showed complete deficiency of growth hormone, Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence which was not reported before, and adverse effect emerged variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the Amer- after treatment of growth hormone. She also exhibited ican College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the phenotypes partially overlapping with Coffin-Siris Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet syndrome. Med2015;17:405-424. Conclusions: Complete deficiency of growth hormone is M. Öztürk: None. S. Zeybek: None. B. Dursun: None. a new phenotype presented in our Chinese patient with B.Albuz:None.Ö.Anlaş:None.H.Gürkan:None.G.O. BFLS. X-inactivation pattern in the peripheral blood may Çetin: None. not be a reliable predictor of the BFLS presentation. (This study was supported by Grant No. 81500972, to YF; No. E-P11.22 81670812, to YGY.) New case of S. SIfrim-Hitz-Weiss (#617159) caused by de X. Zhang: None. Y. Fan: None. Y. Yu: None. novo mutation in CHD4 gene E-P11.21 M.SánchezSoler1,A. SerranoAntón1, V.López González2,M. ANovelNonsenseMutationInTheEYA1GeneFoundInA Ballesta Martínez2,M. Segura-Puimedon3,B. Rodríguez- Patient With BOR Syndrome Santiago3,B. Rodríguez-Santiago3, L.Armengol3, E.Guillén Navarro2 M.Öztürk1, S.Zeybek1,B.Dursun2,B. Albuz1,Ö.Anlaş1,H. Gürkan3,G.O.Çetin1 1MedicalGeneticSección,H.ClinicUniversitaryV.Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, El Palmar, Spain, 2Medical Genetic Sección, 1Medical School of Pamukkale University Department of H.ClinicUniversitaryV.Arrixaca,IMIB-Arrixaca.CIBERER. Medical Genetics, Denizli, Turkey, 2Medical School of ISCIII. Madrid, Spain, El Palmar, Spain, 3qGenomics Pamukkale University Department of Nephrology, Denizli, Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain Turkey, 3Medical School of Trakya University Department of Medical Genetics, Trakya, Turkey Introduction:Sifrim-Hitz-Weisssyndromeisanautosomal dominant intellectual disability syndrome recentlyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 983 described, associated with variable congenital defects, Education» of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian including cardiac, skeletal, and urogenital ones. Some Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation patientsmayhaveshortstature,macrocephaly,hearingloss, and dysmorphic facial features. It is caused by mutation in Introduction: 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome ("pseudo- CHD4, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeler gene. Angelman"syndrome)ischaracterizedbyspeechdelayand Material and Methods: We described the case of a 24 intellectual disability, autistic features, inappropriate year-old-man born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. laughter and short stature. The disease is mainly associated Pregnancy and neonatal period were normal. He presented with MBD5 loss. Over 100 cases of the syndrome are with psychomotor retardation, hypotonia and muscle describedintheavailableliterature.Here,wereportontwo weakness with normal electromyogram. He was schooling cases of cytogenetically pseudobalanced chromosome with support and speech therapy. After finishing the 2 structural rearrangements associated with 2q23.1 micro- compulsory schooling he studied to be a social worker, deletion syndrome. andnowadaysheisworking.Attheageof11scoliosiswas Materials and Methods: Using karyotyping and SNP detected, he needed corset during 3 years. 9 years later, array (Affymetrix Cytoscan HD), we detected two cases of bilateral cryptorchidism was diagnosed after an ultrasound 2q23.1 microdeletion resulted from a paracentric inversion performed because of abdominal pain. He underwent andreciprocaltranslocationinacohortof466patientswith surgery of testes, histological analysis didn`t show malig- intellectual disability, autistic features and congenital nancy. He is followed up by an Endocrinologist due to the malformations. diagnosis of hypogonadotropism- hipergonadotropic and Results:Thepatientswerea2-year-oldgirlanda6-year- subclinic hypotiroidism. His stature is normal (p13) and he old boy, exhibiting 2q22.3q24.1(148,513,845- has dismorphic features: square-shaped face, relative 155,196,310)×1, 46,XX,der(2)inv(q21.1q22.3)del(q22q24) macrocephaly, hypertelorism, bilateral ptosis and small and 2q23.1q23.3(148,851,963-151,316,465)×1, low set ears. After ruling out cromosomopathy, de novo 2q22.2q24.1(143,753,727-155,408,790)×1~2, 46,XY,t mutation c.T4012G was detected by exome sequencing. (2;11)(q31.1;q21), respectively. Common clinical features Conclusions: We present a new case with some of the were motor, speech and developmental delay, gait dis- characteristic features: hearing loss, hypogonadism, delay turbance, myopia. Additionally, the girl exhibited micro- neurodevelopment, muscle weakness, dysmorphic facial cephaly, cleft palate, muscle hypotonia, hearing loss, features; but without cardiac anomalies nor intelectual congenital heart disease. The boy presented with seizures, disability, showing the variable expressivity in this protruding ears, micrognathia, joints hypermobility. Beside syndrome.Itshouldbeincludedinthediferentialdiagnosis MBD5deletion,bothcasesdemonstratedalossofACVR2A, of rasopathies, facial dysostosis and Charge Syndrome. ORC4, EPC2, KIF5C, LYPD6, MMADHC, RND3, NMI, M. Sánchez Soler: None. A. Serrano Antón: None. V. TNFAIP6, RIF1, NEB, ARL5A, CACNB4, STAM2, López González: None. M. Ballesta Martínez: None. M. PRPF40A, RPRM, GALNT13, FMNL2 and ARL6IP6. Segura-Puimedon: None. B. Rodríguez-Santiago: None. Conclusions: Rare cases of pseudobalanced chromoso- B. Rodríguez-Santiago: None. L. Armengol: None. E. mal rearrangements exemplify the intrinsic need for Guillén Navarro: None. genome-wide CNV scan in molecular cytogenetic diag- nosis.Furthermore,thesecasesdemonstrate thecomplexity E-P11.23 of pseudobalanced chromosomal abnormalities that can be Cytogenetically pseudobalanced chromosome 2 structural easily overlooked. Supported by RSF (14-15-00411). rearrangements associated with 2q23.1 microdeletion A.D. Kolotii: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. Y.B. syndrome Yurov: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: None. M.A. Zelenova: None. M.A. Bulatnikova: None. I.Y. Iourov: None. A. D.Kolotii1,2,S.G.Vorsanova1,2,Y. B.Yurov1,2,O.S. Kurinnaia1,2, M.A.Zelenova1,2,M.A. Bulatnikova3, I.Y. E-P11.24 Iourov1,2,4 Intrafamiliar clinical variability of Circumferential Skin Creases Kunze Type caused by a novel heterozygous 1Academician Yu.E. Veltishchev Research Clinical Institute of mutation of N-terminal TUBB gene Pediatrics, N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, M.Dentici, A. Terracciano,E. Bellacchio, R. Capolino, A. Moscow, Russian Federation, 2FSBSI «Mental Health Novelli, M.Digilio, B. Dallapiccola Research Center», Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Stem cell bank “Pokrovsky”, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4FSBEI FPE «Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate984 J.delPicchia BambinoGesúPediatricHospital,IRCCS,Rome,Italy.,Rome, approaches to aim? identification of new gene-disease Italy associations. MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedmassiveparallel CircumferentialskincreasesKunzetype’(CSC-KT;OMIM sequencing on MiSeq (Illumina) using panel Clinical 156610,616734)isararedisordercharacterized byfolding Exome kit by Sophia Genetics, followed by Sanger of excess skin, which leads to ringed creases, primarily of sequencing, CNV and MLPA analysis. This solution the limbs, known as “Michelin Tyre Baby Syndrome” consists of 116,355 individually designed probes that span (MTBS). Additionally, CSC-KT patients exhibit facial approx.. 11 Mb of target regions covering more than 4,900 dysmorphism (epicanthal folds, upslanting palpebral fis- genes, with known mendelian/inherited disease-causing sures, hypertelorism), cleft palate, growth retardation, mutations. intellectual disability (ID) and multiple congenital mal- Results: Altogether, we have tested 5 family trios formation. Recently, 2 heterozygous mutations in TUBB (mother,fatherandchild)usingClinicalExomekit.During geneand4mutations(bothhomozygousandheterozygous) thetestingofclinicalexomewerequiredtoobtainedallthe in MAPRE2 gene were identified in 3 and 4 patients, relevant genetic diagnosis and clinical phenotype informa- respectively, with CSC-KT. In the 3 TUBB gene-related tion of the analysed patients. These 3 families were CSC-KT patients, all mutations falled in the N-terminal diagnosed mainly of the heritable disorders like Ollier domain of the gene and were de novo. Mutations in the C- syndrome⋯. In summary, we have found causal DNA terminal of TUBB gene are associated to microcephaly and variants in genes already associated with a phenotype. We structural brain malformation, in the absence of sign or have also identified pathogenic or potential pathogenic symptomsoftheCSC-KT.Here,wereporta9-year-oldboy variants in other genes, which are probably not associated inwhomthediagnosisofCSC-KTwassuggested,basedon withdisease,howevertheirclinicalinterpretationisunclear the presence of MTBS, typical facial dysmorphism, and should be finalized in the cooperation of clinical and microcephaly, severe ID and brain malformation, including molecular geneticist. These results demonstrate the effi- cortical atrophy and corpus callosum hypoplasia. Sanger ciency of exome sequencing approach in performing sequencing identified a novel heterozygous c. 218 T>C (p. molecular diagnosis of undiagnosed genetic disease. Met73Thr) variant in the N-terminal of TUBB gene. The Conclusions: We have tested patients to detect a variant was inherited from the mother that was retro- mutation in gene of undiagnosed genetic disease. spectively evaluated, and showed MTBS with a sponta- R. Michalovská: None. T. Pis: None. L. Hruskova: neous improvement and no other signs of CSC-KT. We None. A. Jurcekova: None. R. Alanova: None. Z. report the first transmitted TUBB gene-related CSC-KT Vlckova: None. caused by a novel heterozygous mutation of N-terminal of the gene. These data further validates the role of TUBB E-P11.26 mutations in causation of this condition and definitely De novo apparently balanced complex chromosomal includes the CSC-KT syndrome in tubulinopathies. rearrangement involving three chromosomes with cryptic M. Dentici: None. A. Terracciano: None. E. Bellac- genomic imbalances chio: None. R. Capolino: None. A. Novelli: None. M. Digilio: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. M.Minzhenkova1,Z. Markova1, I.Kanivets2,N.Shilova1 E-P11.25 1Federal State budgetary Institution ‘Research Centre for Clinical exome sequencing in genetic diseases - Medical Genetics’, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genomed interpretation of family trio ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation R.Michalovská,T.Pis,L.Hruskova,A.Jurcekova,R.Alanova, Introduction: Complex chromosome rearrangements Z. Vlckova (CCR) are extremely rare in humans. Most apparently balanced CCRs are de novo and usually detected in phe- GHC Genetics, Praha 1, Czech Republic notypically normal subjects. But in some cases found in patients with congenital abnormalities and/or mental retar- Introduction: Clinical analysis of exome is method for dationwhichmaybeduetocrypticgenomicimbalance.We comprehensive diagnosis and interpretation undiagnosed report an exceptional CCR in a child with mental retarda- genetic disease and rare disease. Diagnoses are based on tion,microcephaly,muscularhypotension,corpus callosum known or presumed pathogenic variants in genes already hypoplasia. associated with a similar phenotype. Here, we extend Materials and Methods: G-banding analysis revealed a this paradigm by evaluating novel bioinformatics denovoCCRinvolvingthechromosomes4,5,7.ByFISHAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 985 usingdifferenttypesofprobes(PCP,MCB,subtelomeric)it were detected in the patient. Mother and father were found was possible to clarify how the chromosomes were to be carriers in terms of these mutations. rearranged and to determine the breakpoints. aCGH was Conclusions: Next generation sequencing should be applied for detection of genomic imbalance. preferred in patients with complex genotype resulting Results: Conventional karyotyping showed translocation multiple anomalies. t(4;5;7)(q31;q32;p21)dn. MCBanalysisofchromosomes4, M. Yarar: None. M. Gokcu: None. A.H. Cebi: None. 5, 7 was employed to delineate the breakpoints in every chromosome.Unexpectedlywedetectedthatasegmentof4 E-P11.28 (q31.23q32.2)wasinsertedinthederivativechromosome5 Cytogenomic characterization of a complex small (q31.1).Arm-specificandsubtelomericprobeswereapplied supernumerary marker chromosome leading to partial 4q to confirm the insertion 4q in 5q. Furthermore, aCGH- and21qduplications:clinicalimplicationandreviewofthe analysis showed four cryptic deletions associated with the literature breakpoints on chromosomes 4 and 5. Conclusions: Initially, CCR described here was inter- F.T.Bellucco,R.A.Fock,H.R.Oliveira-Jr,A.B.Perez,M.I. preted as balanced, and derived from a three-way Melaragno translocation between chromosomes 4, 5, 7. However, FISH and aCGH-analysis revealed that the rearrangement Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil wasfarmorecomplexthanoriginallyestimatedinvolvinga larger number of breaks. Only a combination of several Complex small marker chromosomes (sSMC) consist of different approaches was sufficient to resolve the nature of chromosomal material derived from more than one chro- this CCR which had an unexpected level of complexity, mosome. Complex marker chromosomes derived from involving 3 chromosomes, 5 breakpoints, 1 insertion and 4 chromosome 4 and 21 are rare with only five cases deletions. described in the literature, and two listed in the online M. Minzhenkova: None. Z. Markova: None. I. database of sSMCs (http://ssmc-tl.com/sSMC.html). We Kanivets: None. N. Shilova: None. describe a patient who presents a complex sSMC derived from a maternal translocation between chromosomes 4 and E-P11.27 21, revealed by G-banding, MLPA, and array techniques. Detection of Complex Genetic Anomalies with Next Thefinalcytogenomicresultwasgivenas47,XX,+der(21) Generation Sequencing t(4;21)(q32.1;q21.2)mat .arr 4q32.1q35.2 (158907036_190957460)×3, 21q11.2q21.2 M.YARAR, M.GOKCU, A. H.CEBI (15016486_25605895)×3. There are 234 RefSeq genes in the 4q32.1q35.2 duplicated region, 74 of them are OMIM Karadeniz Teknik University, Trabzon, Turkey genes with 17 associated with diseases. Regarding the region in which there are no probes on SNP array, the Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing can be used to duplicated region on chromosome 21 has 25.6 Mb from diagnose complex genetic changes in which conventional 21pter to 21q21.2 (1-25605895) and contains 121 RefSeq genetic methods are inadequate. genes, 18 of them are OMIM genes and 2 are disease- Materials and Method: Whole exome sequencing was causinggenes.Ourpatientpresentsprominentforehead,flat done because the patient had multiple anomalies. face,upslantingpalpebralfissures,hypertelorism,largenose Findings-Results: A 17-year-old male with multiple with a prominent nasal bridge, downturned corners of the anomalies was referred to our polyclinic for genetic mouth, short neck, scoliosis, high arched palate, clin- evaluation and clarification of the diagnosis. There were odactyly, tapered fingers and single palmar creases. Apart chronic cough, torticollis, short stature, glaucoma and fromthebreakpoints,ourpatientshowsasimilarphenotype microphthalmiaontheanamnesisandphysicalexamination to the 4/21 sSMC cases and a compilation of the findings ofthepatient.Computerizedspiraltomographyofchestand found in isolated 4q and 21q duplications. Neuropsycho- magnetic resonance imaging of brain performed respec- motor developmental delay and facial dysmorphism were tively, there were widespread bronchiectasis, multiple themost importantfindings. The wide range ofphenotypes arachnoid cysts, ventriculomegaly and microphthalmia. 6 associated with sSMCs emphasizes the importance of cousins and 2 siblings of the patient died due to similar detailed cytogenomic analyses for an accurate diagnosis, findings and because his parents were relatives blood was prognosis, and genetic counseling. taken from the family to perform whole exom sequencing. Financial Support: FAPESP, Brazil. Homozygous mutation in the PRESS56 gene (c.571G>T), F.T. Bellucco: None. R.A. Fock: None. H.R. Oliveira- homozygous mutation in the MCIDAS gene (c.904C>T) Jr: None. A.B. Perez: None. M.I. Melaragno: None.986 J.delPicchia E-P11.29 fibrosis of extraocular muscles CFEOM in the family with PossibleinvolvementofFREM2homozygousmutationina mutation in TUBB3 gene Japanesefamilywithunilateralsmallkidneydeterminedby whole-exome sequencing J.Pilch1,A.Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska2,K.Czerska2,P.Skiba3, E. Emich-Widera1 S. Katayama1, N.Takeuchi1, Y.Hozumi1,A.Morii1, T. Shimomura2,T. Makifuchi3,4,T. Inazu1 1Department of Pediatric Neurology, Katowice, Poland, 2MEDGEN Medical Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of 1Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmaceutical Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University,, Wroclaw, Poland Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan, 2Department ofNeurology,NationalHospitalOrganizationSaigataMedical Ophthalmoplegia and limited eye movement are frequently Center, Niigata, Japan, 3Department of Clinical Research, observed neurological abnormalities. It could be result of National Hospital Organization Saigata Medical Center, acquireddiseases,inbornerrorsofmetabolismorcongenital Niigata, Japan, 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Joetsu defects. In some patients abnormalities in associated eyes General Hosipital, Niigata, Japan structures often coexist with inborn defects of other organs being one of the symptoms of a specific syndrome, but Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract sometimes it could be an isolated entity. One of them is (CAKUT) constitute a major cause of chronic disease in congenital fibrosis of extraocular muscles (CFEOM). humans.Morethan50geneshavebeenreportedasmutated CFEOMisacomplexconditionwithARorADinheritance in CAKUT affected cases. Recently, mutations in genes andhighclinicalvariabilityasaresultofmutationinoneof encoding Fraser syndrome protein 1 (FRAS1), FRAS1 at least six genes. Some patients may have unilateral eye related extracellular matrix protein 2 (FREM2) and gluta- involvement. Here we report a family with CFEOM. In a matereceptorinteractingprotein1(GRIP1)causeCAKUT. 10-years-old boy ptosis of eyelids, exotropia and fingers A patient with consanguineous parents underwent whole- camptodactyly were present since the neonatal period. exome sequencing to identify the causative gene(s) for his Physical examination additionally revealed severe limited unilateralsmallkidney,relatively hypouricemiaandmental movement of eyes, small facial dysmorphic features. In retardation. After WES, we narrowed down our search for other family members (mother, aunt, grandmother and candidate genes to 48 responsible for the small kidney cousin) only abnormalities in associated structures of eyes phenotype. Lastly, we identified a FREM2 homozygous were reported. aCGH revealed in the boy a small mutation(c.C4030T,p.R1344C)andaGRIP1homozygous 14q31.3q32.11 duplication of uncertain clinical sig- mutation (c.C692T, p.A231V) probably associated with nificance. Based on clinical symptoms, a mutation in unilateral small kidney. In silico analysis revealed that TUBB3 gene has been suspected. A p.Arg190Cys R1344C in FREM2 was probably damaging, and that (c.568C>T, rs267607162) mutation registered in the A231V in GRIP1 was benign. R1344 in FREM2 is evolu- HGMDandinClinVaraspathogenicvariantwasidentified tionarily conserved, and is located within chondroitin sul- inaffectedboyandotherfamilymembers.TheCFEOM3A fate proteoglycan repeats, which could be the binding wasconfirmedinthisfamily.Givenhighclinicalvariability domain for several growth factors. Furthermore, the late in patients with CFEOM it is recommended to look for patient’s brother and sister manifested a relatively bilateral mutations in CFEOM genes in group of patients with small kidney and normal kidney. However, his genotyping congenital inborn defects and abnormalities in associated was a GRIP1 homozygous mutation without FREM2 structures of eyes. mutation, and her genotyping was a FREM2 and GRIP1 Support: Institutional grant KNW-1-126/K/6/K heterozygousmutation.Therefore,theseresultssuggestthat J.Pilch:None.A.Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska:None.K. the mutation in FREM2 is pathogenic and might be asso- Czerska:None.P.Skiba:None.E.Emich-Widera:None. ciated with the unilateral small kidney phenotype. This is the first report of homozygous missense mutation in E-P11.31 FREM2 found inapatient withaunilateralsmall kidney in Congenital heart defects in patient with new KMT2D a Japanese family. frameshift mutation S. Katayama: None. N. Takeuchi: None. Y. Hozumi: None. A. Morii: None. T. Shimomura: None. T. D.Krgovič1,2,S. StanglerHerodez1, N.Marcun Varda3,B. Makifuchi: None. T. Inazu: None. Zagradisnik1,A. Zagorac1,A. Erjavec Skerget1, N.Kokalj Vokac1,2 E-P11.30 Phenotype variability of autosomal dominant congenitalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 987 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Genetics, University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty, University of Kralove, Czech Republic Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Paediatrics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia Introduction: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare complex disorder with multiple structural and devel- Introduction:Congenitalheartdefects(CHD)arethemost opmental defects characterized by typical facial features, common type of birth defect in newborns. CHD are also intellectualdisability,andcongenitalanomalies.Ithasbeen frequently accompanied by genetic syndromes. Usually, estimated to occur in about 1:10 000 individuals where additional features along with CHD are observed in these severe forms of CdLS are revealed easilly, but as more syndromes. The genetic cause of the syndromes can be mildly affected individuals have been reported, its actual single-genemutationsandcopynumbervariations.Because prevalence may be much more common. Diagnostics of theclinicalpictureofpatientswithdifferentsyndromescan CdLS is complicated with a presence of clinically over- overlap,itisveryimportantthatagoodclinicalexamination lapping syndromes. is performed, which leads to a better diagnosis of these Methods:OurcustomNGSpanel(completedbyMLPA) conditions. encompasses genes associated not only with a specific Material and Methods: A 10-moths old boy was diagnosis (CdLS inthis case) butalso with diseases, which referred for NGS analysis due to the CHD observed during are hardly distinguishable from CdLS because of their the pregnancy. After birth vesicoureteral reflux, muscular phenotypic similarity. hypotonia, cleft palate, and mild microcephaly was noted. Results: To date we have investigated 13 pacients with The prenatal testing was performed for observed CHD, CdLS clinical diagnosis. Four of them (three children and which included classical karyotyping, molecular karyotyp- one fetus) carried pathogenic variants in NIPBL gene or ing and QF-PCR for exclusion of aneuploides and SMC3gene,sotheirdiagnosiswasconfirmedonmolecular microdeletions/microduplications syndromes. All genetic level. Our custom NGS panel includes genes related with tests were negative. NGS analysis was performed with clinically overlapping syndromes, so we were able to panel covering more than 4800 disease-associated genes. identify pathogenic variants in ANKRD11 gene (KBG Analysis was initially focused on genes associated with syndrome) and AFF4 gene (CHOPS syndrome) in two CHD, but no clinically significant variants were detected. children patients. Only after the extended genetic analysis, which also Conclusions: For a routine molecular testing it‘s included genes related to additional features observed in important to create custom NGS panels with a great our patients, enabled us the detection of a previously prudence.Onlyinthiscaseitcanbeasuccessfuldiagnostic undescribed frameshift mutation c.11093delG in KMT2D toolwhichcansolvetheissuewithmoleculardiagnosticsof gene which is associated with Kabuki syndrome. clinically overlapping syndromes. Conclusion:Broadspectrumofclinicalfeaturesobserved J. Pospisilova: None. V. Krutilkova: None. P. Cibulk- in Kabuki patients and its rare incidence disables the easy ova:None.P.Solarova:None.M.Senkerikova:None.A. recognition of this syndrome. Our case presents the Boday: None. importance of a good clinical characterizations of the patients which undergo the NGS analysis for successful E-P11.33 diagnostics. Wideningthespectrumofcongenitalanomaliesrelatedtoa D. Krgovič: None. S. Stangler Herodez: None. N. partial 21q monosomy detected prenatally Marcun Varda: None. B. Zagradisnik: None. A. Zagorac: None. A. Erjavec Skerget: None. N. Kokalj A. Sajeva1,2,F.Lalatta1,T. Rizzuti3, S.Boito4,N.Persico4,R. Vokac: None. Silipigni5,S.Guerneri5,E.Scola6,C.M.Cinnante6,F.Triulzi6, L. Ronzoni1,C. Cesaretti1, F.Natacci1 E-P11.32 MoleculardiagnosticsofCornelia deLangesyndromeand 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, related genetic disorders Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 2Specialisation School in Medical Genetics - University of Milan, Milano, J.Pospisilova1,V.Krutilkova1,2,P.Cibulkova1,P.Solarova3,M. Italy, 3Pathology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Senkerikova3, A.Boday1 OspedaleMaggiore Policlinico,Milano,Italy, 4Departmentof Obstetrics and Gynaecology 'L. Mangiagalli', Fondazione 1AGEL Laboratories, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Novy IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Ambulance of Clinical Genetics – Italy,5LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,FondazioneIRCCSCa' Zenklova, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,988 J.delPicchia 6Neuroradiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 3Personal Genetics-Medical Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy Genetics Center, Bucharest, Romania, 4Institute of Virology Stefan S.Nicolau, Bucharest, Romania Introduction: A 29-year-old pregnant woman was referred 20+4 at weeks because of fetal anomalies. The couple was Introduction: Apparently balanced chromosomal rearran- healthy, unrelated and of South American origin. Level II gement associated with an abnormal phenotype is a rare ultrasonography (US) revealed a cystic hygroma, complete event, but with difficult management. In the past few years agenesis of corpus callosum, aortic valvular stenosis with array CGH changed the diagnostic approach to many con- aortichypoplasia,leftventricularhypoplasiaandventricular genital diseases offering an accurate detection of chromo- septaldefect,flexiondeformityofhands.Brainabnormality some imbalances. was confirmed at MRI. Material and Methods: A 6 months old girl, the third Materials and Methods: Agilent Technologies 60K childofthecouplewithhistoryofinfertility,wasreferredto Chromosomal MicroArray (CMA) performed on amniotic our genetic center because of developmental delay, fluid cells revealed a loss of 21,5 Mb of chromosome dysmorphic features, agenesis of corpus callosum, sacral 21q11.2q22.12, encompassing many OMIM genes, 8 of dimple, abnormal skin pigmentation with linear intercostal which are known to be disease-associated. CMA also localisation, growth retardation. Cytogenetic analysis showed two small imbalances inherited from the healthy showed a derivative chromosome 21 inherited apparently mother. The imbalance appeared as a complete chromo- from her mother and arrayCGH result was: arr[hg19] some 21 monosomy upon cytogenetic analysis of cultured 13q12.11-q12.3(20407295-31729705)x3,21q11.2-q21.3 cells.Maternalkaryotypewasnormal,whereaspaternalone (15485008-30013630)x1. FISH testing was necessary to revealed a 1p22-p36.1 paracentric inversion. FISH analysis clarify the results. with a probe specific for subtelomeric 21q regions (Vysis) Discussion: The patient presented a visible abnormal was normal for both parents. The pregnancy was termi- chromosome 21, apparently inherited from a normal nated. Fetal pathology and autoptic MRI confirmed all mother. The abnormal phenotype of the proband suggested prenatal US findings while also identifying periventricular thecontinuationoftheinvestigationefforts.ArrayCGHand nodular subependymal heterotopia and very distinctive FISH were subsequently applied and showed a proximal facial features (low-set and posteriorly set ears, frontal duplication of about 11,3 Mb of 13q12.11-q12.3 and a hirsutismwithbroadeyebrows,hypertelorism,abroadnasal proximal deletion of about 14,5 Mb of 21q11.2-q21.3. The bridgewithantevertednostrils,microretrognathiaandhigh- child’s der(21) was confirmed to be inherited from a arched palate). maternal balancedtranslocationbetween13qand21q.This Conclusions: This case, characterized by a broad loss of structural chromosomal abnormality exposes the mother to genetic material, widens the phenotypic spectrum of 21q a high risk of offspring affected by unbalanced chromoso- deletions revealing a very peculiar prenatal picture. Similar mal disorder and could explain her infertility. but smaller imbalances have been described as definitely Conclusions: Without complete investigation of subtle pathogenic in children with intellectual disability, hypopla- rearrangements, genetic counseling is a real challenge. sia of the corpus callosum, dysmorphic facial features ArrayCGH analysis should be performed when the and VSD. karyotype is apparently balanced but a chromosome A.Sajeva:None.F.Lalatta:None.T.Rizzuti:None.S. anomaly is still suspected based on the clinical phenotype. Boito: None. N. Persico: None. R. Silipigni: None. S. This work was supported by PN-II-PT-PCCA-2013-4-133 Guerneri: None. E. Scola: None. C.M. Cinnante: None. grant F. Triulzi: None. L. Ronzoni: None. C. Cesaretti: None. V.Plaiasu:None.D.Ozunu:None.G.Motei:None.M. F. Natacci: None. Ivan: None. M. Zeleniuc: None. G. Cardos: None. P. Gurban: None. G. Dinulescu: None. C. Diaconu: None. E-P11.34 Chromosomalmicroarrayversuskaryotypingfordiagnosis E-P11.35 of a rare inherited apparently balanced translocation Patientwithdenovo18q22.1-q22.3delection.Acasereport involving chromosomes 13 & 21 M.MolinaZayas,m.MartinezAtienza,M.DelAguilaGarcía,A. V.PLAIASU1,D.Ozunu1,G.Motei1,M.Ivan1,M.Zeleniuc2,G. González Ramirez,S. GarcíaLinares, A. Mora Guijosa, A. Cardos3,P. Gurban3, G.Dinulescu3, C.Diaconu4 PoyatosAndújar., M.Perez Sanchez 1INSMC Alessandrescu-Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, Servicio Andaluz de Salud (SAS)., Granada, Spain 2Personal Genetics-Medical Genetics Center, UMF CarolAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 989 Laboratoryevaluationofpatientswithdevelopmentaldelay/ 72 Arg>Pro variant is related with altered TP53 protein intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, dismorphic functions. Allele distributions of these common variants features and autistic disorders has changed significantly in were assessed between DS and control children. the last years with the introduction of microarray technol- Materials and Methods: DS (n:80) and control (n:32) ogies.Structuralaberrationsofchromosomesareassociates subjectswereincludedinthisstudy.TERTgeners2736100 with various syndromes, although there are a lot of cho- A-CintronicvariantandTP53genep.Arg72Pro(c.C215G) mosomalgainsandlossesthatarenotyetassociatedwitha variant was determined with melting analysis of hybridiza- specific syndrome. Most of the cases are the novo, few tion probes. cases are due to unbalanced rearraments and others are Results:TheallelefrequencyofTERTandTP53variants inherents. We present a three years-old boy derived from werenotdifferentbetweenDSandcontrolgroups,however neuropediatric for genetics studies due to global develop- allele frequencies were higher than that of the highest mental delay. He was born at 38 gestation week from no populationlevel.TheTERTvariantdistributionwassimilar consanguineous healthy parents. Karyotype in leucocites in the control group of children with homozygous Pro72 was normal (46;XY). Comparative Genomic Hybridization variantorArg72variantcarriers.Thevariantdistributionof (CGH-Array) with the Nimblegen CGX Cytogenetic TERT, however, was significantly lower in DS group of Microarrays platform, suplied by PerkinElmer, was per- children with homozygous Pro72 variant compared to formed for the patient and parents. The CGH- Array was Arg72 variant carriers. normal en both parents, but the patient presented a delecc- Conclusion: Similar distribution of the common variants tion of 2,40 Mb in 18q22.1-q22.3 chromosomical region of TERT and TP53 genes are implying that these variants (arr[hg19] 18q22.1-q22.3 (66,375,444-68,773,023)x1 may contribute to DS phenotype by more complex Abnormal Male). The duplication is “de novo” and no associations. previously described. These delection have 11 genes Grant number: Akdeniz University TSA-2016-1531 included (5 OMIM) and then with a high pathologic prob- A.Toylu:None.B.Nur:None.O.AltiokClark:None. ability. . Chromosomic aberrations detected “de novo” and E. Mihci: None. no previously described can be dificult to determine his pathologic potential, and it is necesary to have in mind the E-P11.37 patient pathology and genes involved in the delecction/ Enamel-renal syndrome: identification of two novel non- duplication . In our case we believe that the chromosomal consanguinous families with mutations in FAM20A gene alteration detected, alone or in conjuntion with another chromosomal or enviromental cause will be responsible of F.Jobic1,S.deBroca2,R.Vargas-Poussou3,L.Lichtenberger4, the patient pathology. G.Jedraszak5,M.Mathieu-Dramard1, G.Morin1 M. Molina Zayas: None. M. Martinez Atienza: None. M. Del Aguila García: None. A. González Ramirez: 1Clinical Genetics, Amiens, France, 2Maxillo-facial surgery, None.S.GarcíaLinares: None. A.MoraGuijosa: None. Amiens, France, 3Molecular Genetics - Georges Pompidou A. Poyatos Andújar.: None. M. Perez Sanchez: None. European Hospital, Paris, France, 4Pediatric nephrology, Amiens, France, 5Laboratory of Human Genetics, Amiens, E-P11.36 France Distribution of the Common TERT and TP53 Variants in Down Syndrome Children Amelogenesis imperfecta forms a group of inherited con- ditions having in common a defect in dental enamel for- A. Toylu,B.Nur, O.Altiok Clark, E.Mihci mation on primary and/or secondary dentitions. It can be isolated or syndromic. When associated with nephrocalci- Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey nosis, the condition is designated as « enamel-renal syn- drome » or « amelogenesis imperfecta type IG » (OMIM Introduction:ThephenotypespectrumofDownsyndrome 204690), and is consecutive to biallelic mutations of (DS)relatedwiththetrisomyofchromosome21hasamulti FAM20A gene. The encoding protein is involved in the system associated features, but the exact mechanism of manufacture and maturation of enamel. However, the these abnormalities are not fully explained to date. To mechanism explaining the renal damage remains unclear. understandtheroleofcommonvariantsofTERTandTP53 Rare, this autosomal recessive condition is often observed genes on the diversity of DS phenotype, the frequency of in consanguineous families. We report on 2 new patients thesetwovariantswasaimedtobeinvestigated.TheTERT from distinct and non-consanguineous families. The first, gene rs2736100 A-C intronic variant is known with its 14-year-old, had amelogenesis imperfecta and nephro- associationwithvariousmorbidities.TheTP53genecodon calcinosis without impact on renal function, accidentally990 J.delPicchia discovered at age 6 (abdominal pain). Two heterozygous eyes. Molecular genetic analysis of DNA from peripheral mutations were discovered in FAM20A: c.1192G>T [p. lymphocytes using NGS panel (4800 genes) revealed a (Asp398Tyr)] and c.1228_1229del [p.(Asp410Profs*5)]. novel frameshift deletion in homozygous condition - The second, 6-year-old, had isolated amelogenesis imper- NM_000124:c.1323delA(p.Gly442GlufsTer24)-inexon fecta. His renal ultrasound examination was normal. 5ofERCC6gene.TheSangersequencingtestforthecarrier Molecular analysis of FAM20A identified 3 heterozygous status of both genitors is scheduled. mutations: c.826C>T [p.(Arg276*)], c.1369A>T [p. Conclusions: Our paper provides, to our knowledge, a (Lys457*)] and c.1517T>A [p.(Leu506Gln)]. These obser- detailed clinical presentation of a newly identified homo- vations confirm that the emergence of rare diseases of zygous mutation in a girl affected with CS. This expands autosomal recessive inheritance is also possible in non- themutational spectrum associatedwiththisextremelyrare consanguineous families. The absence of nephrocalcinosis geneticcondition.ThisisthefirstcaseofCSidentifiedand in the second patient does not question the diagnosis of genetically confirmed in the South-West Romania. enamel-renal syndrome, and emphasizes that FAM20A I. Streata: None. R. Plesea: None. A. Olaru: None. E. mutations must also be investigated in isolated amelogen- Popescu: None. A. Pirvu: None. A.L. Riza: None. S. esisimperfecta.Nephrocalcinosisisinconstant,unapparent, Serban-Sosoi: None. A. Cimpoeru: None. M. Cucu: and most often observed later in life. In enamel-renal syn- None. A. Dobrescu: None. A. Morosanu: None. C.L. drome,theriskforrenalfunctionjustifytheorganizationof Mocanu: None. F. Burada: None. M. Ioana: None. a rigorous renal supervision. F.Jobic:None.S.deBroca:None.R.Vargas-Poussou: E-P11.39 None. L. Lichtenberger: None. G. Jedraszak: None. M. Autosomal recessive oculodentodigital dysplasia: the third Mathieu-Dramard: None. G. Morin: None. mutation identified in the GJA1 gene E-P11.38 E. Tasdelen,C. D.Durmaz, H.G.Karabulut Case report: A novel frameshift deletion in ERCC6 gene causes Cockayne syndrome type B Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Departments of Medical Genetic, Ankara, Turkey I.STREATA1,2,R.Plesea1,2,A.Olaru3,E.Popescu1,A.Pirvu1,2, A. L.Riza1,2,S. Serban-Sosoi1,2,A. Cimpoeru1,M.Cucu1,A. Introduction: Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is a Dobrescu1,2,A.Morosanu3, C.L. Mocanu3, F.Burada1,2, M. rare condition characterized by typical facial appearance Ioana1,2 andvariablefindingsoftheeyes,teethandfingers.Besides ocular manifestations like microphtalmia, microcornea, iris 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Human abnormalities and glaucome, small nose, microdontia, Genomics Laboratory, Craiova, Romania, 2Dolj Regional dentalanomalies,syndactylyofthe4th-5thfingers(typeIII Centre of Medical Genetics, Emergency County Hospital syndactyly),absentphalanxofthetoesanddryhaircanalso Craiova, Craiova, Romania, 3University of Medicine and beseeninindividualswiththissyndrome.ODDDiscaused Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania by mutations in the GJA1 gene on chromosome 6q22-q24 and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner in the Cockayne syndrome (CS; OMIM 133540/216400) is a majorityofthepatients.However,inrecentclinicalreports, multi-systemic and progressive rare autosomal recessive autosomal recessive ODDD cases caused by GJA1 muta- condition. CS is member of the DNA repair disorders tions were also described. group, with a highly variable clinical phenotype, ranging Case Report: Here we report a 14-year-old boy with from severe prenatal forms to mild cases with late pre- microphtalmia, microcornea, narrow nasal bridge, hypo- sentations. Classical features include global developmental plastic alae nasi, prominent columnella, hypodontia and delay, post natal growth failure, feeding difficulty, micro- partial syndactyly of 2rd - 3th toes. These clinical findings cephaly, cutaneous photosensitivity, dental, auditory (pro- were consistent with the diagnosis of ODDD, and a novel gressive hearing loss) and ophthalmological (pigmentary homozygous mutation, c.442C>T, p.Arg148Ter was deter- retinopathy, cataracts and enophthalmia) anomalies. CS is mined in GJA1 gene causing to premature stop codon. His mainly caused by mutations in ERCC6 (OMIM 609413) healthy parents were found to be carriers for the same and ERCC8 (OMIM 609412) genes. mutation. Casereport:WereportasporadiccaseofagirlwithCS Conclusion: p.Arg148Ter mutation in GJA1 gene that whopresentedwithseveregrowthfailure(3,5kgat5years) encodes the transmembrane protein, connexin43 (Cx43) is -cachecticdwarfism,microcephaly,congenitalcataractand responsiblefortheclinicalfeaturesofthepatientcausingto aged appearance with prominent beaked nose and sunken premature stop codon and probably, leading to a truncatedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 991 non-functional protein. Up to now, autosomal recessive known recessive disorder matches our patient’s clinical ODDD has been reported in eleven patients from six symptoms. These results suggest that a recessive mutation families but, only two of these cases were confirmed by inanewgenecouldberesponsibleforthisrareassociation. molecular analysis. This is the third mutation described so Itisalsopossiblethattheseatypicalclinicalfindingsarethe far in the literature leading to autosomal recessive form result of a multiple recessive or complex molecular of ODDD. diagnosis. E. Tasdelen: None. C.D. Durmaz: None. H.G. Grants: CAPES, CNPq, FAPEMIG. Karabulut: None. A.Richieri-Costa:None.R.A.C.Monteiro:None.R.M. Zechi-Ceide: None. C. Tonello: None. N.M. Kokitsu- E-P11.41 Nakata: None. S. Vendramini-Pittoli: None. R.M.S. Holoprosencephaly, orofacial cleft and fronto-naso-orbital Sandri: None. M.L. de Freitas: None. J.F. Mazzeu: encephaloceles in a highly inbred patient: a new recessive None. F.S. Jehee: None. disorder? E-P11.42 A. Richieri-Costa1,R. A.C. Monteiro2,R.M. Zechi-Ceide1,C. Holopsosencephaly could be the extreme phenotype Tonello3,N.M.Kokitsu-Nakata1,S. Vendramini-Pittoli1,R.M. ofRTTN mutations S. Sandri1, M.L. deFreitas2,J. F.Mazzeu4,F. S.Jehee2,5 Y. CAPRI1,C. GINS1,F.GUIMIOT1,2,P. LETARD3, A. 1Serviço de Genética, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias VERLOES1,2, S.DRUNAT1,S. PASSEMARD1,2 Craniofaciais, Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, 2IEP-Santa Casa Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 1CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 2Inserm U1141, Paris, 3Craniofacial Team, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias France, 3Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, France Craniofaciais, Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, 4Faculdade de Medicina. Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, RTTN was involved in a recessive autosomal poly- Brazil, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University migrogyria(PM)when itwasfirstdescribed in2012.More Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands recently, in 2015, RTTN was also involved in micro- cephalic primary dwarfism (MCPH) and in microcephaly Introduction: We describe a four-month-old Brazilian boy with simplified gyral pattern. Function of the protein with semilobar holoprosencephaly, fronto-nasal encephalo- Rotatin is still unknown but its interaction with another celes and bilateral cleft lip and palate. Malformations protein of the centriole, the essential organelle required for includedagenesisofthecorpuscallosum,abnormalcortical cell division, has already been described. We report the gyres,dilationoftheaqueduct,bilateralendolymphaticsac, clinical, neuroimaging and neuropathological data from 2 bilateral cystic cocci-vestibular malformation and a cribri- foetuses from a consanguineous couple: the 1st foetus form defect. The 3D TC craniofacial images showed showed a severe microcephaly and the pregnancy was ter- abnormal frontonasal transition region, with a bone bifur- minated at 21WG. Sonogaphic follow-up of the second cation and partial agenesis of nasal bone. The trunk and foetus reveled a holoprosencephalic aspect and the preg- upper and lower limbs were normal. nancy was terminated at 16WG Neuropathological exam- Methods: G-banding karyotype and SNP-array. ination found alissencephalyandventricular heterotopiain Results: Karyotype was normal. SNP-array showed no the 1st foetus and an “incomplete holoprosencephaly” and copy-number alterations but revealed a high rate of regions neuronal migration anomaly in the 2nd foetus. Previously of homozygosity with normal copy number (ROH). The described homozygote missense mutation in exon 23 of coefficient of inbreeding is 25%, suggesting that the RTTN was found. We compared the phenotype of those 2 proband was a result of a parent-offspring or a full- foetuses with 3 new patients of our serie and the patients siblings relationship, which significantly increases the risk previously described in the literature. for an autosomal recessive disorder. Searches in the Y. Capri: None. C. Gins: None. F. Guimiot: None. P. Genomic Oligoarray and SNP array tool for recessive Letard: None. A. Verloes: None. S. Drunat: None. S. disorders did not reveal any gene or disorder within the Passemard: None. patient’s ROH that matched his clinical features. STIL and FGF8, tworecessiveholoprosencephaly genes, donotmap E-P11.43 within our patient’s ROH. Unusual clinical and laboratory findings in a case with Conclusion: To our knowledge, this rare association of Ochoa syndrome holoprosencephaly with fronto-naso-orbital encephaloceles withoutlimbanomalieshasneverbeenreportedbefore.No992 J.delPicchia D.Avdjieva-Tzavella1,H.Kathom1,B. Karashova1,R. 1Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, Istanbul, Turkey, Tincheva1,V. Salpietro2 2Acibadem LabGen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital,MedicalUniversity,Sofia,Bulgaria,Sofia,Bulgaria, Wereporta2.5yearsoldgirlwitha1877kblossofterminal 2Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College 6p25.3 and 8849 kb gain of distal 15q26.1 to ter due to an London,,, London, United Kingdom unbalancedtranslocationinheritedfromthemothercarrying the balanced translocation. She is the second liveborn from Introduction:TheOchoaorUrofacialsyndrome(UFS)isa a 30 year old healthy mother. Prenatal ultrasound showed rare autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in cystic cysterna magna and MRI follow up revealed ven- either HPSE2 or LRIG2 genes. UFS ischaracterized by the tricular dilatation. She was born at 38+3 weeks gestation. association of abnormal facial expression with a lower Macrocephalyandbuphthalmoswasnotedatbirth.Shewas urinary tract and bowel dysfunction. The patients with this operated for glaucoma. She was evaluated in pediatric syndromemadeatypicalpainfulgrimacewhentheytriedto genetics clinic for dysmorphic facial features and develop- smile. Progression to urinary incontinence, megacystis, mental delay. The heterozygous loss in 6p25.3 resulted in vesicoureteric reflux, hydroureteronephrosis, and renal lossof6OMIMannotatedgenesincludingthetranscription failureifnotearlyrecognitionofthediseaseisunavoidable. factor FOXC1 gene. This gene plays an important role in We report the first Bulgarian case of this rare syndrome. eye, brain and heart development. Microdeletions of this Materials and Methods: The patient, a seven-year-old region are known to be associated with microcephaly, dis- girl,wasreferredtogeneticevaluationbecauseofthesevere tinct clinical features, like sensorineural hearing loss, ante- mental retardation and autistic behaviour. She was born at riorchambereyedefects,cardiacdefectsanddevelopmental term after complicated pregnancy. The parents are third delay. The gain in 15q26.1-3 includes 17 OMIM genes cousins. From early childhood the girl suffered from including IGF1R gene, which we speculate explains the frequent vomiting episodes during respiratory infections macrocephaly, instead of microcephaly. This patient and constipation. Physical examination revealed microce- demonstrates thecombinationoftwocopynumbervariants phaly and mild mandibular prognathism. Serum lactate where the loss (deletion) predominates the phenotype and levelsweresignificantlyelevated.Metabolicandmitochon- additionalfindingsarelikelytobeaddressedtothegenesin drial DNA testing results were normal. In an attempt to the gain (duplication) segment. establish the diagnosis Whole exome sequencing was We conclude that patients with a relatively well- carried out. delineated microdeletion syndrome as 6p deletion should Results: A homozygous mutation was identified in exon be thoroughly evaluated for additional copy number 3oftheHPSE2gene:c.C457T:p.R153X.Recurrenturinary variants when presenting with atypical or unusual pheno- tract infections were proven as well as a peculiar inverted typical findings with emphasis on all genes involved in the facial expression was noticed after receiving results from imbalance. DNA analysis. K. Yararbas: None. C. Sayar: None. S. Tumer: None. Conclusions: Unusual clinical and laboratory findings in D.Ozciger:None.C.Tavukcu:None.N.Oncu:None.Y. our case led to delay in diagnosis. The characteristic facial Alanay: None. expressionallowsearlydetectionofthisraredisorder.Early recognitionofUFSandadequateprophylaxisandtreatment E-P11.45 can prevent upper urinary tract damage and renal failure. Identification of novel mutation in KMT2D gene in a D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. H. Kathom: None. B. patient with Kabuki syndrome and borderline Karashova: None. R. Tincheva: None. V. chromosomal instability Salpietro: None. A. Pietrzyk1,2, Z.Litwinska3,M.Gos4,M.Bryskiewicz1,E. E-P11.44 Studniak1,M. Dlugoszewska4,5,T. Gambin4, S.Zajaczek1,2 PossibleeffectofIGFR1geneonmacrocephalyinapatient withunbalanced6;15translocationwith6p25deletionand 1Cytogenetic Unit, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, 15q26 duplication Poland, 2Department of Genetics and Pathomorphology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, K.Yararbas1,2,C.Sayar2,S.Tumer2,D.Ozciger2,C.Tavukcu2, 3Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical N.Oncu2,Y. Alanay1 University, Szczecin, Poland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 5Faculty of Biology, Univeristy of Warsaw, Warsaw, PolandAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 993 Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare, multiple congenital chromatinmodifierresponsiblefor56-75%and5-8%ofthe anomaly syndrome. It is caused by mutations in KMT2D cases, respectively. Two patients were referred because of andKDM6Agenesthatareinvolvedinhistonemethylation congenital anomalies and dysmorphic features. They were and thus leading to epigenetic dysregulation. KS is char- borned to healthy non-consanguineous parents. We clini- acterized by distinctive facial features, intellectual dis- cally diagnosed two cases of Kabuki syndrome due to ability, postnatal growth retardation and various structural typical features. Sequencing analysis of KMT2D gene was anomalies.Otherfindingssuchasincreasedsusceptibilityto performed and two novel variations were identified. Two infections and autoimmune disorders have also been heterozygous variants were found after parental carrier observed. Cancer predisposition in KS remains uncertain testing, namely c.438G>A [p.(S146S)] and c.5674C>T [p. and it has been described in less than 10 cases so far. (Gln1892X)]. In silico tools (Mutation Taster, SIFT and We report 10-year-old boy with typical facial features of PolyPhen) predicts these mutations as potentially deleter- KS, fetal fingertip pads, intellectual disability, complex ious. Parental carrier testings confirmed that these variants heart defect, minor skeletal anomalies, hearing loss and occured as de novo events. Clinical manifestation of these short stature due to growth hormone deficiency. He also twocasesassessedasmoderateormildformofthedisease. suffered from IgA and IgG hypogammaglobulinemia and Therefore, fuctional studies and additional case reports are was operated due to neuroblastoma in the 3rd month of required to understand the affect of these variations and his life. genotype-phenotype correlation. Noimbalance wasdetected inarray CGH.Targeted gene D. Kan Karaer: None. Z. Yuksel: None. K. sequencing revealed a novel, truncating variant Karaer: None. (c.2063_2064del/p.Arg688Profs*6)inexon10ofKMT2D gene which confirmed diagnosis of KS in the patient. E-P11.47 Additionally performed assay showed bleomycin- induced Kabuki syndrome - long-term follow-up of five cases chromosome breakage at a rate of bordeline value (0,74 vs 0,8, which was a cut-off value adopted in our facility). C.Rusu1,M.Starcea1,R.Aanicai2,R.Popescu1,M.Panzaru1,L. Histone methyltransferase encoded by KMT2D gene is a Butnariu1, R.Blok3,C. Schrander-Stumpel3 major epigenetic factor which interacts with other protein complexes regulating expression of multiple genes and 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2"Sf. many cell functions. The present observation of chromo- Maria" Children's Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 3Maastricht UMC some breakage in a patient with Kabuki syndrome may +, Maastricht, Netherlands thereforeindicateitssignificanceforchromatinstabilityand affect clinical characteristics and management of the Kabukisyndrome(KS)ischaracterizedbydistinctivefacial disease. features, minor skeletal anomalies, fetal pads, intellectual A.Pietrzyk:None.Z.Litwinska:None.M.Gos:None. disability (ID) and postnatal growth deficiency. Cardiac, M. Bryskiewicz: None. E. Studniak: None. M. Dlugos- renal and skeletal defects are sometimes associated. zewska: None. T. Gambin: None. S. Zajaczek: None. KMT2D and KDM6A are the only genes known to deter- mine KS. We present 5 cases with KS in order to illustrate E-P11.46 particularitiesidentified,butalsotodiscussthechangingof Two Novel KMT2D Gene Variants in Kabuki Syndrome the clinical picture in time. All our cases are males, repre- sent sporadic cases and have been confirmed by mutation D.KanKaraer1, Z.Yuksel2, K.Karaer3 analysis of KMT2D. Growth charts and evolution in time will be provided. Case 1: marked postnatal growth retar- 1Department of Genetic Dr.Ersin Arslan Research and dation, obesity, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, severe TrainingHospital,Gaziantep,Turkey,2DepartmentofGenetic vesico-ureteral reflux leading to chronic renal failure, Mersin Women and Children Hospital, Mersin, Turkey, moderate/severe ID with ADHD; the mother has typical 3Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of face and fetal pads (no mutation); Case 2: normal growth, Genetic, Gaziantep, Turkey obesity, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, heart defect, unilateral renal agenesis, nephrocalcinosis, moderate ID; Kabuki syndrome is a rare, multiple malformation disorder Case 3: normal growth, situs inversus, typical face, fetal characterized by distinctive facial appearance, cardiac pads, cardiac and renal defect, severe ID with behavioral anomalies, skeletal abnormalities,jointlaxity, short stature, disturbance; Case 4: normal growth, obesity, typical face, prominent finger pads and intellctual disability. Recent softskin,fetalpads,gynecomastia,cardiacandrenaldefect, studies reported patients with Kabuki syndrome caused by moderate/severe ID with ADHD; the mother has typical variations in KMT2D and KDM6A, two interacting face and fetal pads(no mutation); Case5: postnatal growth994 J.delPicchia deficit, presternal obesity, typical face, dry skin, fetal pads, V.Djordjevic1,J.Jovanovic1,M.Dencic-Fekete1,Z. Jemuovic2, cardiac and renal defect, mild ID with marked ADHD. In S. Pekic3,M.Nikolic-Djurovic3 conclusion,wehaveidentifiedparticularfeaturesinourKS patients (obesity, soft skin, ADHD, situs inversus). All of 1Clinic of Hematology, Clinical center of Serbia, Belgrade, them have cardiac and renal defects. ID was present in all Serbia, 2Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic cases (severe in 4/5 cases). Disease, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Clinic C. Rusu: None. M. Starcea: None. R. Aanicai: None. for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, Clinical R. Popescu: None. M. Panzaru: None. L. Butnariu: CenterofSerbia;FacultyofMedicine,UniversityofBelgrade, None. R. Blok: None. C. Schrander-Stumpel: None. Belgrade, Serbia E-P11.48 Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome (KS) describes the Kagami-Ogata syndrome: phenotype of a non-Japanese phenotype of the most common sex chromosome abnorm- patient with microdeletion of imprinted region ality in humans (1/600 newborn males). The most wide- spread karyotype in affected patients is 47,XXY, but J.Behunova,J. Neesen,F. Laccone various other karyotypes have been described. The aim of this study was to examine the karyotypes of a group of our Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, patients suspected of having Klinefelter's syndrome. Vienna, Austria Materials and Methods: Since 1993, 98 adult KS patients have been evaluated in the Laboratory of Kagami-Ogatasyndrome(KOS)originatesfromanabsence Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Clinic of Hematol- of a maternal copy of imprinted region 14q32.3, where a ogy, Clinical Center of Serbia. Cytogenetic analysis was nonexpression of a MEG3-gene plays a critical role. About carried out on metaphases obtained from 2/3 of the KOS-patients show paternal uniparental disomy phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral lymphocytes 14,theresteitheranepimutationoradeletionofthecritical using a standard procedure. Fluorescence in situ hybridiza- region. Majority of the published KOS patients are of tion (FISH) analysis was performed on peripheral blood Japanese origin and non-Japanese patients have been specimens. Vysis CEP X/Y- alpha satellite DNA probes reported rather seldom, as well as the phenotypes with were used to detect X and Y chromosomes. microdeletion. An Array-CGH analysis in our patient Results: We identified KS with the ‘classical’ karyotype showed a microdeletion of 670 kb in the critical region in 77 patients, KS with a mosaic karyotype- 47,XXY/46, 14q32.2, verified also by FISH. An MLPA analysis con- XX in three and 47,XXY/46,XY in four (confirmed by firmedaheterozygousdeletionofMEG3-,aswellasRTL1- FISH),KSwiththe‘classical’karyotypetogetherwithother andDLK1-genes,andshowedahypermethylationpatternof autosomal chromosomal abnormalities in six, and KS with MEG3-gene-theevidencethatthedeletionoriginatedatthe other numerical sex chromosome abnormalities-48,XXYY maternal allele. The healthy mother showed no microdele- in two (confirmed by FISH) and 47,XYY in six patients. tion and normal MLPA (de novo microdeletion in daugh- Conclusion: In our group of KS patients most had the ter).Ourpatientshowedexceptofthe14q32.3deletionalso ‘classical’ karyotype, but some men had diverse other a deletion of 1,2 Mb in region 16p13.11, however the karyotypes. It is important to determine the nature of the possible phenotypes of the absent genes do not correlate karyotypeofeverymalewithclinicalfeaturesofKSinvery with the phenotype of the patient. The mother does not early childhood in order to initiate an adequate, persona- carry this second microdeletion and the father was una- lized, medical approach. vailable for the analysis. The patient had been evaluated in V. Djordjevic: None. J. Jovanovic: None. M. Dencic- herageof1,5yand5y.Sheshowedaglobaldevelopmental Fekete: None. Z. Jemuovic: None. S. Pekic: None. M. delay with severe hypotonia, typical costovertebral Nikolic-Djurovic: None. anomalies (significant congenital scoliosis, pectus excava- tum, “coat-hanger" ribs), facial dysmorphy, adducted E-P11.50 thumbs and an abdominal muscle defect. She needed no A five-year-old boy with Laurin- Sandrow syndrome with ventilation in infancy, but had an absent sucking reflex, micro-duplication on 7q36.3, duplicating a part of the massive sialorrhoea and a PEG till 5y. LMBR1 gene J. Behunova: None. J. Neesen: None. F. Laccone: None. M.Mirzazadeh1,P. Namiranian1,F. Samiei2, L.Alami3,M.H. Kariminejad1,M.A. Mensah4,S. Mundlos4,A.Kariminejad1 E-P11.49 Chromosomal Variants in Klinefelter SyndromeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 995 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, in the oligodendrocyte differentiation during postnatal Tehran,Iran,IslamicRepublicof,2SamieiGeneticCounseling growth. Center, Gazvin, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Alavi Hospital, Materials and Methods: Investigation was performed Ardabil University ofMedical Sciences,Ardabil, Iran,Islamic with whole-genome oligonucleotide microarray CGH Republic of, 4Institut für Medizinische Genetik und analysis using clinical 60K microarrays from Oxford Gene Humangenetik, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Technology (CytoSure ISCA v2). Germany Results:Thepatient,a6-year-oldgirlistheonlychildof nonconsanguineous, caucasian parents. The pregnancy was Laurin-Sandrow syndrome (LSS) (OMIM # 135750) is a physiologicalandaroutineultrasoundduringpregnancydid rare polydactyly syndrome characterized by mirror image not show any abnormalities. Delivery was by cesarean polysyndactyly of hands and feet, nasal defects, and often section at 39th week of gestation. The child’s birth weight accompanied by fibula and ulna duplication along with was 3750 g, length 54 cm and the occipitofrontal head absence of tibia and radius. It has an autosomal dominant circumference 35 cm. The patient achieved sitting without pattern of inheritance and is caused by heterozygous supportattheageof6months,attheageof18monthsshe mutations in an SHH (OMIM 600725) regulatory element started walking. At the age of 4 years the patient was (ZRS) that resides in intron 5 of the LMBR1 gene (OMIM referred to the genetic clinic for evaluation because of 605522). Microduplications were detected in 3 families moderate intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial with Laurin- Sandrow syndrome in the 7q36 chromosomal features.Her mother hadsimilardysmorphicfacialfeatures withlengthsvaryingfrom16to75kb.Wereportonafive- and intellectual disability. Microarray CGH analysis year-old Iranian boy of distantly related parents, presented showedadeletionat10q21.2inthepatientandhermother. with prominent forehead and upturned flat tip nose, syn- The identified deletion included RTKN2, ARID5B (exons dactyly of all fingers and toes, hypoplastic nails, preaxial 8-10) and ZNF365 (exons 1-5). polydactyly of both feet and hypoplastic nails of feet. We Conclusion: For the first time, we describe the clinical identified a de novo 86 kb micro-duplication on 7q36.3, characteristics of two patients with a deletion of RTKN2, encompassing exons 5 to 15 of the LMBR1 gene including ARID5B and ZNF365. the ZRS element by array comparative genomic hybridi- K. Wojciechowska: None. M. Lejman: None. M. zation (aCGH). The duplication was verified by real-time Babicz: None. M. Holweg: None. K. Sikora: None. B. quantitative PCR (qPCR). Styka:None.D.Winnicka:None.I.Jaszczuk:None.J.R. Keywords:Laurin-Sandrowsyndrome,polysyndactyly, Kowalczyk: None. nasal defect, LMBR1 M. Mirzazadeh: None. P. Namiranian: None. F. E-P11.55 Samiei: None. L. Alami: None. M.H. Kariminejad: Challengesinthemoderngeneticdiagnosticsofachildwith None. M.A. Mensah: None. S. Mundlos: None. A. a malformative syndrome and intellectual disability Kariminejad: None. M.Stoyanova1,T.Todorov2,T.Chervenkov1,R.Vazharova3,M. E-P11.52 Ӧzen4,M.Levkova1,I.Jordanova5,L. Angelova1 A 10q21.2 microdeletion identified in a patient with moderate intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial 1Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico- features Diagnostic Laboratory Genica", Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Gynecology and assisted reproduction Hospital Malinov MD, Sofia, K. Wojciechowska, M.Lejman, M. Babicz,M. Holweg,K. Bulgaria, 4DoneGenetics and Bioinformatics Inc, Istanbul, Sikora, B.Styka, D.Winnicka, I.Jaszczuk,J. R.Kowalczyk Turkey, 5Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria Children's University Hospital, Lublin, Poland Introduction: Advances in genomics and development of new genetic tests allow the diagnosis of rare malformative Introduction: Interstitial deletions in 10q21.2-q22.2 are syndromesthatmaynotbediagnosablewithothermethods. rare and the phenotype is not well characterized. Important Insomecases,however,theygenerateconfusingresultsthat genes in this region include: RTKN2 involved in lympho- are difficult to interpret or use in a way that improves poiesis, ARID5B affecting cell growthdifferentiation ofB- clinical care. lymphocyte progenitors, adipogenesis and liver develop- Materials and Methods: We report on a 7-year old girl ment and ZNF365 involved in morphogenesis of basket with moderate intellectual disability, psychomotor and cellsinthesomatosensorycortexduringembryogenesisand speech delay, hypomimic face with dysmorphic features, hypodontia, axillary and inguinal linear996 J.delPicchia hyperpigmentations, horseshoe kidney, clinodactyly and blood sample and fibroblast culture from the antecubital abnormal toes. At birth severe muscle atonia and areflexia skin. Additionally, we evaluated the chromosome X and were observed. Cytogenetic analysis revealed normal chromosome18numberswithfluorescentinsituhybridiza- karyotype. At age 6 whole-genome analysis using the tion (FISH) technique. HumanCytoSNP-12Beadchipandwhole-exomesequencing Results: A total of 100 metaphases were counted from using Illumina MiSeq were performed. the lymphocyte cultures of the patient. There were 68 Results: Molecular karyotyping revealed 46,XX, metaphases with 47,XX,+18; 27 metaphases with 45,X; arr13q14.11 microduplication (440 Kb) with paternal and 5 metaphases with 46,XX karyotype. FISH analysis origin, considered to be benign variant, based on the wasconfirmedtheresult.Thefibroblastculturerevealed21 normal phenotype of the father and reports in healthy metaphases with trisomy 18 and 51 metaphases with controls. NGS detected heterozygous variants in several monosomy X without normal metaphases. genes, but only 4 (WNT10A, ANO5, KCNE2, POLG) were Conclusions:Althoughthepatientshowedahighlevelof classified as “pathogenic” or “likely pathogenic” with trisomy 18 cell group in the lymphocyte culture, she had possible autosomal dominant expression. However, none more similar Turner phenotype rather than trisomy 18 of these gene variants could fully explain the phenotype of phenotype. There is no correlation between the trisomy 18 thechildandthenextstepintheinterpretationoftheresults ratioinlymphocyteorfibroblastcultureandthephenotype, will be sequencing of the parents for seeking these ascanbeseeninthis caseandinother definedcases inthe mutations. literature. Conclusions: Reaching an accurate genetic diagnosis in M.H. Demirbas: None. E. Habiloglu: None. M.A. childrenwithmultiplecongenitalabnormalities/intellectual Ergun: None. E.F. Percin: None. M. Yirmibes- disability syndromes is still a great challenge. In many Karaoguz: None. cases, a detailed family history and genetic evaluation of additional family members is essential in determining the E-P11.57 significance of genetic variants identified in the patient. A variant outside the catalytic domain of SMARCA2 is M. Stoyanova: None. T. Todorov: None. T. Cherven- associated with a phenotype distinct from Nicolaides- kov: None. R. Vazharova: None. M. Ӧzen: None. M. Baraitser syndrome Levkova:None.I.Jordanova:None.L.Angelova:None. G.Cappuccio1, A.Torella2,M.Pinelli1,V. Nigro2,T. E-P11.56 Consortium2,R. Hennekam3,N.Brunetti-Pierri1 A mosaic double aneuploidy: mos 45,X/47,XX,+18/46,XX with mild phenotype 1Federico II Univeristy, Naples, Italy, 2Tigem, Pozzuoli, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, Netherlands M.H.Demirbas1,E.Habiloglu1,2,M.A.Ergun1,E.F.Percin1, M.Yirmibes-Karaoguz1 Introduction: Mutations in SMARCA2 gene encoding a chromatin remodeling gene are responsible for Nicolaides- 1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital, Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) presenting with intellectual Ankara, Turkey, 2Medical Genetics Department, Duzce disability (ID), seizures, short stature, and a recognizable University Faculty of Medicine, Duzce, Turkey pattern of facial dysmorphic features. The majority of NCBRS causative SMARCA2 mutations affect the ATPase Introduction: Mosaic trisomy 18 and monosomy X con- domain (exon 15- 25). To date, SMARCA2 variants outside cordance is a very rare genetic phenomenon. There is a the ATPase domain have been identified by whole exome smallnumberofcasesintheliterature.Here,wepresentan sequencing (WES) in two individuals lacking the typical 18-year-old girl with mild phenotype. NCBRS facial features. Clinical Report: An 18-year-old female patient Patient and Methods: Here, we report a 6-year-old followed-up to the psychiatric department due to anxiety individual harboring a de novo variant detected by WES in disorder and nocturnal enuresis. She had no mental the SMARCA2 gene not affecting the catalytic domain (p. retardation but her school performance was low. She had Leu529Val; exon 9). This individual presented with frontal short stature, hypotelorism, trident posterior hairline, bossing,short palpebral fissures, downturned nasal tip with cubitus valgus, atrial septal defect and irregular menses hypoplastic alae nasi, thin upper lip, moderate ID and with normal uterine and ovarian morphology. Her gonado- Arnold-Chiari type 1 malformation. tropinandsexhormonelevelswaswithinthenormalrange. Results and conclusions: The facial features were not Materials/Methods: Karyotype analysis was performed consistent with NCBRS dysmorphic features. Although from two separate lymphocyte cultures from the peripheral further cases need to be investigated, the individual hereinAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 997 described suggest that SMARCA2 mutations falling outside E-P11.59 the catalytic domain might result in a phenotype that is De novo 15q26.2-q26.3 deletion in a patient with oculo- distinct from NCBRS. auriculo-vertebral spectrum G. Cappuccio: None. A. Torella: None. M. Pinelli: None. V. Nigro: None. T. Consortium: None. R. F.Piceci-Sparascio1,H.Hozhabri1,D.Melis2,P.Strisciuglio2,A. Hennekam: None. N. Brunetti-Pierri: None. Capalbo3,B. Torres3,L. Bernardini3,A. DeLuca1,V. Guida1 E-P11.58 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza 17q22 microdeletion detected by array-CGH leading to Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2U.O.C. di NOG-related symphalangism spectrum disorder (NOG- GeneticaClinicaPediatricaDipartimentodiPediatriaAzienda SSD) Ospedaliera Universitaria "Federico II",, Naples, Italy, 3Cytogenetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, E. Atlı,H.Gürkan,E. I.Atli, Y. Özen, D.Eker, C. Akurut,S. IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy Demir, H.Tozkır Normal 0 14 false false false IT JA X-NONE /* Style Trakya University, Edirne, Turkey Definitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- Tabella normale"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle- 17q22 microdeletions involving the NOG gene have been colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-prior- reported to cause the NOG-related symphalangism spec- ity:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in trum disorder (NOG-SSD). NOG-SSD is mainly char- 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bot- acterized by symphalangism and the ankylosis of the joints tom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font- infingersortoes.Otherfindingsreportedintheliteraturein size:12.0pt; font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family: relation to 17q22 microdeletion are microcephaly, urogen- Cambria; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi- ital anomalies (absence of uterus / vagina, cryptorchidism, font-family:Cambria; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;} penile chordee, duplex renal system, small penis), mild/ Oculoauriculovertebralspectrum(OAVS,MIM164210)is moderate intellectual impairment, speech stress, cervical a rare disease due to an altered development of the deri- and/or other vertebral fusion/defects and hypogonadotropic vativesof the first and second branchial arch. We observed hypogonadism. a five-year-old patient with growth retardation, hemi- A thirteen years old male referred us because of speech mandibular and maxillary hypoplasia, microretrognathia, delay and short fifth finger. Her parents were nonconsan- preauricular pits, corneal lipodermoid, cataract, vertebral guineous and healthy. He had dysmorphic features includ- anomalies and congenital heart defects. Simple and com- ing bilateral ptosis, epicanthus, deep-set small eye, plicated dental caries and mild developmental delay were pollybeak deformity, low-set ears, high narrow palate, alsopresent.ThyroidprofileandhormonalanalysisofIGF1 shortened philtrum, micrognathia, arachnodactyly, long gene were in normal ranges, like analysis of bone age data neck, bilateral shortening of the 5th middle phalanx of the which corresponded to chronological age. Research of handandbilateralsyndactylyoftoes2-3,pectuscarinatum, microdeletions and microduplications through SNP-array and dorsal hypopigmentation, hyperopia. The patient was analysis (Cytoscan HD array) identified two different operated for undescended testis at the age of five. There is genomicrearrangements:adenovodeletionofabout5Mb onlyoneseizurehistoryoccuredattheageof13.G-banding on chromosome 15q26.2-q26.3 and a maternally trans- karyotype using peripheral blood was normal. Array CGH mitteddeletionof120Kbonchromosome9p22.1.Terminal analysis was performed on Agilent 4x180K CNV+SNP deletion of long arm of chromosome 15 are a rare cause of oligo-arraybymanufacturer’sprotocol.3977kbsizedcopy shorth stature (prenatal and postnatal growth retardation), number deletion arr[hg19] 17q22 (51,848,499-55,825,448) and are associated to microcephaly, skeletal anomalies, x1 was identified in our patient. facial and auricular dismorphic features. The same chro- To our knowledge, 17q22 microdeletions involving the mosomalregionhasbeenpreviouslyinvolvedinOAVSby NOGgenehasbeenreportedextremelyrarepreviously.The linkage analysis in a three-generation family. This study Array-CGH result of our patient 17q22 microdeletion reports the association between deletion of chromosome contributed to the genotype-phenotype correlations asso- 15q26.2-q26.3 and OAVS, adds further genetic hetero- ciated with this chromosomal aberration. geneity to this condition, suggests the presence of one or E. Atlı: None. H. Gürkan: None. E.I. Atli: None. Y. more candidate gene/s in this region, confirming the Özen:None.D.Eker:None.C.Akurut:None.S.Demir: importance of array-based studies in patients with OAVS. None. H. Tozkır: None. <!--EndFragment-->998 J.delPicchia F. Piceci-Sparascio: None. H. Hozhabri: None. D. Table (continued) Melis:None.P.Strisciuglio:None.A.Capalbo:None.B. Family/patient A/** A/I.1 A/II.2 A/II.3 A/II.4 A/II.6 B/II.1 Torres: None. L. Bernardini: None. A. De Luca: None. Not V. Guida: None. analyzed CNVtype,size NA Del, NA Del,2.15Mb,Del,2.15Mb, Del,2.15Mb, 57166523- andbreakpoints 2.15Mb, 55386907- 55386907- 55386907- 57537913 55386907- 57537913 57537913 57537913 E-P11.60 57537913 14q22 Copy Number Variations encompassing OTX2, new Gender M M M M M F F Prenatal NO NO Agnatia NO NO Ventriculomegaly Smallfor cases widening the phenotype findings gestationalage Ageat NR 32yr 21w* 28w* 10yr 11m 12yr lastassessment F. Blanco-Kelly, H.Stewart, D.Shears Strucutraleye NO NO NO NO NO Microphthalmia, NO anomalies iriscolobomaBE Opticnerve NR NR NR NR NR Nistagmusunder NR defects investigation OxGeM (Oxfor Centre for Genomic Medicine), Oxford Retinal NR MaculopathyNR NR NR Nistagmusunder NR University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United dystrophy investig Pituitary NR NR NO NO pitutarymass NO Hypoplasia Kingdom strucutral anomalies GHdeficit YES NR(normal NA NA NormalgrowthshortstatureunderYES stature) investigation Introduction: OTX2 (14q22.3) is key in craniofacial and Otherpituitary NR NR NA NA NR NR Hypotiroidism sensoryorgandevelopment.14q22.3Copynumbervariants hormone deficiencies (CNV)affectingOTX2havebeenidentifiedinpatientswith Brain NR NR NO NO NR Ventriculomegaly, NO malformation cerebellar a great variety of phenotypes, from autosomal dominant hypoplasia,small corpuscallosum retinal dystrophy to the otocephaly-dysgnathia-complex Neurodevelop- Learning Normal NA NA Autismand Normal Normal (ODC) and hemifacial microsomia (HM), being the most ment difficuleties l de ia ffirn ci un lg ties frequent phenotype severe eye defects (microphthalmia/ ODC NR Micrognatia Agnatia, Micrognatia, Micrognatia NR Micrognatia microstomia, microstomia, anophthalmia);withorwithoutcerebralmalformationsand/ caudally smalltongue positionedears, or pituitary abnormalities with inter and intra-familial absenceof external variability and incomplete penetrance. auditorycanal We present the phenotypic findings of a 3 generation F asa yc mia ml etry NR NO NO J aa sw ymmetry NR NO NO familydisplayingalltheOTX2associatedphenotypes,anda Velopharyngeal NR NR NO NO NR Laryngomalacia NR anomalies case presenting neuroblastoma. Microcephaly NR NO NO NO NR NO NO Digitanomalies NR NO NO NO fixedposition NO NO PatientsandMethods:Comparativegenomichybridiza- of5thfinger tion (aCGH), Agilent1 60K Human array (ISCA design). Kidney NR NR NO NO NR NR NR anomalies Revealed in the Agilent G2565BA microarray scanner HeartanomaliesNR NR NO NO NR NR NR (Plateforma G_enomique, Nantes) and analyzed by Agilent Genital NR NO NO NO NR NO NO anomalies Cytogenomics 3.0 software. Genomic position: UCSC Hearingloss NR NO NA NA NR NO NO Dysmorphism NR NO YES YES NR NO highforehead Genome Browser on Human Feb. 2009 (GRCh37 / hg19) Other NR NO NO NO NR NO NEUROBLAS- Assembly43, TOMA Results: Family A: 2.15Mb deletion (14q22.2q22.3) OTX2 being the only pathology associated OMIM gene. FamilyB:370Kbdeletion(14q22.3)affectingexclusively OTX2. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. H. Stewart: None. D. Table 1 and figures 1 and 2 show the cases´ phenotypes. Shears: None. Conclusions: First family case of a 14q22.2q22.3 deletion exhibiting all OTX2 known phenotypes E-P11.62 Neurobasltoma could be an additional OTX2 phenotypic Pre- and postnatal diagnosis of microchromosomal characteristic, and supports the possible involvement of abnormalities in the population of Sverdlovsk Region OTX2 in nasal tumours pathogenesis. (Russian Federation) Phenotypic variability is key in the counselling of these families. S. Deryabina1,2,N.Nikitina1,E. Shamanskaya1, A.Konoplev1, Table 1.Clinical findings on the new described patients O.Lagutina1,M. G.Sumina1 presenting a deletion on 14q22 region 1Medical Center 'Health Care of Mother and Child', Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 2Ural Federal university Family/patient A/** A/I.1 A/II.2 A/II.3 A/II.4 A/II.6 B/II.1 named after the First President of Russia B.N.Yeltsin, 14q 22.2q22.3 Notanalyzed 22.2q22.3 22.2q22.3 22.2q22.3 22.3 Yekaterinburg, Russian FederationAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 999 Introduction: As many of hereditary diseases and syn- E-P11.63 dromes diseases are characterized by territorial and ethnic Clinical assesment importance in an asymmetrical heterogeneityitisveryimportanttochoiceoptimalmethods overgrowth case in the context of New Generation Testing for studying of pathology in particular population. Materials and Methods: We present a genetic examina- F. Nedelea1,I. Iordanescu2,A. Mocanu2,T. Huseyinoglu1,M. tion of 3359 samples (2012-2017 y.). 2,947 prenatal Bari1,C.Bohaltea2, G.Peltecu1 samples of fetuses (villus chorionic, amniotic cells, cord blood) were analyzed by BACs-on-Beads technology 1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical (PerkinElmer, Finland). 412 samples of whole blood from Hospital Pantelimon, Bucharest, Romania children with clinical signs of chromosomal abnormalities, who were born in the same period were performed by Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) uses Next multiplex ligase amplification of probes (MLPA) (MRC- Generation sequencing technology (NGS) to identify Holland, Netherland). DNA was examined for aneuploidy mutations in all the coding regions of an individuals’ gen- at 13, 18, 21, X, Y chromosomes and 9 microdeletion ome. WES is useful when an individual is presenting syndromes. multiplephenotypicalcharacteristicsthatarenotsuggestive Results: The number of microstructural chromosome foraspecificsyndrome.Wepresentacaseofasix-year-old disturbances was detected more often for children than in boypresentingwithupperlimbasymmetry,hemangiomaof the fetal materials (17.5% vs. 1.5%). the distal phalanx of the index finger on the left hand, hemihypertrophy and extended hemangioma of the left hemithorax.Theabnormalvascularizationpatternoftheleft Syndromes Region Detected Detected prenatal, postnatal, hemithorax was observed in the third trimester of preg- (n=2947) (n=412) nancy.Basedontheclinicalpresentation,oursuspicionwas of Proteus syndrome. DiGeorge 22q11.2/ 5 12 Material and Method: Due to genetic heterogeneity of 10p14 Proteus syndrome, WES was performed for genetic Cri-du-chat 5p15.3- 3 4 confirmation. 15.2 Williams-Buren 7q11.2 1 10 Results: The WES analysis was unable to confirm PraderWilli/Angelman 15q11- - 8 Proteus syndrome or other cause for the child’s phenotype, q12 duetopossiblesomaticmosaicismortechnicallimitationof Wolf-Hirschhorn 4p16.3 - 4 themethod.Noteworthytwoincidentalfindingsresponsible Smith-Magenis 17p11.2 - 2 of long QT syndrome and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Miller-Dieker 17p13.3 - 1 were reported. Pallister-Killian 12p 1 Conclusion: A very important issue in communicating Microdeletion/microduplication 35 31 WES results are incidental findings. They represent notassociatedwithknown mutations discovered by WES that can be associated with syndromes diseaseswhichcanaffecttheindividualthroughouthislife. Total(%) 45(1,5) 72(17,5) Inourcase,althoughthetestdidn’tidentifyageneticcause for the patient’s phenotype, the incidental findings suggest that cardiological monitoring could be life-saving. Also Conclusions: The existing criteria for selection of familial genetic testing of above mentioned mutations is pregnant women for prenatal diagnosis (the combination adviced. of anamnestic, biochemical and ultrasound data) are Acknowledgements: The probe was analised at Cento- ineffective for diagnosing of micro anomalies of chromo- gene Laboratory. somes. The MLPA or BoBs technologies are a reliable F. Nedelea: None. I. Iordanescu: None. A. Mocanu: methodofsearchingformicrochromosomalrearrangements None. T. Huseyinoglu: None. M. Bari: None. C. for the diagnosis of genetic syndromes for patients need Bohaltea: None. G. Peltecu: None. medical genetic counseling. S. Deryabina: None. N. Nikitina: None. E. Shamans- E-P11.64 kaya: None. A. Konoplev: None. O. Lagutina: None. M. Unexpected phenotype in a frameshift mutation of PTCH1 G. Sumina: None. B.Beltrami1,G.Tolva1,E.Prada1,G.Scuvera1,R.Silipigni2,D. Graziani3,G.Bulfamante3, P.Marchisio1,D.Milani11000 J.delPicchia 1Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of RASopathies are group of autosomal dominant disorders Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi that are phenotypically similar. They are caused mostly by di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of mutations in the RAS/MAP kinase signaling pathway. Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca´ Granda, Ospedale Accordingtotheclinicalpresentationandspecificmutation, Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Human they are distributed in several subgroups. Phenotypic Pathology, Cytogenetic and Molecular Pathology, ASST Santi changes include facial dysmorphism, short stature, cardiac Paolo e Carlo, Milan, Italy defects, haematological disturbances and variable neu- ropsychiatricproblems.ThemutationsinPTPN11 geneare Gorlinsyndrome,alsoknownasBasalcellnevussyndrome most commonly presented, followed by mutations in other (BCNS #109400), is a rare autosomal dominant genetic genes - KRAS, HRAS. SOS1, etc. We present ten patients disorder. The penetrance of BCNS is complete and the with clinical phenotype of Noonan syndrome. Phenotypic expressivity is variable. The most characteristic clinical presentation is consistant with the diagnosis and include manifestation is the development of multiple basal cell shortstature,variablecardiacdefects,skinandhairchanges, carcinomas at a young age; other common findings are: genital anomalies in some. Facial changes include hyper- odontogenic keratocysts, calcified falx cerebri, skeletal telorism, antimongoloid eye slanting, long philtrum, dental anomalies, palmoplantar pits, macrocephaly and dys- maloclusion, low set ears, pterigia, etc.Two of the patients morphisms. BCNS is mainly caused by mutations in hadhearingimpairment.Molecularanalysiswasperformed PTCH1 gene, the “protein patched homolog” gene: an by the NGS method including genes: NRAS, ROT1, onco-suppressor gene that maps at 9q22.32 region. Other SCHOC2, HRAS, CBL, KRAS, PTPN11, SPRED1, genesthatcanbeinvolvedinthediseaseareSUFUandless MAP2K1,NF1andMAP2K2.In60%ofevaluatedpatients commonly PTCH2. Those genes participate in the “sonic mutationsinPTPN11,RAF1andKRASgeneswerefound. hedgehog” (SHH) signaling pathway. A disease related to Infour patients with typical NSfeatures nomutationswere BCNS is the 9q22.3 microdeletion syndrome. This syn- found so far. Intelectual disability varies in all patients, drome has an overlapping clinical phenotype with the ranging from minor to profound. Our findings indicate that BCNS, but it can also present other possible findings in mutationdistributioninRASopathiesaresimilartothosein addition: metopic craniosynostosis, pre and post-natal other studies. Further molecular evaluation is needed in overgrowth, obstructive hydrocephalus, developmental order to reveal all mutations in patients with NS. Although delay, intellectual disability and seizures. This condition is similar in clinical presentation, patients with RASopathy caused by the deletion of a genome region containing the syndromes reveal some distinctive phenotype features that PTCH1andtheFANCCgenes.Herewereportthecaseofa can direct the diagnostic procedure. 11 years old girl that came to our attention for overgrowth, E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M. Kocova: None. R. dysmorphic features of the face and craniosynostosis, but Kacarska: None. B. Lee: None. with a normal intellectual and motor development. We present this case because it is the first one with a PTCH1 E-P11.66 mutation (p.Val502Glyfs*13) and a 9q22.3 microdeletion Complex constitutive rearrangement involving syndrome phenotype. This finding may strengthen the chromosome 15 in a girl with postnatal growth and importance of the role of the PTCH1 gene especially developmental delay regarding the metopic craniosynostosis. B.Beltrami:None.G.Tolva:None.E.Prada:None.G. L.B.Minasi1,I.P.Pinto1,R.M.Pinto1,2,J.F.daSilva1,D.M. Scuvera:None.R.Silipigni:None.D.Graziani:None.G. Cunha1,C. L.Ribeiro1,C. C. daSilva1,3,A. D.daCruz1,3 Bulfamante:None.P.Marchisio:None.D.Milani:None. 1PontificalCatholicUniversityofGoiás,SchoolofAgricultural E-P11.65 andBiologicalSciences,GeneticsMaster’sProgram,Replicon Phenotype characterization in patients with Noonan Research Group, Goiânia, Brazil, 2Federal University of syndrome Goias,HealthSciencePhDProgram,Goiânia,Brazil,3Human CytogeneticsandMolecularGeneticsLaboratory,Secretaryof E. Sukarova-Angelovska1,M. Kocova1,R. Kacarska1,B. Lee2 Goias State for Public Health, Goiânia, Brazil 1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Introduction: Rearrangements affecting chromosome 15 Republicof,2MedicalGeneticsCenter,Seoul,Korea,Republic are rare and affected patients show a variety of nonspecific of features, including complex congenital malformations, growth deficiency, and developmental delay.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1001 Material and Methods: Here, we reported a 2 years old GenomicHybridizationandpresentingashortstatureand girl with postnatal growth delay, short stature, brachydac- hypospadias, without dysmorphic features or any psycho- tyly, triangular face, and facial dysmorphisms with motor developmental delay. Molecular investigations prominent forehead, hypertelorism, bulbous nasal tip, long showed that ring X chromosome in this patient presents a philtrum, thin upper lip, and micrognathism. Physical terminal deletion of 923 Kb including SHOX gene and examination revealed height of 71 cm (<4rd) and weight totally located on the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of7000g(<3rd).G-bandinganalysisatabandresolutionof and an inverted duplication of 2.3 Mb proximal to STS >550 was performed, followed by FISH using probes gene.Thenon-lossofXchromosomematerialoutsidethe 15q11-13 (SNRPN) for Prader-Willi/Angelman and PARregionexplainthecompatibilitywithsurvivalinour 15q26.3 for internal control. casebecausetheabsenceoffunctionalnullisomy.Lossof Results: The karyotype showed a constitutive chromo- SHOX gene is presumably common with the two pre- somal aberration, 46,XX,r(15)[64]/46,XX,r(15)dup(15) viously reported cases and is the cause of short stature. [16]/47,XX,+r(15)[5]. FISH analysis confirmed the karyo- However, hypospadias was not reported in the previous typeresultsandshowedtwomoredifferentcelllines46,XX reported cases and may be due to the associated dupli- [9]/45,XX,-15[6]. In r(15) was detected the absence of the cation outside PAR1 region and including particularly 15q26.3 signal resulting in a genetic material loss, region PRKX gene coding for a protein involved in urogenital that harboring IGF1R gene responsible for biological system morphogenesis. activity of IGF1. K. Al Fayez: None. H. Elghezal: None. A. Almazyad: Conclusions:Ringchromosomeresultsfrombreakagein None. M. Alshedoukhy: None. S. Al Ghamdi: None. A. both arms of a chromosome, with fusion of the points of Al Jasser: None. M. Al amro: None. fracture and loss of the distal fragments. In this context, a ring induces chromosomal instability, which in turn E-P11.68 generates a diversity of cell lines harboring different Variant in RNF113A gene, links neurodevelopmental chromosome configurations. In the case described here, pathway and dna repair pathways to severe congenital we hypothesized that a 46,XX zygote acquired a r(15) malformations leadingtotheinstabilitysubjacenttotheothercelllinesthat had ring duplication, monosomy 15, trisomy 15, which M.Tessarech1,M.Gorce1,F.Boussion1,S. Triau1,S.Khiati1,2, included r(15), most likely due to different approaches to M.Charif1,2,A. Guichet1,2, A.Ziegler1,2,C. Fallet-Bianco3, H. restorebalancedgenomeinthecells,suchastrisomyrescue Salhi4,D.Bonneau1,2,E. Colin1,2 and UPD. L.B.Minasi:None.I.P.Pinto:None.R.M.Pinto:None. 1CHUd'Angers,Angers,France,2UMRCNRS6015,INSERM J.F. da Silva: None. D.M. Cunha: None. C.L. Ribeiro: U1083, Angers, France, 3CH de Saint Anne, Paris, France, None. C.C. da Silva: None. A.D. da Cruz: None. 4APHP - Cochin Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France E-P11.67 RNF113Aisanintronlessgenethatencodesaproteinwitha Ring X chromosome In a male with short stature and Ring type Zinc finger domain that seems to be involved in hypospadias DNA repair pathway. So far, RNF113A has only been implicated in one family with intellectual disability and K. Al Fayez, H.Elghezal, A.Almazyad, M.Alshedoukhy, S. Al trichothiodystrophy (TTD), which is a group of rare auto- Ghamdi, A. Al Jasser,M.Al amro somal recessive disorders that variably affect a wide range of organs derived from the neuroectoderm. In this report, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia we describe two related fetuses with a phenotype with dysmorphic features, microcephaly, callosal and cerebellar Ring X is a rare chromosomal anomaly mainly seen in malformations, absent testis and micropenis. WES was females with turner syndrome. In males it is extremely performedononeofthefetusesandbothparents,andledto rare because nullisomy for X chromosome material is not the identification of a nonsense variant in the highly con- compatible with survival and induce an early abortion. served RNF113A gene (c.901 C>T, p.Q301*). Sanger Only two cases of male with ring chromosome X and sequencing analysis confirmed the variant was present in presenting a short stature as the only phenotypic both fetuses and inherited from the mother.Our report pro- abnormality (Ogata et al. 1990 and Ellison et al. 2002) vides two new cases with a RNF113A variant. This fur- were previously reported. We report here a new case of a nishes more consistent evidence of a role of RNF113A in twoyearsoldmalewithringchromosomeXcharacterized neurodevelopment with functional studies that suggest a using Karyotype, FISH and 180K array Comparative role in DNA repair pathway.1002 J.delPicchia M. Tessarech: None. M. Gorce: None. F. Boussion: MGZ, Munich, Germany None.S.Triau:None.S.Khiati:None.M.Charif:None. A. Guichet: None. A. Ziegler: None. C. Fallet-Bianco: Introduction: Roifman Syndrome (RFMN; OMIM None. H. Salhi: None. D. Bonneau: None. E. Colin: F. #616651) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease char- Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;novartispharmaSAS. acterized by growth retardation, humoral immunodefi- ciency, intellectual deficit, distinctive facial features and in E-P11.69 some individuals retinal dystrophy. This syndrome is Two novel ROR2 mutations in Robinow syndrome caused by compound heterozygosity in the gene RNU4A- TAC, coding for the snRNA U4atac, which is an essential E. Kırat1,H.Mutlu Albayrak2, K.Karaer1 component for minor intron splicing. Material and Methods: Here we describe a female five 1Dr.ErsinArslanResearchandTrainingHospital,Gaziantep, year old patient presenting with growth retardation, Turkey, 2Cengiz Gokcek State Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey recurrent infections, organ anomalies and developmental delay. The patient´s DNA was tested before by microarray Introduction: Robinow syndrome is a genetically hetero- analysis. No causative results could be detected. Due to geneousskeletaldysplasia,isduetomutationsintheROR2 genetic heterogeneity a trio analysis was performed on (MIM: 268310), WNT5A (MIM: 180700), DVL1 (MIM: clinicalexomesequencingusingtheIlluminaTruSightOne 616331) and DVL3 (MIM: 616894) genes. ROR2 muta- sequencing panel. The focus of our analysis lay on genes tions exhibit autosomal recessive inheritance pattern associated with multiple congenital anomalies and / or whereas WNT5A, DVL1, DVL3 mutations segregate as developmental delay. autosomal dominant trait. Robinow syndrome is character- Results and Conclusions: Compound heterozygosity of ized by skeletal abnormalities encompass mesomelic or two SNVs could be detected in the gene RNU4ATAC. The acromesomelic limb shortening, brachydactyly, distinctive paternally inherited substitution n.13C>T in the stem II facial features and genital hypoplasia. region had been described previously, while the maternally MaterialsandMethods: Wediagnosed threecases (two inherited substitution n.116A>C affecting a highly con- of whom siblings) of Robinow syndrome with typical served nucleotide in RNU4ATAC had not been described clinical features.Allcodingexonsandtheflankingintronic before. We propose that these variants are the likely cause regionsoftheROR2geneamplifiedbyPCRandperformed of the patient’s phenotype, thereby extending the spectrum bidirectionaldirectsequencing.Variationsweredetectedby of pathogenic variants in RNU4ATAC. comparing the reference sequences and interpreted by in 1 silico predictive programs. J. Graf: None. A. Hallermayr: None. A. Laner: None. Results: Two novel mutations [(c.1386+1G>A), B. Schönfeld: None. A. Benet-Pagès: None. E. Holinski- (c.784_785insCGAGGTGCTGGAGAGCG, p. Feder: None. D262Afs*189)] were identified in ROR2 gene. The first mutation (c.1386+1G>A) is located in the spice donor site E-P11.71 of the intron 8 that affects the protein structure by damage Three Cases of Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome with Novel de splicing. The other mutation is occurred in exon 6 by Novo cAMP binding protein-BP (CREBBP) Mutations inserted 17 base that lead to disrupt the amino acid sequence. In silico analysis predicted both of the novel A. Bakır1, B.Çavdarlı2,V. Topçu2 mutations to be pathogenic. Conclusions: This study revealed the first ROR2 gene 1Zekai Tahir Burak Education and Research Hospital, splice-site mutation and expanded the database for ROR2 ANKARA, Turkey, 2Ankara Numune Education and Research mutations in patients with Robinow syndrome. Hospital, ANKARA, Turkey E. Kırat: None. H. Mutlu Albayrak: None. K. Karaer: None. Introduction: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; OMIM #180849) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic condition E-P11.70 with a prevalence of 1 in 125,000-720,000. RSTS is char- Extending the critical regions for mutations in the acterized by broad thumbs and halluces, facial dysmorph- noncoding gene RNU4ATAC in another patient with ism, short stature and a variable degree of intellectual Roifman syndrom disability. Pathogenic variants in CREBBP and EP300 genes cause RSTS in 50-60% and 5-8% of cases, respec- J.Graf,A.Hallermayr,A.Laner,B.Schönfeld,A.Benet-Pagès, tively.Themajorityofthecasesoccurasaresultofdenovo E. Holinski-Feder heterozygous mutations.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1003 Materials and Methods: We suspected RSTS based on describedpatientscarryingduplicationat15q25.2presented particular clinical findings and dysmorphic features of the some clinical features resembling those observed in our patients. Patient DNA samples were extracted from the patient such as anomalies of the foot digits, hypertension, peripheral blood, followed by CREBBP whole gene and short neck. In conclusion, the complex phenotype of sequencing. our patient is likely to represent the result of a never Results: Inone patienttwo novel heterozygous missense described co-occurrence of unbalances in the SHOX region variants were detected: c. 5034C>G and c.5047C>T. In and on 15q25.2. othertwopatients,wefoundnovelheterozygousframeshift D.Babu:None.A.Fanelli:None.A.Monzani:None.S. mutations:c.3250_3250+3delAGTAandc.4599-4599delT, Mellone: None. G. Stress: None. G. Genoni: None. S. respectively. In silico analysespredicted these mutationsas Bellone: None. F. Prodam: None. M. Giordano: None. deleterious/disease-causing alterations. Parental mutation analysesofpatientswerenormalandconfirmedthedenovo E-P11.73 occurrence of the variants. IGF2 mutation causing Silver-Russell syndrome in an Conclusions: We have identified four novel CREBBP Aboriginal Australian girl variants in three patients demonstrating clinical features of RSTS. C.J.Poulton1,D.Azmanov2,L.Ewans3,D.Gration4,L.Dreyer4, A. Bakır: None. B. Çavdarlı: None. V. Topçu: None. S. Broley4, G.Baynam4 E-P11.72 1Department of Paediatrics, Perth, Australia, 2Department of Co-occurrence of SHOX region (Xp22.3) rearrangements Diagnostic Genomics, Perth, Australia, 3Genome one, Perth, and15q25.2duplicationinagirlwithshortstature,genital Australia, 4Genetics Services of Western Australia, Perth, defects and bone anomalies Australia D.Babu1,A. Fanelli1,A. Monzani2, S.Mellone1,G.Stress1, G. Introduction: Silver-Russell Syndrome (SRS OMIM Genoni2,S.Bellone2, F.Prodam2,M. Giordano1 180860) is a rare disorder characterised by severe intrau- terine and postnatal growth retardation with additional 1HumanGeneticsLaboratory,DepartmentofHealthSciences, clinical criteria. It remains a clinical diagnosis with a University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, 2Division of molecular cause identifiable in 60-70%. We present a 4- Pediatrics, Department of Health Sciences, University of year-old Aboriginal Australian girl with an SRS phenotype Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy who was extensively investigated prior to referral to our Undiagnosed disease program through which IGF2 was The presence of multiple genomic unbalances in the same investigated as candidate gene based on clinical inter- patients co-operate to cause complex phenotypes. Here we disciplinary panel assessment. describea9-yearoldgirl,diagnosedwithshortstaturewith MaterialsandMethods:Triowholegenomesequencing growth hormone deficiency and precocious puberty. She was performed by Genome.One on extracted DNA on the hadagenesisofrighttibiaandfibula,asupernumerarydigit Illumina HiSeq X instruments using a TruSeq Nano DNA of the left foot, dorsal scoliosis, short neck, upturned nose, Library Preparation kit. Trusight One sequencing was hypotelorismandarterialhypertension.MRIshoweduterus applied simultaneously. cDNA sequencing was performed didelphys with double vagina. An array CGH analysis to investigate variant function detected thereby. revealed the presence of two distinct duplications flanking Results: Simultaneously, both platforms identified a the SHOX gene within the PAR1 region (Xp22.3) and an heterozygous intronic substitution c.157+3A>C. This was additional duplication of 1.6-2.5 Mb at 15q25.2. The absent from in-house and population databasesand Alamut duplicated region on 15q25.2 contains 13 genes, some of predictedsplicesiteabolition.Sangersequencingconfirmed themhavebeenassociatedtowelldefineddisordersbutnot de novo status, cDNA studies show skipping of the exon includedintheclinicalfeaturesobservedinourpatient.The containing the initiation codon. Cumulatively, studies parents were not available to establish the origin of the confirmed the variant was on the paternal allele and duplications. The extreme short stature of the girl might be pathogenic. the result of the co-occurrence of growth hormone defi- Conclusion: We identified a novel IGF2 splice site ciency and the rearrangements in the SHOX region. Mole- variant causing a SRS phenotype in an Australian cular defects of SHOX and/or its regulatory region explain Aboriginal girl. We compare and contrast clinical findings 60-80% of cases with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 7- withreportedpatientstoincreasetheIGF2knowledgebase, 15%ofcaseswithidiopathicshortstatureandareassociated including noting the frequency of cardiac, neurodevelop- tohypoplasia/aplasiaoftheulnaandfibula.Fewpreviously mental and limb phenotypes across different ethnic groups;1004 J.delPicchia and to promote engagement of other Australian Aboriginal Department of Health of the Basque Government families in genomic medicine. (GV2017/111040). C.J. Poulton: None. D. Azmanov: None. L. Ewans: J. Errea-Dorronsoro: None. Y. Vado: None. I. Llano: None. D. Gration: None. L. Dreyer: None. S. Broley: None. N. Gorria: None. A. Pereda: None. B. Gener: None. G. Baynam: None. None. G. Perez de Nanclares: None. E-P11.74 E-P11.75 Cri-du-chat syndrome mimics Silver-Russell syndrome Duplication of 15q24.1q26.2 and terminal deletion of depending on the size of the deletion 15q26.2q26.3 in a female child with severe growth impairment J.Errea-Dorronsoro1,Y. Vado1,I. Llano2,N.Gorria3,A. Pereda1, B.Gener2,G.PerezdeNanclares1 H.Numabe1,2,Y. Morishima1,N.Inagaki1, M.Wakai1,Y. Kanbara2,C. Takeuchi2,H.Kawashima1,T. Kunikata3 1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Service of Genetics, 1ClinicalGeneticsCentre,TokyoMedicalUniversityHospital, BioCruces National Health Institute, Barakaldo, Spain, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, 2Tokyo Metropolitan Kita Medical 3Service of Paediatric Neurology, BioAraba National Health and Rehabilitation Center for the Disabled, Kita, Tokyo, Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain Japan, 3Center for Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Iruma, Saitama, Japan Introduction: Silver-Russell Syndrome (SRS) is a rare growth-related genetic disorder in which patients show The patient was the first child of unrelated 27-year-old intrauterine (IUGR) and postnatal growth retardation parents. Her mother suffered from immunoglobulin A (PNGR), relative macrocephaly at birth, body asymmetry, (IgA) nephropathy but the rest of her family history was facial dysmorphic features and feeding difficulties and/or unremarkable. Pregnancy was complicated by foetal low BMI. Approximately 50% of the clinically diagnosed growth restriction and breech presentation. She was born SRS patients present alterations at 11p15.5, mainly hypo- at 37 weeks and 5 days of gestation by caesarean section. methylation at H19/IGF2:IG-DMR, whereas 10% of them Herbirthweightwas1647g(-3.2SD),lengthwas40.5cm show UPD(7)mat. For the remaining 40% negative SRS (-3.1SD),andheadcircumferencewas30.0cm(-2.1SD). patients, molecular karyotyping is advised. She had facial features characteristic of micrognathia. G- MaterialsandMethods:Wepresenta22monthsoldgirl Banded karyotyping identified interstitial duplication of with clinical suspicion of SRS (IUGR, PNGR, prominent chromosome15qwiththekaryotype46,XX,dup(15)(q22- forehead, triangular face, psychomotor delay, transient 24q26.2). At the age of 4 years and 7 months, the child neonatal hypoglycaemia, mild hypotonia and single umbi- was referred to the Tokyo Metropolitan Kita Medical and licalartery).Shealsopresentedcorpuscallosumhypoplasia, Rehabilitation Center for the Disabled for her develop- mild ventriculomegaly, Arnold-Chiari malformation and mental disability. Her height of 82.1 cm (-5.3 SD) sug- high-pitchedvoice.MethylationandCNVsatchromosomes gested a growth factor deficiency. To identify the precise 11 and 7 were studied by MS-MLPA (MRC Holland, chromosomal breakpoint, we performed single nucleotide ME030-C3 and ME032-A1, respectively). Molecular kar- polymorphism(SNP)arrayanalysisattheTokyoMedical yotyping was performed (aCGH, Agilent 400K). University Hospital. The SNP array identified arr[hg19] Results:AfternoalterationsweredetectedbyMS-MLPA 15q24.1q26.2(73,922,340-98,178,660)×3, 15q26.2q26.3 at the analysed DMRs, the aCGH identified a deletion at (98,179,896-102,429,112)×1.Itrevealedthatnotonlydid 5p15.33p15.2(arr[hg19] 5p15.33p15.2(25,942-11,644,645) she have duplication of 15q24.1q26.2 as previously x1). Deletions at 5p are commonly associated with Cri-du- reported, but also terminal deletion of 15q26.2q26.3. In chat syndrome (CdC). the deleted region 15q26.2q26.3, the insulin-like growth Conclusions: The absence of some CdC features in our factor-1 receptor gene (IGF1R) was involved. This dele- patientcouldbeduetothefactthattheircriticalresponsible tion was thought to be the cause of her severe growth regions are not included within the identified deletion. The impairment. commonclinicalaspectsofCdCandSRS(impairedgrowth, H. Numabe: None. Y. Morishima: None. N. Inagaki: developmental and intellectual delay) alongside the macro- None.M.Wakai:None.Y.Kanbara:None.C.Takeuchi: cephaly and the triangular face, typical of SRS, led to the None. H. Kawashima: None. T. Kunikata: None. initial clinical misinterpretation. Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III, the European Regional Development Fund (PI16/00073) and theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1005 E-P11.76 E-P11.77 SNParray diagnostic yield in children with intellectual A newborn with Sotos syndrome and renal polycystosis disability with and without malformations in a Romanian population G.Pierquin,S. Bulk M.Puiu1,N.Andreescu1,S.Farcas1,A.Mihailescu1,P.Tutac1, Centre of Genetics, CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium D.Micle2,C. Zimbru1,A. Chirita-Emandi1 We report the case of a female newborn with Sotos syn- 1Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and drome and renal polycystosis.Before birth,renal poly- Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2University cystosis was already diagnosed on echographies.At birth, of Medicine and Pharmacy "Iuliu Hatieganu", Cluj-Napoca, she was hypotonic and dysmorphic and she had big diffi- Timisoara, Romania culties to drink.Cardiac echography has shown an aortic stenosis Renal polycystosis was confirmed.CGH-array has Microarrayanalysiscurrentlyrepresentsoneofthefirstline revealedadeletionof1863,4kbintheregion5q35.2-q35.3 genetic assessment tool for patients with intellectual dis- involving the NSD1 gene,hereby confirming Sotos syn- ability, dysmorphic features and/or malformations. drome.The search for mutation in PKD1,PKD2,ARPKD Aim:WeevaluatedthediagnosticyieldofSNParrayina andinapanelofgenesforrenalpolycystosiswasnegative. Romanian population with this phenotype spectrum. We will discuss the possibility of implications of other Method: We used HumanCyto SNP BeadChip Kit genes deleted and the particular characteristics of Sotos (Ilumina). Data analysis was performed using DECIPHER syndrome in a newborn with renal polycystosis. (Wellcome Sanger Institute) and UCSC Genome Browser G. Pierquin: None. S. Bulk: None. (University of California). Results: The cohort included 78 paediatric patients (39 E-P11.78 females; 6+/-5,6 years) presenting intellectual disability As a rare case of chromosomal anomaly, 49, XXXXY with or without cranio-facial dysmorphism, malformations syndrome or developmental. In some cases, karyotyping and fluor- escent in situ hybridization were used to identify chromo- F. Duymus,B. E.Cavdartepe, N.Yasa,N.Kocak somalrearrangements.Apathogeniccopynumbervariation was identified in 24,3%(19/78) of cases (microdeletion or Selcuk University Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey microduplication syndromes) and 11.5% had possibly pathogenic or uncertain variants. The pathogenic copy 49, XXXXY syndrome is characterized by the presence of number variants included 15 microdeletions (chromosomes threeextraXchromosomes,andthissyndromeisdescribed 1,3,11,12,15,17,18 and X) and 4 microduplications (chro- as the rarest sex chromosomal aneuploidy syndrome. mosomes 15,13,16). The patogenic variants confirmed the Classical findings include mental retardation, hypogonad- syndromic phenotypes. For uncertain variants (all duplica- ism, and radioulnar synostosis. There are a limited number tionschromosomes1,5,21),parentalSNPmicroarraytesting ofcasesreportedintheliterature.Itissometimesreferredto had been used to elucidate inheritance. Average size of as a variant of Klinefelter syndrome, but differs from Kli- deletion was 12,6Mb(range 1,1-40Mb).Uncertain variants nefeltersyndromeinmanywaysandismoresevere.Severe had size range between 1-5,4Mb. CONCLUSSION The varying degrees of learning difficulty and mental rotation diagnosticyieldinourcohortwasrelativelygood,however are encountered; Some patients have deteriorated with age. it included cases that were already diagnosed using The patient was referred to our polyclinic with dyslexia, karyotype and SNParray provided additional accuracy speech delayed, micropenis, microorchidism, atypical face regarding size and genes involved in the copy number appearance,hypertelorism,broadnasalroot,shortphiltrum, variant. Nonetheless, a good clinical selection is crucial for radioulnarstenosis.Thepatient'smotherandfatherwerenot efficiencyofgenetictesting.Unsolvedcasesrequirefurther relatives. There is no evidence in the patient's family his- molecular testing. tory. Chromosome analysis was applied to the patient and Funding: Development of Existing Infrastructure and hisparents.Becausethepatient'skaryotypewasdetermined Creation of New Infrastructure POSCCE-A2-O2.2.1-2013- as49,XXXXY,thepatient'sfindingswereidentifiedas49, 1, Center of Genomic Medicine of the University of XXXXYsyndrome.parents'karyotyperesultswerenormal. Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Victor Babes’ Timisoara. Our case was carrying the cardinal clinical findings of the M. Puiu: None. N. Andreescu: None. S. Farcas: None. 49, XXXY syndrome, which had beenpreviously reported. A.Mihailescu:None.P.Tutac:None.D.Micle:None.C. Inourpatient,mentalretardationhasbeenshowntoworsen Zimbru: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. with age, as seen in some patients with this syndrome.1006 J.delPicchia F. Duymus: None. B.E. Cavdartepe: None. N. Yasa: I.Resmerita1,S. Cozma2,R. Popescu1,M.Panzaru1,L. None. N. Kocak: None. Butnariu1, C.Rusu1 E-P11.79 1UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy„GrigoreT.Popa”Iasi The multiple faces of TMEM231 - Medical Genetics Department, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Grigore T. Popa” Iasi - ENT E. Chervinsky1, S.Shalev1,2,R. Spiegel3,2,T. Ben-Josef2 Department, Iasi, Romania 1The Genetic Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, TreacherCollinssyndromeisararedisorderofcraniofacial 2Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, development that affects first and second branchial arches. 3PediatricDepartmentB’,EmekMedicalCenter,Afula,Israel The estimated incidence is 1/50,000 live births. Mutations in TCOF1(5q32) (78%-93%) and POLR1C or POLR1D PathogenicvariantsintheTMEM231gene(OMIM614949) (8%) cause the disease. 40%-50% of individuals have have been reported to cause a spectrum of phenotypes, conductive hearing loss attributed to malformation of the including Joubert syndrome, Meckel-Gruber syndrome and ossicles and hypoplasia of the middle ear cavities. We Oro-facial-digital3syndrome.Weevaluatedthreesibsfrom describe 4 patients to discuss the frequency of clinical a consanguineous family affected with a spectrum of phe- featuresandaudiologicaldata,illustrateevocative/particular notypes which included retinal degeneration, intellectual featuresandevolutionintime.Allcaseshavebeensporadic disability and renal abnormalities. All three had early and result from uneventful pregnancies. Case 1 (male, 10 childhood onset of retinal degeneration, however, clinical years): IUGR, microcephaly, downslanting palpebral fis- features were different between them to a great extent. The sures, hypoplastic zygomatic arches, dental malposition, proband's facial gestalt included down-slanting palpebral cleft palate, deformed/lowset ears, bilateral auricular tags, fissures, convex and high nasal bridge, short philtrum and mild-severe bilateral conductive hearing loss; epilepsy; prominent incisors, slender palms, truncal obesity, short hiatal hernia. Case 2 (male, 11 years): triangular face, stature and hypogonadism, raised a suspicion of Cohen mildly asymmetric, downslanting palpebral fissures, lower syndrome. His older sister had severe developmental delay eyelids coloboma, hypoplastic zygomatic arches, micro- and profound intellectual disability, and his younger one retrognathia, dysplastic ears, bilateral severe conductive had borderline learning disabilities and nephronophthisis hearingloss.Case3(male,15years):triangularface,mildly diagnosed in adolescence. Using exome sequencing we asymmetric, downslanting palpebral fissures, lower eyelids identified a homozygous c.511T>G (p.L171V) novel var- coloboma, hypoplastic zygomatic arches, deformed/lowset iant in the TMEM231 gene (GeneBank accession number ears,severebilateralconductivehearingloss.Case4(male, NM_001077418.2) which is fully segregated in the family. 18 years): microcephaly, triangular face, downslanting To date, at least 13 different pathogenic variants of palpebral fissures, everted lower eyelids, sparse lashes, TMEM231 have been reported. These variants are spread dental malposition; tympanosclerosis; aortic coarctation; throughout the gene and associated with several partially epilepsy. Apart of epilepsy (worse in time), the clinical overlapping, yet distinct phenotypes, with no clear picturehasbeenconstant.Clinicalfeaturesatdifferentages genotype-phenotype correlation. Moreover, we report sig- will be illustrated. In conclusion, we present the evolution nificant phenotypic heterogeneity within the same family. in time and the importance of a multidisciplinary approach The finding expands the phenotypes that can be caused by inthemanagamentofthepatient.Earlydetectionofhearing pathogenicvariantsTMEM231,whichshouldbeconsidered loss in these patients is of great importance in order to in learning disabilities associated with retinal degeneration reabilitate hearing impairment. and Cohen syndrome-like phenotype, and strongly suggest I. Resmerita: None. S. Cozma: None. R. Popescu: the existence of additional environmental and/or genetic None. M. Panzaru: None. L. Butnariu: None. C. factorswhichmodifythephenotype inducedby TMEM231 Rusu: None. variants. E. Chervinsky: None. S. Shalev: None. R. Spiegel: E-P11.81 None. T. Ben-Josef: None. A NovelTCOF1Gene Mutation In A Turkish Family With Treacher Collins Syndrome E-P11.80 Long-time follow-up and hearing impairment in four A. Subasioglu patients with Treacher Collins syndrome Medical Genetics Department, Izmir Katip Celebi University, Ataturk Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, TurkeyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1007 Introduction: Treacher Collins Syndrome (TCS), also The patient had various facial dysmorphic features includ- known as Mandibulofacial Dysostosis is an autosomal ing downward-slanting eyes, malar hypoplasia, micro- dominantdisorderofcraniofacialdevelopmentandpresents gnathia,fishlikemouthwithahigharchedpalateandabsent variableexpressivityandmainlycausedbymutationsinthe lowereyelideyelashes.Therewerealsomalformedbilateral TCOF1 gene. The major features are commonly include pinnae and left ear microtia. According to the clinical fea- otologic,ophthalmicanddentalmalformationsandmidface tures, we suspect from TCS and sequence analysis of hypoplasia,micrognathia,microtia,conductivehearingloss TCOF1genewasperformed.Aheterozygousnewmutation and cleft palate can be seen. Treacher Collins Syndrome c.1722_1731delCATCCTCCAG in exon 12 of the TCOF1 occurs with an incidence of 1 in 50000 live births. Pheno- genewasdetected.Ithasbeendeterminedthatthismutation types caused by mutations in the gene POLR1D and ispathogenicaccordingtotheinsilicopredictiontools.The POLR1C have similar clinical features with different current study further expands the TCOF1 mutation inheritance patterns. spectrum. Materials and Methods: A 32 years old man applied to B. Eser Çavdartepe: None. N. Koçak: None. N. Yaşa: our clinic with characteristic facial dysmorphism with None. T. Çora: None. F. Duymuş: None. bilateral and symmetrical hypoplasia of the malar bones. He had antimongoloid slant of the palpebral fissures, ear E-P11.83 abnormalities and hearing loss. Both of his son were died Rarecaseoftriphalangealthumb-polysyndactylysyndrome because of the respiratory distress and they were both have in combination with congenital heart disease malar hypoplasia, malformation of auricle, hearing loss, downslantingpalpebralfissuresandpartialabsenceoflower O.V.Melnik,A.M.Zlotina,T.S.Loevets,A.A.Kostareva,T.L. eyelashes. His father also has mild antimongoloid slant of Vershinina,E. S. Vasichkina,T. M.Pervunina the palpebral fissures. For mutation analysis, the coding region of TCOF1 gene was sequenced. AlmazovNationalMedicalResearchCentre,Saint-Petersburg, Results: The molecular analysis showed the presence of Russian Federation heterozygousmutation,c.4394C>T/p.Ser1465Leuinexon 25oftheTCOF1geneintheprobandandhisfather.Toour <META NAME="author" CONTENT="Ольга knowledge, the mutation has never been reported. Седенко"> Conclusion: Both variable expressivity and reduced Introduction: Triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syn- penetrance must be considered in and also it is very drome (TPT-PS) caused by LMBR1 mutations is a well- important that; healthcare providers must be careful not to defined autosomal dominant disorder not commonly miss the mild findings especially of autosomal dominant associated with heart defects. There is only one report on diseases. a patient with TPT-PS and Tetralogy of Fallot, however, A. Subasioglu: None. harboringanadditional22q11.21deletion.Herewepresent a3-month-oldgirlwithprenatallyestablisheddoubleoutlet E-P11.82 right ventricle (DORV). Additionally, the patient had A novel mutation in the TCOF1 gene in a patient with asymmetric preaxial, postaxial polydactyly with TPT-PS Treacher Collins syndrome (4-5 digits). Similar phenotype of upper and lower limbs was reported along five generations in 9 affected family B. EserÇavdartepe,N.Koçak,N.Yaşa, T. Çora,F. Duymuş members with no history of congenital heart disease. MaterialsandMethods:Theinvestigationwasapproved Selçuk University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical by the local ethical committee. Informed consent was Genetics, Konya, Turkey obtained from patient's parents. Genetic analysis was performed using Sanger sequencing and array-based Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS), is a rare autosomal comparative genomic hybridization (CGH-array) with dominant congenital disorder characterized by various cra- Agilent 60K platform. niofacial malformations. The estimated incidence is 1/ Results: Target sequencing of the TBX5 gene to exclude 50000livebirths.Therearebilaterallysymmetricanomalies Holt-Oram syndrome,NKX2-5,intron5oftheLMBR1did ofthestructurewithinthefirstandsecondbranchialarches. not reveal any known pathogenic variants/variants of Thecharacteristicfacialdysmorphismincludesbilateraland unknown significance. Array-CGH allowed to identify the symmetrical hypoplasia of the malar bones and mandible. onlyduplicationat7q36.3region(~277kb),encompassing This syndrome most commonly results from the TCOF1 LMBR1 gene. gene mutations. Here we report a five-year-old female Conclusions:LMBR1isacausativegeneleadingtoTPT- patient who has a syndromic appearance and hearing loss. PS but it has not previously been associated with DORV.1008 J.delPicchia Further analysis of possible association of LMBR1 duplica- TTN gene, which should be considered in lethal congenital tion with cardiac defects should include sequencing of contracture syndromes, arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, broad spectrum of genes (GDF1, CFC1, ZFPM2) or even congenital myopathies and hydrops fetalis. exome sequencing approach to exclude possible combina- Supporting grant: Abraham & Sonia Rochlin Family tionoftwoindependent genetic abnormalitiesasacauseof Foundation. the combined malformation pathologies. M. Khayat: None. E. Chervinsky: None. S. Soltsman: This work was financially supported by Russian Science None. H. Habiballa: None. O. Elpeleg: None. S. Foundation (RSF), Grant № 17-75-10125. Shalev: None. O.V. Melnik: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as E-P11.86 grants already received); Modest; Russian Science Founda- Synemin expression profile during tissue-specific tion (RSF), Grant № 17-75-10125. A.M. Zlotina: B. differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells confirms its Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or possible involvement in heart-hand syndrome consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Russian Science Foundation (RSF), A. Zlotina1, A.Kiselev1,A. Sergushichev2,E. Parmon1,A. Grant № 17-75-10125. T.S. Loevets: None. A.A. Kostar- Kostareva1,3 eva: None. T.L. Vershinina: None. E.S. Vasichkina: None. T.M. Pervunina: None. 1Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint- Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2ITMO University, Saint- E-P11.84 Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Karolinska Institute, Homozygote TTN gene variant associated with lethal Department of Women's and Children's Health, Center for congenital contracture syndrome Molecular Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden M.Khayat1, E.Chervinsky1,S. Soltsman2,H. Habiballa3,O. Introduction: «Heart-hand» syndromes represent a group Elpeleg4,S. Shalev1,5 of rare congenital conditions where patients in addition to cardiac pathology demonstrate various abnormalities of 1Genetics Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, limb skeleton. To date, genetic basis of such phenotypes is 2Maternal Fetal Medicine outpatient clinic, Department of onlypartlycharacterized.Inthepresentstudy,wereporton Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baruch Padeh Medical Center, a 30-year-old woman with a clinical picture closely Poriya,Israel,3SheruteiBriutClalit,SickFund,Bena-Nujedat, resembling ulnar-mammary syndrome. The patient was Israel, 4The Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of hospitalized due to frequent episodes of non-sustained Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical ventriculartachycardiaandpresentedwithsymmetricalfifth Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 5Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, fingeranomalies,mammarygland hypoplasiawith inverted Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel nipples, specific face features, squint and abnormal teeth. Here we aimed to extend knowledge on molecular Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the TTN gene have mechanisms underlying the complex congenital disorder. been reported to cause various cardiomyopathies and a MaterialsandMethods:Genomicscreeningwascarried range of skeletal muscle diseases, collectively known as outbywhole-exomesequencing(WES),Sangersequencing titinopathies. and array-based comparative genome hybridization. Materials and Methods: Eight affected individuals Results: No genetic defects were revealed in TBX3, the presented with lethal congenital multiple contractures only gene associated with ulnar-mammary syndrome to belong to a large family of Moslem Bedouin origin, living date, as well as in other genes responsible for common in the northern part of Israel, were studied. Exonic heart-hand syndromes. Based on WES data analysis, we sequencesfromthreepatients'DNAsampleswereenriched took notice of a novel missense variant in SYNM gene with the SureSelect Human All Exon 50 Mb V.5 Kit (exon 1, p.A58V), encoding an intermediate filament Results:Ahomozygousc.36122delC(p.P12041Lfs*20) protein synemin. Experimental cell study confirmed high variant in exon 167 of the TTN gene, which is only expression of synemin in mesenchymal stromal cells expressed in the fetal IC isoform, was detected in all (MSCs) during tissue-specific differentiation, thus, point- patients. ing to a possible role of synemin in the congenital Conclusions: Our findings provide evidence for the malformations. causative role of TTN gene in the severe lethal form of Conclusions: Here we present a nontypical clinical case arthrogryposismultiplexcongenita.Thefindingexpandsthe of ulnar-mammary syndrome with no association with phenotypes that can be caused by pathogenic variants in TBX3 mutation. We suggest that the genetic variant inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1009 SYNM could contribute to the complex phenotype, but E-P11.88 further comprehensive functional studies are required. Novel bi-allelic POMGNT1 mutations detected by whole This work was financially supported by Russian Science exome sequencing causing dystroglycanopathy in a family Foundation (RSF), Grant № 17-75-10125. of Cypriot descent A. Zlotina: None. A. Kiselev: None. A. Sergushichev: None. E. Parmon: None. A. Kostareva: None. E. Kritioti1,2,3, A.Alexandrou1,I.Papaevripidou1,A. Theodosiou1,N.Nicolaou3,C. Sismani1,2, G.A. Tanteles3 E-P11.87 Combined Partial Trisomy 7q and Partial Monosomy 21q 1CytogeneticsandGenomicsDepartment,TheCyprusInstitute in a 6 Year Old Male Patient Phenotypic and Genotypic of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Findings School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Clinical Genetics e.i.atli1, h.gurkan1,e. atli1,y.ozen1,i.gorker2,d.eker1,c. Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, akurut1 Nicosia, Cyprus 1Trakya University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Congenital muscular dystrophies represent a clinically and Medical Genetic, Edirne, Turkey, 2Trakya University Faculty genetically heterogeneous group of inherited muscle dis- of Medicine, Department of Child and Adolescent Mental orders. Affected infants typically present with hypotonia Health and Diseases, Edirne, Turkey and poor spontaneous movements. Progressive weakness, joint contractures, spinal deformities and respiratory com- Proband is 6 years old male with dysmorphic features and promise may affect quality of life and life span. Cognitive examined by psychomotor retardation pre-diagnosis. The impairment,structuralbrainand/orocularabnormalitiesand boy was born after uneventful pregnancy at term with seizures are found almost exclusively in normal growth parameters. In infancy, he had feeding dif- dystroglycanopathies. ficulties. His mother noticed that eye colors were different A cohort of undiagnosed Cypriot patients with multiple from each other when he was 1 month old. The patient congenital malformations was selected for whole exome underwent surgery for inguinal hernia at 14 months and 2 sequencing (WES) following extensive diagnostic workup. years of age. When he was 1 year old underwent surgery We report on a non-consanguineous family with two male due to in his right eye tension. He was able to sit without siblings, born following uneventful pregnancies. They support and hold his head after 1 year of age. He can walk presented with a congenital muscular dystrophy phenotype holding on to one place at the moment. At 5 years of age, with features including infantile hypotonia, hyperCkemia additional features were noted including brachycephaly, early hydrocephalus, severe developmental delay, epilepsy, beak nose structure, low set ears, upslanting palpebral fis- strabismus and cataracts. Family history was non- sure,retro micrognatia, ortognati, short filtrum. Cytogenetic contributory. WES was performed on the Illumina Next- analysis of cultured lymphocytes revealed a 46,XY,der(21) Seq500 platform using the TruSeq DNA exome library kit. (pter→q22::?) karyotype. Mother was normal, father’s Bioinformatics analysis was carried out using an in-house karyotype 46,XY,t(7;21)(q32;q22). Array-CGH was per- pipeline. formed oligonucleotide array and showed 7q33q36.3 gain, Two novel compound heterozygous variants were 21q22.2q22.3 loss. Very often fetuses with complete identified in POMGNT1 and confirmed by Sanger sequen- monosomy 21 die before or shortly after birth; by contrast, cing. These included a nonsense mutation (p.Glu102*) in cases with partial deletion of chromosome 21, which occur exon 4 and a missense variant (p.Arg129Trp) in exon 5 more often, have better survival expectancy and are het- which substitutes a conserved aminoacid within the erogeneous regarding their phenotypic severity. Although interleukin-like epithelial to mesenchymal tissue (EMT) duplications of the chromosome 7q are well known, these domain of POMGNT1. Both variants are classified as rare are rare and their presence usually results in the apparition and were not identified in online databases. In-silico tools of multiple congenital abnormalities and cognitive deficits. predicted pathogenicity. Parental carrier status was We present the first report of a patient with 21q22 deletion confirmed. and concomitant 7q33 duplication detected by CGH array In conclusion, two affected siblings carrying novel, andassociatedwithdysmorphism,psychomotorretardation. predicted pathogenic, bi-allelic POMGNT1 variants were E.I. atli: None. H. gurkan: None. E. atli: None. Y. identified. Other POMGNT1 mutations have been asso- ozen: None. I. gorker: None. D. eker: None. C. ciated with autosomal recessive dystroglycanopathies akurut: None. exhibiting similar phenotypes. Further investigations to measuretheexpressionofthedefectiveproteinareongoing.1010 J.delPicchia E. Kritioti: None. A. Alexandrou: None. I. Papaevri- E.Tønne1,H.Bærø2,T.Prescott3,K.Tveten3,Ø.L.Holla3,L.H. pidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. N. Nicolaou: None. Sunde1, B.Due-Tønnessen4,K.Heimdal1 C. Sismani: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, E-P11.89 Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital, Williams-Beuren syndrome: clinical variability in a Nord- Kristiansand, Norway, 3Section of Medical Genetics, Eastern Romanian cohort Department of Laboratory Medicine, Telemark Hospital, Skien,Norway,4DepartmentofNeurosurgery,OsloUniversity E. Gavril,R. Popescu, E.V. Gorduza,M.Gramescu, I. Hospital, Oslo, Norway Resmerita, L.Butnariu, M.Panzaru,S. Cozma,C. Rusu Xia-Gibbs syndrome (MIM 615829), a multisystem dis- ”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy - order first described in 2014, is caused by heterozygous Department of Medical Genetics, Iaşi, Romania variants (including nonsense variants) in AHDC1 that encodes the AT hook DNA-binding motif containing 1 Williams-Beuren (WS) syndrome (7q11.23 microdeletion), (AHDC1) protein. All 15 individuals reported to date have is a syndrome with wide clinical variability. We have stu- had global development delay. Other frequent features died 22 patients diagnosed with WS and followed-up for a include hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, laryngomalacia, longtime(averageperiod7years)inIasiMedicalGenetics shortstature,microcephaly,obstructivesleepapnea,hernias Center, aiming to describe clinical variability and the and corpus callosum hypoplasia. changing picture in time. All cases were confirmed using StudiesinmiceanddrosophilasuggestthatAHDC1isan MLPA follow-up kit. We identified cardiovascular disease epigenetic regulator of embryonic brain development. in 18/22 patients (72.22% supravalvar aortic stenosis), Pathogenic AHDC1 variants may act via a dominant- characteristic dysmorphic faces in 19/22, intellectual dis- negative mechanism. ability in 19/22 (5 severe, 9 moderate, 5 mild) and con- Wepresenta5yearoldboywithmoderatedevelopmental nectivetissuedefectsin16cases(40.95%presentedhernia). delay, alargeomphalocele,metopic craniosynostosis,short Lesscommonfeaturesincluded:pre-andearlypost-natal stature, dysmorphic features, hypotonia and chronic snor- growth deficiency (18/22), friendly personality (16/22), ing. Snoring improved after bilateral adenotonsillectomy. specific cognitive profile (13/22), strabismus and dental Brain and spinal cord imaging revealed metopic craniosy- anomalies (9/22), gastro-intestinal disturbances (9/22), nostosis and a tethered cord, both of which were treated obesity (6/22), hypercalcemia (3/22) and hypothyroidism surgically,aswellasChiariImalformationandashortened (1/22).Shortstatureandincreasedsensitivitytosoundwere corpus callosum. The only variant of interest detected on found in only 7 and 5 patients, and only 1 case presented whole exome trio sequencing was de novo heterozygous hearing loss and enuresis. Cryptorchidism, as well as renal NM_001029882.3(AHDC1) c.2772del p.(Arg925Glufs*). defects were identified in 4 cases, anesthesia accidents in 2 Metopic and bicoronal craniosynostosis was reported and diabetes and hypoplastic abdominal aorta in one.We previouslyinasingleindividualwithXia-Gibbssyndrome. didn’t detect non-social anxiety, specific phobias or early Our case suggestsa tentative extension ofthephenotypeto puberty. Other features identified in our patients include: include craniosynostosis, tethered cord, Chiari I malforma- brachydactyly (5/22), autism spectrum disorder (4/22), tion and omphalocele. dysmenorrhea (2), hypogonadism (3/22), scoliosis (2/22), E.Tønne:None.H.Bærø:None.T.Prescott:None.K. marked microcephaly and psoriazis (1/22) and ischemic Tveten: None. Ø.L. Holla: None. L.H. Sunde: None. B. stroke (1/22). The changing phenotype in time will be Due-Tønnessen: None. K. Heimdal: None. illustrated for cases with long term follow-up. In conclu- sion, this study emphasizes the wide phenotypic variety from one case to another, and within the same patient at E-P12 Cancer genetics different ages. E. Gavril: None. R. Popescu: None. E.V. Gorduza: E-P12.10 None. M. Gramescu: None. I. Resmerita: None. L. Impact of MTHFR C677T variant on the susceptibility of Butnariu:None.M.Panzaru:None.S.Cozma:None.C. acute leukemia in Tunisia Rusu: None. R. Frikha1,M.Elloumi2, T. Rebai3 E-P11.90 Xia-Gibbs syndrome presenting with craniosynostosis, 1Department of Medical genetics, Hedi Chaker University tethered cord and Chiari I malformation TeachingHospital,Sfax,Tunisia,2Departmentofhematology,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1011 Hedi Chaker University Teaching Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, whether theessential oilsofMCinduce apoptosis onA549 3Laboratory of histology, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia cells, and if it is induced, which pathway leads the cells to apoptosis. Introduction: The association between the 5,10-methyle- Materials and Methods: A549 cells were exposed to netetrahydrofolatereductase(MTHFR)variants;mainlythe various concentrations from 31.25 to 2500 μg/ml of the C677T; and the risk of acute leukemia (AL) was largely essentialoils.ThecytotoxicitywasmeasuredbyMTTassay investigated and enrolled in a meta-analysis. However, the andIC valuesweredetermined.Then,theessentialoilwas 50 results were inconsistent. administered at the concentrations of 312.5 μg/ml for The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship 24hours.Theexpressionlevelsofcaspase3,8and9,Bcl-2 between the C677T variant of the MTHFR gene, and and P21 genes were evaluated by qRT-PCR method. susceptibility to acute leukemia in a cohort of Tunisian Results: Our results showed that 625 μg/ml and above patients with AL. concentrations of the essential oils significantly suppressed Materials and Methods: A case-control study was cell viability. Expression levels of caspase 3 and 9 genes conducted among 37 patients with AL and 35 controls. which are mediators of intrinsicpathway were significantly Genotyping of MTHFR C677T was performed by poly- increasedataconcentrationof312.5μg/mlofessentialoils merase chain reaction-restriction fragment length poly- (p=0.0129 and p=0.0180 respectively). However, when morphism (PCR-RFLP). the expression levels of the caspase-8 gene, an important Results: The frequency of MTHFR 677T was signifi- mediator of extrinsic apoptosis pathway, were compared cantly different between AL patients and controls (21.6% with the control group, no difference was found. It was and 0% respectively), independent of the gender [p=0.58; foundthat,thep21andtheanti-apoptoticBcl-2geneswere OR=1.56(0.31-7.78)].TheriskofALwiththe677Tallele not different when compared with the control group. carrier was elevated by 2.2 times (p=0.001). Conclusions:Asaresult,theessentialoilsofMCinduce Conclusions: The present result highlights the impact of apoptosis through the intrinsic pathway. In this regard, we MTHFR C677T variant on the susceptibility of acute think they may be new hope for non-cytotoxic drug leukemia in Tunisian patients. Thus, MTHFR C677T researches in the treatment of cancer. polymorphism may be a promising AL biomarker and N. Bilgic: None. G. Gulbol Duran: None. A.D. furtherstudywithlargernumbersofparticipantsworldwide Kaya: None. are required before definitive conclusions can be drawn. References E-P12.16 1. Li, S.Y., et al., Association between MTHFR C677T Evaluation of a novel BAP1 mutation found in a family polymorphism and risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a with high cancer burden meta-analysis based on 51 case-control studies. Med Sci Monit, 2015. 21: p. 740-8. W.Sjursen1,2, B.Bodil Gilde1,L. Lavik1,I.Bjørnevoll1,H. 2. Qin, Y.T., et al., Association between MTHFR Hov1,2, L.Engebretsen1 polymorphisms and acute myeloid leukemia risk: a meta- analysis. PLoS One, 2014. 9(2): p. e88823. 1St. Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, R. Frikha: None. M. Elloumi: None. T. Rebai: None. 2NorwegianUniversityofScienceandTechnology,Trondheim, Norway E-P12.15 Apoptotic Effects of Myrtus communis L. Essential Oil on BAP1 tumour predisposition syndrome (BAP1TPS) is a A549 Cells recentlydescribedcancersyndromeassociatedwithvarious typesofcancersuchasmelanoma(eyeandskin),malignant N.Bilgic1, G.Gulbol Duran2, A.D.Kaya3 mesothelioma, renal clear cell carcinoma, basal cell carci- noma and atypical Spitz tumour (benign). BAP1 (BRCA1- 1Mustafa Kemal University, Health Sciences Institute, Hatay, associated protein 1) is a tumour suppressor gene that Turkey, 2Mustafa Kemal University, Medicine Faculty, Hatay, encoding ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase. This Turkey, 3Mustafa Kemal University,Agriculture Faculty, enzyme regulates cell growth, cellular differentiation, tran- Hatay, Turkey scriptionandDNArepair.Mutationonbothallelescanlead to rapid and uncontrolled cell growth. The germline muta- Introduction: Myrtus communis L. (MC) is an important tion in BAP1 gene is inherited in an autosomal dominant aromatic and medicinal plant. Understanding of the mole- manner. cular mechanism of apoptotic cell death in cancer studies The proband in a family with high burden of renal clear hasgreatimportance.Inthisstudy,weaimedtoinvestigate cell carcinoma and one case with mesothelioma, was1012 J.delPicchia offeredgenepaneltesting.Thegenepanelusedconsistedof Additionally, we detected several rare but previously 19 renal cancer associated genes. The only suspicious described mutations with predicted deleterious impact. variant detected, was a missense variant in the BAP1 gene, Conclusions: In high-risk cases with negative screening c.325G>A, p.(Gly109Arg). This variant has not been results for common founder mutations, there is a strong published as a BAP1TPS predisposing variant before, and cause for extended analysis of whole BRCA1/BRCA2 becauseoflackinginformationitwasclassifiedasavariant genes. Such an approach allows to detect new/atypical of uncertain clinical significance. The family history and underlyingchangesinca.22%ofaffectedpatients.Routine further analyses of blood and tumor samples from family sequencing of key oncogenes is thus validated as a tool of members,andhowthiscontributedinthereclassificationof choice for informed therapies in breast/ovarian cancer the variant will be presented. treatment. W. Sjursen: None. B. Bodil Gilde: None. L. Lavik: K. Łacna: None. A. Białek-Prościńska: None. M. None. I. Bjørnevoll: None. H. Hov: None. L. Przyborska: None. J. Muszyński: None. K. Matus- Engebretsen: None. zewska: None. N. Badziąg-Leśniak: None. R. Glazar: None.M.Stawicka-Niełacna:None.G.Koczyk:None.A. E-P12.17 Dawidziuk: None. D. Popiel: None. M. Piechota: None. Screening of Polish patients for novel BRCA1/2 mutations A. Jamsheer: None. as underlying factors of ovarian/breast cancer E-P12.18 K. Łacna1,A. Białek-Prościńska1,M.Przyborska1,J. Detection of BRCA1/BRCA 2 gene mutations in ovarian Muszyński1,K. Matuszewska1,2,N.Badziąg-Leśniak1,R. cancer by next- generation sequencing Glazar1,M.Stawicka-Niełacna3,G.Koczyk1,4,A.Dawidziuk1,D. Popiel1,M.Piechota1,A.Jamsheer1,2 B. Grahovac1, M.Katunarić1,E. Babarović2,M. Kraević2 1Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 1Medical Faculty University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of 2Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3University Hospital of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia Lord’s Transfiguration-Partner of Poznan University of MedicalSciences,Poznan,Poland,4InstituteofPlantGenetics Introduction: Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland lead to an increased risk of developing breast or ovarian cancer. In high-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOC) the Introduction: A strong genetic predisposition towards frequency of BRCA1/2 germline and somatic mutations breastandovariancancersisfrequentlytiedtomutationsin ranged from 18 % to 26% (Alsop et al. 2012; Ledermann BRCA1 and BRCA2. Women with pathogenic mutations in et al. 2011). Identification of mutations in BRCA1/2 genes either BRCA1 or BRCA2 have about five times higher risk could facilitate targeted therapy with selective PARP1 ofbreastcancerandtentothirtytimeshigherriskofovarian inhibitor. cancer,butnotallchangesconferthesamerisks.Whilethe Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was isolated mostcommongeneticdeterminantsareknown,inhigh-risk from 101 HGSOC patients who underwent surgical patients novel loss-of-function mutations can contribute a resection between2013and2016(47microdissectedFFPE significant risk. tumor tissues and 54 peripheral blood samples used when Materials and Methods:Screening of806 samples over quality of DNA from FFPE tissue was not satisfactory. the 2016-2017 period has confirmed the prevalence of BRCA 1/2 mutation analysis was performed by targeted founder mutations: c.5266dupC, c.4035delA, c.181T>G, next-generation sequencing (NGS), using the ONCOMI- c.3700_3704delGTAAA and c.68_69delAG in BRCA1 NETMBRCA1/BRCA2ResearchAssay(LifeTechnologies, (NM_007294.3). In cases lacking the above, full Next USA) covering all exons and intron-exon boundaries. GenerationSequencingwasperformedusingIonTorrentS5 Multiplex PCR, DNA library preparation and enrichment platform. The DNA library was prepared using AmpliSeq were performed according to manufacturer`s instructions. BRCA1/BRCA2 Panel (ThermoFisher Scientific). The Sequencing was carried out on Personal Genome Machine presenceofpathogenicmutationswasconfirmedbySanger (PGM) sequencer (Ion Torrent, USA). The sequence data, sequencing on GA3500 (Applied Biosystems). including alignment to the hg19 reference genome and Results: In one case, (63y.o. female with breast cancer variant calling was done using Torrent Suite Software v4.6 and suspected ovarian cancer) a novel BRCA2:c.3215T>A and Ion ReporterTM Softwere (Life Technologies, USA). (p.L1072*) mutation was detected. The likely loss-of- Results: Pathogenic BRCA 1/2 mutations were found in function follows due to heavily truncated protein product. 28,7%HGSOCpatients(29/101);in17FFPEand12bloodAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1013 samples. 26 mutations were located in BRCA1 gene and 3 referral increases, and free up time for consultations in BRCA2 gena. The mutations were SNV and short indel requiring real cancer genetics expertise. introducing frameshift or stop codon. No large deletions or P.R. Benusiglio: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speak- insertions were detected in our study group. ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Astra Conclusion: Detection of BRCA1/2 mutations in FFPE Zeneca, BMS. J. Gligorov: None. V. Byrde: None. M. tumor tissues using NGS method is feasible. Warcoin:None.E.Guillerm:None.S.Richard:None.S. B. Grahovac: None. M. Katunarić: None. E. Babar- Zilberman:None.L.Zelek:None.L.Carbillon:None.A. ović: None. M. Kraević: None. Bricou: None. N. Chabbert-Buffet: None. F. Coulet: None. E-P12.20 Geneticsusceptibilitytocancer:isittimetodelegatetesting E-P12.22 prescription to oncologists and breast/gynecological Characterizing of five common BCR-ABL kinase domain surgeons? A pilot project mutations (T315I, F359V, E255V, E255K, Y253H) in Bulgarian patients with chronic myeloid leukemia P. R.Benusiglio1, J.Gligorov2,V. Byrde2,M.Warcoin1,E. preliminary results Guillerm1,S. Richard2,S.Zilberman2, L.Zelek3, L.Carbillon4, A. Bricou4,N.Chabbert-Buffet2,F. Coulet1 H.Y. Ivanov1,A. Linev1,I. Zheliazkov2,H.Ivanova3, V. Goranova-Marinova3,V. Stoyanova1 1Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière APHP, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Tenon APHP, Paris, France, 3Hôpital Avicenne, 1Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical Bobigny, France, 4Hòpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France UniversityPlovdiv,Plovdiv,Bulgaria,2UniversityHospitalSt. George, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3First Department of Internal Introduction:Cancergeneticsclinicsstruggletocopewith Medicine, Clinic of Hematology, Medical University Plovdiv, steady increases in referrals. Indeed, awareness among the Plovdiv, Bulgaria general public and medical professionals is rising, tumour profiling is becoming commonplace with its incident dis- Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) arises covery of cancer susceptibility mutations, and PARP- from the fusion of the BCR and the ABL1 genes due to inhibitors might soon be approved for indications other reciprocal chromosome translocation forming the Philadel- than relapsing serous ovarian carcinoma. One must there- phia Chromosome (Ph). Mutations in the Bcr-Abl kinase fore explore alternative modes of genetic counseling and domain may cause, or contribute to, resistance to tyrosine novel approachestotesting,atask allthemore challenging kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in chronic myeloid leukemia in France where only cancer geneticists (CG) have been patients. The aim of our study is to detect five common prescribinggenetictests.Objectives.Wearestartingapilot mutations (T315I, F359V, E255V, E255K, Y253H) in the project involving CG, oncologists and breast/gynecological ABL1 kinase domain (harboring on acquired) in patients surgeons (O+OBGS) from a Paris University Hospital and with CML. its affiliated suburban partner, and studying the feasibility MaterialsandMethods:Thestudywasperformedon30 and acceptability of a partnership allowing O+OBGS to patientswithCML.WeusedAllele-specificamplificationto prescribe genetic tests. detect the mutations in the ABL1 kinase domain. Methods: All patients with breast/ovarian cancer will Results:InourstudyT315Imutationwasdetectedinone receive a family questionnaire. O+OBGS will evaluate patientandinthesamepatientE255Kmutationwaspresent whether testing is indicated using a modified Manchester- as well. We did not detect E255V, F359V and Y253H Scoring-System(MSS3).Theywillexplaintheprinciplesof mutationsinthepatients.Thepatientisa79yearsoldmale, genetic susceptibility to cancer, give an explanatory leaflet, diagnosed in CML - chronic phase in April 2017. The obtain consent and prescribe BRCA1/2, PALB2, and patient was treated with Nilotinib, followed by Dasatinib. RAD51C/D analysis. CG will receive a medical report, the Not even hematological response has been achieved so far. family questionnaire and a copy of the MSS3. If they Conclusions: The patient with mutations in ABL kinase suspectLi-Fraumeniorthinkamultigenepanelisindicated, domain showed treatment failure based on 2013 ELN they will ask to see the patient face-to-face. CG will return recommendations for management of CML. One of the all resultsduring an individual consultation. Outcomeswill study limitations was limited number of samples. Research be compared to patients seen exclusively by CG. Perspec- on larger number of patients is suggested to obtain more tives. We will present preliminary observations at ESHG- reliable results. Identification of ABL kinase domain 2018. Our novel approach should allow us to cope with mutations may be used as a proper and useful method for improving therapeutic strategies, avoiding delay in1014 J.delPicchia treatment and excessive expenditure in CML patients with Lung cancer is the leading cancer killer of both men and tyrosine kinase inhibitors resistance. women throughout theworld. Notably, KRASaccountsfor H.Y. Ivanov: None. A. Linev: None. I. Zheliazkov: 90% of RAS mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Recent None.H.Ivanova: None.V.Goranova-Marinova: None. literature has reported a strong association between KRAS V. Stoyanova: None. mutation and survival in non-small cell lung cancer and approximately97%ofKRASmutationsinNSCLCinvolve E-P12.24 codons 12or13.Molecular mechanismsthataremediating Fibronectin type III domain containing 5(FNDC5) gene tumor’s initiation, invasion, metastases, recurrence and expression level in colorectal cancer cell lines resistance to the therapy in lung cancers remains largely unknown. One of the target sequences of miRNA Let-7 F. GhazviniZadegan, F. SeyedFrotan, K. Ghaedi,M.Nasr complementary site within the 3'untranslated region of Esfahani KRAS gene (named is 3’-UTR LCS6 sequence). LCS6 mutation may lead to metastases, development of cancer, DepartmentofReproductiveBiotechnology.ReproductiveBio- relapse and treatment resistance in many cancers. In this medicine Research Centre, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, project, it was aimed to carry out the effect of LCS6 ACECR, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of mutation on metastatic functions and AKT and ERK path- ways, by using lung cancer A549, NCI-H441 cells and Metabolic activities are altered in cancer cells relative to BEAS-2B (control) cell carrying pLenti-KRAS- normal cells, which provide a selective advantage during CDSmLCS6n,pLenti-KRAS-CDSm-LCS6mplasmids.The tumorigenesis,andsupporttheacquisitionandmaintenance results showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations have sig- ofmalignantproperties.Preciselyhowmetabolismbecomes nificant different effects among A549 and NCI-H441 cell reprogrammed in cancer cells, whose functions or malig- groups. the mutation of LSC6 region increases the cell nant properties are enabled by these activities, help to migration and proliferation in NCI-H441 cells, while in exploit metabolic changes for suitable therapeutic benefit. A549 cells a slight decrease occurred in migration and On the other hand, reprogrammed metabolism refers to the proliferation levels. Both G12V and LCS6 mutations ability of cancer cells supporting the increased energy increase the cell invasion level in A549 and NCI-H441 request due to continuous growth, rapid proliferation, and cells. As for the target genes, both Western and qPCR other characteristics typical of neoplastic cells. FNDC5/ results showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations induced Irisin,anovelhormoneintheregulationofenergybalance, PI3K/AKT/mTOR and RAF/MEK/ERK pathways in A549 is involved in metabolic homeostasis. Energy imbalance and NCI-H441 cells, induce these pathways were higher in were shown to be associated with colorectal cancer. A549 cells. Therefore, FNDC5 expression level was assessed in two A.A. Azzawri: None. H. Acar: None. colorectal cancer cell lines i.e. Caco-2, HT29 and human fibroblast asa controlgroup by quantitativereal-timePCR. E-P12.26 Our results indicated that FNDC5 expression level is Human malignant glioma: implementation of the increased significantly in HT29 colorectal cancer cell line adjunctive therapy by transferring the CRISPR/AsCpf1 compare to Caco-2 colorectal cancer cell line and control system-induced tumor suppressor genes insertion and group. A positive association with FNDC5 expression and oncogenic suppression of Bcl2L12 via the CRISPR/ metastaticcolorectalcellline(HT29)suggestedthepotential ddAsCpf1systemforinvivoengineeringofchromosome19 role of this gene as one of energy metabolism regulator in q-arm metastatic colorectal cancer cells. F. Ghazvini Zadegan: None. F. Seyed Frotan: None. A. Abak,E.Sakhinia, A. Abhari K. Ghaedi: None. M. Nasr Esfahani: None. Tabriz university of medical sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic E-P12.25 Republic of The effect of helicobacter pylori cagA gene on autophagy pathway in human gastric cancer cells Glioblastoma multiform (GBM) is the most prevalent intracranialprimarybraintumorinadultswhichcancausea A. A.Azzawri1,H. Acar2 strikingly complex process by altering various genes and molecular biomarkers. These research indicated that chro- 1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Diagen Biotechnological mosome19qharborsmanytumorsuppressorgenesthatare Systems Healthcare Automation, Ankara, Turkey integral to glioblastoma carcinogenesis. These genes localized the common region of deletion to the distal longAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1015 arm, 19q13.2-13.4. EML2 is one of the tumor suppressor development and prognosis. In the present study, we genes that is situated on 19q13.32. Also, this loci can be examined the presence of genetic aberrations in a small considerably methylated inGBMs by CpG island promoter group of Bulgarian patients. hypermethylation. Interestingly, miR-330 encoding gene is MaterialsandMethods:Freshbrainbiopsytissueswere liesinsidetheintronofEML2,andthismiRNAalsoactsas analyzed with multiplex ligation - dependent probe oncosuppressor-miR in glioblastomas. Importantly, miR- amplification (MLPA). 519d encoding gene which is situated on 19q13.42 also Results: Simultaneous genetic alterations were found: downregulated in GBMs. Moreover, NOP53 (also desig- EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) amplification, nated GLTSCR2/PICT-1) is localized within the dis- CDKN2A (cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A) deletion tinguished 1.4 Mb tumor suppressive region of and TP53 (tumor protein p53) deletion. chromosome 19q13.33. Additionally, Bcl2L12, a protein Conclusion: This is an initial study on signaling belonging to the Bcl-2 protein family which is located on regulators genetic aberrations in Bulgarian glioblastoma 19q13.33,isupregulatedinglioblastomamultiform(GBM) patients. Detected genetic variations are correlated with and plays a role in tumor cell development and tumor cell differentiation of primary and secondary gliomas and resistance to apoptosis. Our hypothesis is that a program- disease outcome but more analyses are needed to assess mableCRISPR/AsCpf1-basedgenomeengineeringstrategy their prognostic role. The study was partially supported by canbeusedtoattachthesesizeablechromosomalfragments Medical University Sofia, Bulgaria of tumor suppressor genes as an essential part of the chro- E. Nikolova: None. D. Ferdinandov: None. T. mosome 19 q-arm with the aim of chromosomal treatment. Todorov: None. V. Mitev: None. A. Todorova: None. Besides,wecansimultaneouslyemployCRISPR-ddAsCpf1 systemforspecificInhibitionofBcl2L12asanoncogenein E-P12.28 glioma cells. In this research cancer-derived exosomes- Does Theranekron affect the pathway of apoptosis & associated scAAV9 is utilized as a convenient delivery endoplasmic reticulum stress in head-neck cancer cell platform of CRISPR/AsCpf1 and CRISPR/ ddAsCpf1 systems to GBM cells. T. Cora, T.Duran, V.B. Ucar,N.Kocak A. Abak: None. E. Sakhinia: None. A. Abhari: None. Medical Faculty, KONYA, Turkey E-P12.27 Molecular alterations in Bulgarian patients with Introduction: Tarantula cubensis venom (Theranekron) is Glioblastoma multiforme used as a homeopathic medicine. Many therapeutic effects of Theranekron, such as antitumor, necrotizing action and E. Nikolova1,2,D.Ferdinandov3,4, T.Todorov1,V. Mitev2,A. wound healing have been demonstrated in clinical studies. Todorova1,2 ER stress has a role in development of inflammation and cancer. Therefore, ER stress has been suggested as a pro- 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, mising target for tumor cell death and cancer therapy. Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Chemistry and Effectivenessoftheranekronasananti-cancerchemicalhas Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, beendemonstratedinlimitedhumancancercells.However, 3Clinic of Neurosurgery, St. Ivan Rilski University Hospital, astudyrelatedtotheeffectoftheranekrononheadcanceris Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Medical not available in the literature. Therefore, in this study, we University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria aimed to investigate the effect of theranekron on ER stress and apoptosis on HNSCC. Introduction: Central nervous system tumors are char- Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron acterized by invasive nature and difficulties to resect sur- (80μl)inthestudyweredeterminedbyMTTanalysis.Cells gically all neoplastic cells with frequent relapses. weretreatedwith80μltheranekronfor6hours.TotalRNA Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), classified as World wasisolatedusingTRIzolreagent.SynthesisofcDNAfrom HealthOrganization(WHO)gradeIVinfiltrativeglioma,is the total RNA was carried out using Transcriptor High the most common primary brain tumor in adults and the Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression levels of genes most lethal subtype of gliomas. The molecular hetero- (GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1) associated with endoplasmic geneity in gliomas is extremely complex. There are several reticulum stress and genes (P53, BAX, BCL-2) associated genes involved in critical signaling pathways like receptor with apoptosis were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changes tyrosine kinase (RTK), p53 pathway and retinoblastoma were calculated by the ΔCT method. The statistical (RB) pathway. Somatic copy number variations in these significances were analyzed applying two-tailed student’s genes are supposed to contribute to the glioblastoma t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA).1016 J.delPicchia Results: As a result, we found a difference in the E-P12.31 expression levels of genes associated with ER stress and Effects of kras gene lcs6 mutation on metastasis pathways apoptosis in theranekron-treated HNSCC cells compared to in human lung cancer the untreated group. This suggests that theranekron effects the pathways associated with ER stress and apoptosis. A. A.Azzawri1,T. Cora1,H.Acar2 T. Cora: None. T. Duran: None. V.B. Ucar: None. N. Kocak: None. 1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Diagen Biotechnological Systems Healthcare Automation, Ankara, Turkey E-P12.30 Assessment of JAK2 V617F mutation in Tunisian patients Lung cancer is the leading cancer killer of both men and with essential thrombocythemia women throughout theworld. Notably, KRASaccountsfor 90% of RAS mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Recent M.Belhiba1,H. Bellaaj2,L. Keskes1,R. Frikha3 literature has reported a strong association between KRAS mutation and survival in non-small cell lung cancer and 1HumanMolecularGeneticsLaboratory,FacultyofMedicine, approximately97%ofKRASmutationsinNSCLCinvolve Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Hematology, Hedi Chaker codons 12or13.Molecular mechanismsthataremediating University Teaching Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Department of tumor’s initiation, invasion, metastases, recurrence and Medical genetics, Hedi Chaker University Teaching Hospital, resistance to the therapy in lung cancers remains largely Sfax, Tunisia unknown. One of the target sequences of miRNA Let-7 complementary site within the 3'untranslated region of Introduction: Essential thrombocythemia (ET) is a mye- KRAS gene (named is 3’-UTR LCS6 sequence). LCS6 loproliferative neoplasm characterized by thrombocytosis mutation may lead to metastases, development of cancer, with a tendency to thrombosis and hemorrhage. Acquired relapse and treatment resistance in many cancers. In this single point mutation in the JAK2, the V617F, has been project, it was aimed to carry out the effect of LCS6 described as a frequent genetic event in patients with ET mutation on metastatic functions and AKT and ERK path- (approximately 50-60 %). ways, by using lung cancer A549, NCI-H441 cells and In this study, we have investigated the JAK2V617F BEAS-2B (control) cell carrying pLenti-KRAS- mutation in Tunisian patients with ET, to establish the CDSmLCS6n,pLenti-KRAS-CDSm-LCS6mplasmids.The correlation between phenotype and genotype. results showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations have sig- Materials and Methods: Mutation screening for JAK2 nificant different effects among A549 and NCI-H441 cell V617F in patients was performed by allele-specific PCR in groups. the mutation of LSC6 region increases the cell 12 newly diagnosed ET patients in Tunisia. Clinical and migration and proliferation in NCI-H441 cells, while in biological data were recorded. A549 cells a slight decrease occurred in migration and Results: JAK2 V617F mutation was found in 2 patients proliferation levels. Both G12V and LCS6 mutations with an overall frequency of 16.7%.A particular history of increase the cell invasion level in A549 and NCI-H441 thrombosis was recorded. cells. As for the target genes, both Western and qPCR Conclusions: Despite the limitation of our study, the results showed that G12V and LCS6 mutations induced JAK2V617FmutationseemstobenotfrequentinTunisian PI3K/AKT/mTOR and RAF/MEK/ERK pathways in A549 patients with ET. Moreover, genotyping of patients and NCI-H441 cells, induce these pathways were higher in suspected of a myeloproliferative neoplasm for JAK2 A549 cells. v617F would be useful to assess the risk of complications. A.A. Azzawri: None. T. Cora: None. H. Acar: None. Larger studies are mandatory. References: E-P12.32 1.Cetin, G., et al., Evaluation of clinical and laboratory A PHENOTYPIC CONTINUUM FROM LYNCH findings with JAK2 V617F mutation as an independent SYNDROME TO CMMRD variable in essential thrombocytosis. Mol Biol Rep, 2014. 41(10): p. 6737-42. M.Alvarez-Barona1,C. Fernandez-Rozadilla1,A. Dacal2,C. 2.AlAssaf,C.,etal.,Analysisofphenotypeandoutcome Calviño-Costas3, J.Amigo1, X.Bello1,B. Sobrino1,A. Lopez- in essential thrombocythemia with CALR or JAK2 muta- Novo1,J. Cameselle-Teijeiro4,A. Carracedo1,M. Muleris5,C. tions. Haematologica, 2015. 100(7): p. 893-7. Colas6,K. Wimmer7,C.Ruiz-Ponte1 M. Belhiba: None. H. Bellaaj: None. L. Keskes: None. R. Frikha: None. 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC, IDIS, Santiago deAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1017 Compostela, Spain, 2Servicio de Gastroenterología, Hospital E-P12.34 Universitario Lucus Augusti, IDIS, Lugo, Spain, 3Servicio de Detection of mitochondrialDNA copy numbers in the Pediatría, Hospital Universitario Lucus Augusti, Lugo, Spain, plasma of ovarian cancer patients 4Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Clínico Universitario, USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, J.S. Keserű1,B. Soltész1, J.Lukács2, R.Póka2,B. Nagy1 5Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Centre de recherche Saint- Antoine,Paris,France,6DepartmentofGeneticsInstitutCurie, 1Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne Université, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Institute of Paris, France, 7Division of Human Genetics, Medical Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, University University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary Colorectalcancer(CRC)isextremelyrarebelowtheageof Introduction: Mitochondria are the key organelles in the 25yearseveninLynchsyndrome(LS),whichiscausedby energy production, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Copy heterozygous germline mutations in the mismatch repair number variations were connected to different pathological (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2). On the conditions. It was suggested that it is contributing factor to other hand, biallelic germline mutations in one of these different cancer development. We decided to measure the MMR genes are responsible for the Constitutional Mis- mtDNA copy numbers in the plasma in ovarian cancer match Repair Deficiency (CMMRD) syndrome character- patients and healthy controls. ized by an early-onset CRC with a high childhood Materials and Methods: We involved 24 healthy cancer risk. controls (average age 54.00±14.57 years) and 24 ovarian We present a very early-onset CRC in a 12 year-old boy cancer patients (average age 61.33±12.72 years) in the belongingtoaLSfamilywithagermlinepathogenicvariant study. Blood was drawn into EDTA tubes and plasma was intheMSH2gene.HisCRCshowedMSH2/MSH6protein- separated by centrifugations. MtDNA copy numbers were complex loss, microsatellite instability, and the second-hit determined by Human Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation in MSH2. Due to his early-onset a CMMRD was Monitoring Primer Set kit (Takara, Japan) with real- suspected, but the absence of another detected germline time PCR. alteration in the MMR genes together with the results Results: The mtDNA copy number was 48±17.34 in the obtained in the gMSI /(ev)MSI and the methylation healthy control group. We divided the ovarian cancer tolerance assays1 discarded the CMMRD diagnosis. patients group according to their FIGO classification, the Ourhypothesis isthatanothergermlinevariantoccurring copynumberswerethefollowingsFIGOI.32±8.38; FIGO in the affected child could contribute in addition with the III. 33±5.66; FIGO IV. 42±18.87. There is not significant causative MSH2 variant to his early-onset CRC. Whole- difference in the plasma cell-free mtDNA copy numbers. exome-sequencing and trio analysis were carried out. Conclusion: We determined the cell-free mtDNA copy Preliminary results showed no genetic alterations in numbers in the plasma of ovarian cancer patients and actionable genes related to hereditary colorectal cancer healthy controls and did not found significant difference. syndromes or in genes involved in DNA repair pathways We plan to extend the study to exosome encapsulated (NER, BER, HR). Further analyses are still undertaking. mtDNA measurements. These data support the existence of a severe and early- J.S. Keserű: None. B. Soltész: None. J. Lukács: None. onset LS phenotype mimicking CMMRD. Although the R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. genetic mechanisms underlying this clinical continuum are largely unknown, we will discuss possible scenarios of a E-P12.36 postulated genetic continuum. Expression quantitative trait loci analysis of 1Bodo_Gastroenterology 2015 nasopharyngeal carcinoma Funding: CNAG-300-exomes Rare-Diseases M. Alvarez-Barona: None. C. Fernandez-Rozadilla: W.Su1,J. Zhang1,K. Chang2 None. A. Dacal: None. C. Calviño-Costas: None. J. Amigo: None. X. Bello: None. B. Sobrino: None. A. 1Department ofBiomedical Sciences,Chang GungUniversity, Lopez-Novo: None. J. Cameselle-Teijeiro: None. A. Taoyuan, Taiwan, 2Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Carracedo: None. M. Muleris: None. C. Colas: None. Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou, Taoyuan, Taiwan K. Wimmer: None. C. Ruiz-Ponte: None. Thediscoveryofexpressionquantitativetraitloci(eQTL)of specific tissue can help to reveal genetic component of complex diseases. To identify eQTLs responsible for1018 J.delPicchia nasopharyngeal carcinoma risk behind the loci identified in E-P12.40 genome-wide association studies (GWAS), we conducted Can Theranekron be an agent for inducing apoptosis and eQTL analyses using 25 tumor and 5 adjacent normal tis- ER stress in human pancreatic cells sues. The cis- and trans-eQTLs were identified by inte- gratingwholegenomegenotypingdatawithRNA-Seqgene N.Koçak1,T. Duran1,V.B. Ucar1,S. Nergiz1,I.Yildirim2 expression data. After analysis, there were 18,375 SNP- mRNA eQTL pairs passed P < 1.00E-05 criteria. Then the 1Selçuk University, Selçuklu Medical Faculty,The Department eQTLs were combined with NPC GWAS loci and found ofMedicalGenetics,Konya,Turkey,2DicleUniversity,Faculty HLA-B, HLA-DQ and TNFRSF19 were with putative NPC of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Genetics, Diyarbakır, susceptibility eQTLs. Turkey W. Su: None. J. Zhang: None. K. Chang: None. Introduction: Tarantula cubensis venom (Theranekron) is E-P12.39 used as a homeopathic medicine. Many therapeutic effects Investigation of the effect of theranekron on endoplasmic of Theranekron, such as antitumor, necrotizing action and reticulum stress in human pancreatic cell line BXPC-3 wound healing have been demonstrated in clinical studies. ER stress has a role in development of inflammation and V. B.Ucar,T. Duran, N.Kocak cancer. Thus, ER stress has been suggested as a promising targetfortumorcelldeathandcancertherapy.Effectiveness Selcuk University, Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, of theranekron as an anti-cancer chemical has been TURKEY, KONYA, Turkey demonstrated in limited human cancer cells. However, a studyrelatedtotheeffectoftheranekrononpancreascancer ® Introduction:Tarantulacubensisvenom(Theranekron )is isnotavailableintheliterature.Therefore,inthisstudy,we used as a homeopathic medicine which has shown anti- aimed to investigate the effect of theranekron on ER stress tumor effects in veterinary medicine. The aim of this study and apoptosis on PANC-1. wastoassesseffectofTarantulacubensisonapoptoticcell Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron death of human cancer cell lines. ER stress has also a key (10μl)inthestudyweredeterminedbyMTTanalysis.Cells role in development of inflammation, obesity and cancer. weretreatedwith10μltheranekronfor4hours.TotalRNA Thus,ERstresshasbeensuggestedasapromisingtargetfor wasisolatedusingTRIzolreagent.SynthesisofcDNAfrom tumor cell death and cancer therapy. Effectiveness of ther- the total RNA was carried out using Transcriptor High anekron as an anti-cancer chemical has been demonstrated Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression levels of genes in various human cancers. However, a study related to the (GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1) associated with endoplasmic effect of theranekron on pancreas cancer is not available in reticulum stress and genes (P53, BAX, BCL-2) associated the literature. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to inves- with apoptosis were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changes tigate the effect of tunicamycin-induced ER stress on were calculated by the ΔCT method. The statistical BXPC-3 cell line. significances were analyzed applying two-tailed student’s Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA). (2μg/ml) in the study were determined by MTT analysis. Results: As a result, we found a difference in the Cells were treated with 2μg/ml theranekron for 6 hours. expression levels of genes associated with ER stress and TotalRNAwasisolatedusingTRIzolreagent.Synthesisof apoptosisintheranekron-treatedPANC-1cellscomparedto cDNA from the total RNA was carried out using the untreated group. This suggests that theranekron effects Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression the pathways associated with ER stress and apoptosis. levels of genes (GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1, ATF4, ATF6, N.Koçak:None.T.Duran:None.V.B. Ucar:None.S. XBP1) associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress were Nergiz: None. I. Yildirim: None. analyzedbyRT-qPCR.Foldchangeswerecalculatedbythe ΔCT method. The statistical significances were analyzed E-P12.41 applyingtwo-tailedstudent’st-testandanalysisofvariance Does Tarantula cubensis venom have antipoliferative & (ANOVA). endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibitor activity on skin Results: As a result, We found a difference in the cancer cells? expressionlevelsofERstressrelatedgenesintheranekron- treatedBXPC-3cellscomparedtotheuntreatedgroup.This T. Duran,N.Kocak,V. B. Ucar,T.Cora, S. Nergiz suggests that theranekron effects the pathways associated with ER stress. Selcuk University Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey V.B. Ucar: None. T. Duran: None. N. Kocak: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1019 Tarantula cubensis venom (Theranekron) is used as a thyroid cancer (DTC) in Caucasoid and Asian populations. homeopathic medicine which has shown anti-tumor effects Among those reported, the rs944289 seems to had a sig- in veterinary medicine. ER stress has also a key role in nificantassociationinAsians.Hereweinvestigatedtherole developmentofinflammation,obesityandcancer.Thus,ER of rs944289 as a pilot study in Thai population. stress has been suggested as a promising target for tumor Materials and Methods: 179 patients with confirmed cell death and cancer therapy. Effectiveness of theranekron thyroid cancer and 98 healthy individuals as control group asananti-cancerchemicalhasbeendemonstratedinlimited were enrolled. Genotypes were identifiedusing PCR-RFLP humancancercells.However,astudyrelatedtotheeffectof methods. Results were analyzed by SPSS. theranekron on pancreas cancer is not available in the lit- Results:TheriskTalleleofrs944289polymorphismwas erature.Therefore,inthisstudy,weaimedtoinvestigatethe notassociatedwithriskofthyroidcancer,withoddsratioof effect of theranekron on ER stress and apoptosis on SK- 0.97 (95% CI 0.68-1.38) in Thai population. These result MEL-30 cell line. revealedthatthers944289polymorphismisnotamainrisk Materials and Methods: Effective doses of theranekron factor for thyroid cancer in Thai. (20μl)inthestudyweredeterminedbyMTTanalysis.Cells Conclusions:Thers944289SNP,however,maynotplay were treated with 20 μl theranekron for 24 hours. Total a primary role in the development of DTC in Thai RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent. Synthesis of population. Further studies would include more samples cDNA from the total RNA was carried out using and extend to other reported variants to create a profile Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit. Expression polymorphisms for thyroid cancer susceptibility in Thai levels of genes (GRP78, CHOP, EDEM1, ATF4, ATF6, population. XBP1) associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress and P. Yeetong: None. S. Mitbunchanarong: None. A. genes (P53, BAX, BCL-2,BAD) associated with apoptosis Laipiriyakun: None. B. Satayaban: None. S. were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Fold changes were calculated Ausavarat: None. by the ΔCT method. The statistical significances were analyzedapplyingtwo-tailedstudent’st-testandanalysisof variance (ANOVA). E-P13 Basic mechanisms in molecular and cytogenetics Results: As a result, we found a difference in the expression levels of genes associated with ER stress and E-P13.02 apoptosis in theranekron-treated SK-MEL-30 cells com- Different origin of chromosome 15 CNVs paredtotheuntreatedgroup.Thissuggeststhattheranekron effects the pathways associated with ER stress and Z. G.Markova,M. Minzhenkova,N.Shilova apoptosis. T.Duran:None.N.Kocak:None.V.B.Ucar:None.T. Federal state budgetary institution «Research centre for Cora: None. S. Nergiz: None. medical genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation E-P12.43 Introduction: The 15q11-q13 region contains many low Association of rs944289 polymorphism and differentiated copy repeats, is well known for its genomic instability and thyroid cancer: a pilot study in Thai population issubstrateforCNVsformation.CNVsmaybedetectedby aCGH and NGS. But these methods provide information P. Yeetong1,S. Mitbunchanarong2,A. Laipiriyakun3,B. only about copy number variations (deletion, duplication, Satayaban3,S. Ausavarat4 triplication). Materials and Methods: We studied CNVs of chromo- 1Division of Human Genetics, Department of Botany, Faculty some15detectedbyaCGHin4casesandbyNGS-inone of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand, case. FISH analysis was performed on interphase and 2Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn metaphase chromosomes with CEP and LSI DNA-probes University, Bangkok, Thailand, 3Nuclear Chemistry on chromosome 15. Laboratory, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Results: In two cases, the copy number gains Radiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol (dup15q11.2q11.3 and dup15q11.2) were caused by inter- University, Bangkok, Thailand, 4Department of Clinical stitial duplication detected by FISH analyses. Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol In two other cases (triplication15q11.2q13/duplica- University, Bangkok, Thailand tion15q13.2q13.3 and duplication15q11-q13) FISH- analysis showed inv dup 15 supernumerary marker Introduction: Many single nucleotide polymorphisms chromosome. (SNP)havebeenshowntobeassociatedwithdifferentiated1020 J.delPicchia Inonecase,withthedeletionof15q11.2q13.3(8,7Mb)an E-P13.06 unbalanced translocation - der(13)t(13;15)(q11.1,13.3) was Molecular cytogenetic survey of alterations to cell cycle found. The genomic imbalance detected by CMA was due pathway in neuropsychiatric diseases toanunbalancedsegregationproductofapaternalbalanced translocation. S. G.Vorsanova1,2,Y. B.Yurov1,2,M.A. Zelenova1,2, O.S. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that although aCGH Kurinnaia1,2,I.A.Demidova1,2,A.D.Kolotii1,2,K.S.Vasin1,2,V. and NGS may be should be the first-tier test for clinical S.Kravets1,2,N.S. Shmitova2, V.O.Sharonin2, I.Y.Iourov1,2,3 diagnosis of genomic imbalance, but only chromosome analysis or FISH provides the chromosomal structural 1Academician Yu.E. Veltishchev Research Clinical Institute of information associated with these copy number changes. Pediatrics, N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research Medical Some of these copy number changes are associated with University, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, additional chromosomal structural rearrangements that can Moscow, Russian Federation, 2FSBSI «Mental Health only be defined by FISH analysis with targeted DNA- ResearchCenter»,Moscow,RussianFederation,3FSBEIFPE probes. Identification of chromosomal structural rearrange- «RussianMedicalAcademyofPostgraduateEducation»ofthe mentsisindispensableforgeneticcounselingofthefamily. Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Z.G. Markova: None. M. Minzhenkova: None. N. Russian Federation Shilova: None. Introduction: Chromosome and genomic rearrangements E-P13.03 areafrequentcauseofabnormalbrainfunctioningresulting A rarely seen 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism of Klinefelter in neuropsychiatric diseases. Despite a wide variety of syndrome: Case report available data, specific biological processes underlying abnormal neurodevelopment remain to be unmasked. Here, A. KalayciYigin, U.Gumus,M.Seven wehaveusedmolecularcytogeneticdatatoanalyzespecific pathways leading to neuropsychiatric diseases in children. İstanbulUniversity,CerrahpaşaMedicalFaculty,Department Materials and Methods: Conventional and molecular of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey karyotyping was used to evaluate 427 patients with idiopathic intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy, and A rarely seen 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism of Klinefelter congenital malformations. An original bioinformatic tech- syndrome: Case report nique based on candidate process prioritization (Iourov Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome is one of the most et al., 2014; Yurov et al., 2017) was applied to pathway common human sex chromosome anomalies. Males with enrichment among these patients. Klinefelter syndrome may have one or more extra copy of Results: Molecular cytogenetic analysis has shown the X chromosome in each cell (47,XXY/48,XXXY/49, CNVs relevant to a pathway functional change in 397 XXXXY) or may have the extra X chromosome in only children (93%). The highest enrichment rates (gene some of their cells. This condition is described as mosaic percentage among all the prioritized candidate genes/ (47,XXY/46,XY). 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism of Klinefel- processes) were found for the following pathways: cell ter syndrome is very rare and aproximately 10 cases have cycle (4.68%), MAPK signaling (6.56%), pathways in been reported so far in the literature. cancer(11.94%),DNAreplication(1.64%).Allthechildren Clinical case: We report here a case of a mosaic 47, exhibitingthegenomicvariationsalteringgenesinvolvedin XXY/46,XX infertile male in whom referred to our these pathways were found to present with chromosome department with infertility history for 5 years. His sperm instability (mosaic aneuploidy, chromosome breaks/fragi- analysis revealed azoospermia. The cytogenetic analysis lity, non-specific structural chromosomal rearrangements), with GTG-banding karyotype lymphocytes from peripheral whereas the remainder was not demonstrating definable bloodsamplesshowed47,XXY[57]/46,XX[43].AlsoFISH chromosome instability. analysiswithXcentromereprobeconfirmedthemosaicism. Conclusions: Alterations to pathways associated with Conclusion: We have demonstrated 47,XXY/46,XX genome/chromosomestabilitymaintenancethroughthecell mosaicism ofKlinefelter syndromewhichisextremelyrare cycle were shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of geneticdiseaseandthereforewethoughttocontributetothe neuropsychiatric diseases. The consequences of the altera- literature with the present study. tions were found to be detectable at chromosomal level. Keywords: 47,XXY/46,XX mosaicism, Klinefelter syn- These data supports a previously proposed hypothesis drome, rare disorders. describing two-/multiple hits to genome stability as a A. Kalayci Yigin: None. U. Gumus: None. M. possible mechanism of neuropsychiatric diseases (Iourov Seven: None. et al., 2013). Supported by RSF (14-35-00060).Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1021 S.G. Vorsanova: None. Y.B. Yurov: None. M.A. T. V.Nikitina1,A. A. Kashevarova1, A.G.Menzorov2,3,S.A. Zelenova: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: None. I.A. Demidova: Vasilyev1,M.M.Gridina2,A.A.Khabarova2,A.V.Churilova4, None. A.D. Kolotii: None. K.S. Vasin: None. V.S. O.L. Serov2,3,I.N.Lebedev1 Kravets: None. N.S. Shmitova: None. V.O. Sharonin: None. I.Y. Iourov: None. 1ResearchInstituteofMedicalGenetics,TomskNRMC,Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB E-P13.08DR RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 4Tomsk State N.Nadine Jalkh1, Z.Haidar1, S.Corbani1,V. Delague2,A. University, Tomsk, Russian Federation Mégarbané3,E. Chouery1 Introduction:Themitoticinheritanceofringchromosomes 1Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 2INSERM, UMR_S in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) has acquired 910, Marseille, France, 3Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, special interest after report, that iPSCs can eliminate ring France chromosomeandrestoreanormalkaryotypeviauniparental disomy (Bershteyn et al., 2014). The frequency of genetic disorders among people reaching MaterialsandMethods:Weobtained3iPSClinesfrom adulthood is estimated to be equal 8%. Due to the clinical fibroblasts of patient with r(13) by using LeGO lentiviral and genetic heterogeneity of diseases, molecular diagnosis vectors, coding OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and C-MYC tran- can be very challenging. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) scriptionfactors.Cytogeneticanalysiswasperformedusing have revolutionized the field of genomics by allowing a G-banding and FISH. rapid and cost-effective diagnosis. Results: Fibroblasts were mosaic for variable level of r Here,wepresentdataonthefirst172probandsreferredto (13), monosomy 13 and 46,XY,-13,+mar cells during usforgeneticevaluationbyWES.Patientspresentedwitha cultivation. iTAF6-6 iPSC line karyotype was 46,XY,r(13) range of phenotypes suggesting potential genetic causes. in80%and45,XY,-13in20%ofcellsatpassage13(P13). The molecular diagnostic rate observed in our study iTAF6-13 line had 95% of 46,XY,-13,+mar cells at P11, is 43%. whereas the ring chromosome was not registered at all. Thisyieldishigherthanthepositiveratesofothergenetic Perhaps, this clone originated from a cell with the marker tests, such as karyotype analysis (5 to 15%), chromosomal chromosome or fragmentation of r(13) took place during microarrayanalysis(15to20%),andSangersequencingfor reprogramming or at early passages. In iTAF6-4 line the single genes. proportion of cells with r(13) significantly decreased from WES provided a high diagnosis in people with deafness, 18% to 5%, at the same time the proportion of cells with renal dysfunction, leukodystrophies and neuromuscular marker chromosome significantly increased from 73% to disorders; suggesting that these groups of patients are 86% (at P5 and P12 respectively) with a small number of particularlygoodcandidatesforgeneticevaluationbyWES. monosomic cells. Undiagnosed cases may present large rearrangements or Conclusions:r(13)wasinstableduringreprogrammingor mutations that are located in non-coding regions, such as at early passages in iPSCs. However, spontaneous correc- regulatory or deep intronic regions, which can not be tion of the 46,XY,r(13) karyotype to normal has not been detected by WES. Furthermore, technical limitations such registeredinanyofthecelllines.Thisstudywassupported as poor coverage can also interfere with WES success. by Russian Science Foundation, grant 16-15-10231. In conclusion, the use of WES to analyze 172 clinical T.V. Nikitina: None. A.A. Kashevarova: None. A.G. cases yielded a diagnosis in 43% of these cases, which Menzorov: None. S.A. Vasilyev: None. M.M. Gridina: supports the use of WES as a diagnostic test for patients None.A.A.Khabarova:None.A.V.Churilova:None.O. with nonspecific or unusual disease presentations of L. Serov: None. I.N. Lebedev: None. possible genetic cause and for patients with clinical diagnoses of heterogeneous genetic conditions. E-P13.13 N. Nadine Jalkh: None. Z. Haidar: None. S. Corbani: Chromosomal damage in Individuals with radiofrequency None. V. Delague: None. A. Mégarbané: None. E. eposure as Measured by Personal Exposimeter Chouery: None. R. Ramanpreet, G.Gandhi E-P13.10 The routes of r(13) instability in induced pluripotent stem Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India cells1022 J.delPicchia Introduction: Communication and information technolo- stability, was the most incriminated mechanisms.We report gies rely on electromagnetic radiations and the increased in this work, the case of a newborn (patient1) presenting a dependency on these technologies has resulted in an insi- polymalformative syndrome (severe dysmorphic syndrome diousbuild-upofradiofrequencyelectromagneticfield(RF- and a cardiopathy) and a 16 years-old boy (patient 2) with EMF) in the environment. The RF radiation exposure may scoliosis, Madelung deformity and aortic stenosis.Patients pose to be health-hazardous and, therefore, requires underwent a standard R-band blood karyotype and fluor- assessment. escence in-situ hybridization (FISH).Karyotype showed in Materials and Methods: In the present study, chromo- patient2 the presence of a chromosome mosaic with a ring somaldamagewasassessedusingtheBuccalMicronucleus 7 chromosome present in 28% of mitoses and a derivative Cytome (BMCyt) assay as a function of radiation exposure chromosome 7 (der (7)) presentin 72% of mitoses. Der (7) after Institutional Ethics Committee clearance of the study is a duplicated in 7q terminal. Patient 2 presents a chro- and written voluntary informed consent from the partici- mosomal mosaic associating a monosomy X and a ring Y pants.Forthis,24hour-personalexposimetermeasurements chromosome. FISH confirmed the presence of the ring Y (PEM) were recorded for unrelated 60 healthy adults (40 chromosme in 90% of the analyzed nuclei. This Y ring cases residing in the vicinity of mobile phone base stations chromosome contains the SRY gene Instability of ring sincetheirinstallationand20controlsresidinginareaswith chromosomesduringmitoticdivisionsexplainstheirmosaic no base stations). distribution. Phenotypes associated with ring chromosomes Results: The PEM in cases (149.28±8.98 mV/m) are variable depending on the nature of the ring chromo- revealed significantly higher (p=0.000) electric field some,themosaicrateandtheirgenescontent.Ring7andY strength compared to the recorded value (80.40±0.30 mV/ chromosomes are chromosome abnormalities. During the m) in controls. The cases (n=40; 23-90 years) and the cell cycles, by an exchange effect between sister chroma- controls(n=20;19-65 years)matched foralcoholdrinking, tids, ring chromosomes can undergo breaks, duplication,⋯ smoking habits, and mobile and cordless phone usage. The These phenomena can lead to the formation of derivative frequenciesofmicronuclei(1.86X,p=0.007),nuclearbuds chromosomes associated with the ring.The haploinsuffi- (2.95X, p=0.002) and cell death parameter (condensed ciency ofSHOXgeneinring Ychromosomeisresponsible chromatin cells) were significantly (1.75X, p=0.007) for 70% of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Characterization elevated in cases compared to that in controls probably as byCGHarrayoftheseringchromosomesisinprogressand a function of radiofrequency radiation exposure in the may explain their formation mechanism absence of other exposure(s). S. Dimassi: None. Y. Halleb: None. N. Kahloul: None. Conclusions: The long- term exposure to low intensity W. Gafsi: None. A. Jalloul: None. H. Hadj Abdallah: electromagnetic microwaves as emitted continuously by None. L. Boughammoura: None. S. Mougou-Zerelli: mobile phone base station may provoke ill health effects None. A. Saad: None. which may further lead to cancer development. However, studies on a larger sample size are required for more E-P13.15 insights. Impact of diet, household income and stress on telomere R. Ramanpreet: None. G. Gandhi: None. length in a cohort of Colombian schoolchildren E-P13.14 E. D.Kidd1,A. Walley2, J.Buxton3, J.LePage-Pezet4,D.D. fishing with the ring Cohen5,6,P. Lopez-Jaramillo5,6,A. I.F. Blakemore7,8,U.L. Fairbrother1 S.DIMASSI1,Y.Halleb2,N.Kahloul3,W.Gafsi4,A.Jalloul1,H. Hadj Abdallah1, L.Boughammoura3,S. Mougou-Zerelli1, A. 1School of Human Science, London Metropolitan University, Saad1 North Campus, 166-220 Holloway Road, London, United Kingdom, 2Genetics Research Centre, Molecular and Clinical 1service de cytogénétique et de biologie de la reproduction, Sciences Research Institute and Institute of Medical and CHU Farhat Hached, SOUSSE, Tunisia, 2Department of Biomedical Science Education, St George’s University of Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached London, St George’s Hospital, Carlton Terrace, London, University Teaching Hospital, SOUSSE, Tunisia, 3service de United Kingdom, 3Department of Biomolecular Sciences, pédiatrie,CHUFarhatHached,SOUSSE,Tunisia,4servicede School of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and Chemistry, Kingston pédiatrie, hôpital régional de Moknine, Moknine, Tunisia University, London, United Kingdom, 4School of Human Science, LondonMetropolitan University, NorthCampus,166- Ring Chromosomes are rare cytogenetic abnormalities. 220 Holloway Road, London, United Kingdom, 5Dirección de Teloremic deletion or fusion, disturbing chromosome Investigaciones, Fundación Oftalmológica de SantanderAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1023 (FOSCAL),Floridablanca,Santander,Colombia,6Facultadde TheMCM4genebelongtothekeyproteinsinvolvedinthe Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Santander (UDES), replication licensing in a cell cycle. The gene expression Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia, 7Department of dysregulation was found in number of tumors. The aim of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, this study was to investigate the particularities of gene London, United Kingdom, 8Department of Life Sciences, expression in cancer cells after МСМ4 gene silencing. College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University, ExperimentwascarriedoutontheHT-29cellline.Profiling London, United Kingdom was made with the help of Affymetrix GeneChip 2.0. Data were normalized by SSTR Multi-Chip Analysis algorithm Introduction: Mean telomere length (TL) has been asso- in TAC 4.0. The changes of MCM4 RNA levels were ciated with aging, cancer, diet and stress. In order to assess determinedthroughdifferenttimeaftersiRNAtransfection. theeffectsofdietandstressonTL,andminimisetheeffect ControlcellsweretransfectedwithsiCON1.Acomparative ofage,thecurrentstudyassessedschool-agechildrenwitha analysis of siMCM4/siCON1 RNA samples showed that comprehensive phenotyping approach. MCM4genesilencingleadstochangesin146genes(gene- Materials and Methods: Relative telomere length ratios level p-value < 0,05). The most of identified genes are were determined in 375 subjects (age 9-14 years). Subjects involved into regulation of cell cycle process, G1/S transi- were recruited within the ACFIES (Association between tion,DNAreplication,anatomicalstructuredevelopment.In Cardiorespiratory Fitness, Muscular Strength and Body particular,theexpressionofE2F7,Cdc6,CCNE2cell-cycle Composition with Metabolic Risk Factors in Colombian genes were suppressed and expression of CDK8 gene was Children) study. Phenotypes were determined using stan- increased. The CDK8 is a part of mediator complex that dard tests and an extensive questionnaire. A composite allowed suggest activation of multiple transcription pro- stress score was derived by adding together the number of grams as response to gene silencing. Of significance is the serious life events for each subject. Statistical analysis was increased expression of TNFSF10 gene, which activates carried out using SPSSv25 (IBM Inc., USA). cancer cell death through the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. Results: Consumption of 31 different foods was not Both TNFRSF10 (A/B) receptors constitutionally express significantly associated with TL (p>0.05). Uncorrected into HT-29 cells. The data may suppose the activation of associations were observed for dairy (p=0.014), fast food apoptosisthroughanexternalcellmechanismunderМСМ4 (p=0.01) and fruit juice (p=0.049). Household income silencing. Grant: № 0517 - 2017-0017, FASO Russia. was positively associated with consumption of dairy (p= A. Kuzevanova: None. P. Koshkin: None. P. Apano- 0.00005) and fruit juice (p=0.03) but not fast food vich: None. D. Khmelkova: None. A. Karpukhin: None. (p>0.05). It was negatively associated with a composite A. Alimov: None. stress score (p=0.00003). In this study, neither household income nor stress were associated with TL (p>0.05). E-P13.17 Conclusions: Interestingly, TL appears to be positively The two faces of WTX gene associated with consumption of dairy products, possibly due to the beneficial effects of increasing micronutrients D.Formicola1,A.LaBarbera1,A.Provenzano1,A.Gambale2,P. such as calcium in the diet for these children. The lack of Reho1,L. Quaglietta3,V. Palazzo4,E. Bosi1, L.Dosa4, R. associationwithhouseholdincomeandstressmaybedueto Artuso4,A. Iolascon2, S.Giglio1,4 the relatively small cohort size, or their young age so that long-term effects are yet to manifest. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Dpt. Experimental and Clinical E.D.Kidd:None.A.Walley:None.J.Buxton:None.J. Biomedical Sciences, Florence, Italy, 2Department of Le Page-Pezet: None. D.D. Cohen: None. P. Lopez- Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University Jaramillo: None. A.I.F. Blakemore: None. U.L. Federico II of Naples (Italy) and CEINGE Advanced Fairbrother: None. Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology & Oncology, AORN Santobono-Pausilipon, E-P13.16 Naples, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's Gene expression profiles in response to MCM4 University Hospital, Florence, Italy transcription silencing Abnormalities in WNT signaling are implicated in a broad A. Kuzevanova, P.Koshkin, P.Apanovich, D.Khmelkova,A. range of developmental anomalies and in tumorigenesis. Karpukhin, A.Alimov WTX is expressed during embryonic development and is somatically inactivated in 20-30% of Wilms tumors; RCMG, Moscow, Russian Federation germline mutations are also observed in both familial and sporadic forms of a X-linked dominant disorder, the1024 J.delPicchia osteopathia-striata congenital with cranial sclerosis(OSCS). necessary. One of the most important points to note in Wereportedtwounrelatedmaleprobands:thefirstaffected experiments for cell culture studies is the amount of living byOSCS(hismotherpresentmildphenotype)andasecond cells used. While the qualification of the cell medium and with familial Wilms tumor. Whole exome sequencing theamountof thecarbon dioxide and/or temperature ofthe (WES) of both revealed two novel missense germinal incubator with CO are include during passaging, the sub- 2 mutations: c.401>G/T (OSCS) and c.477T>G (Wilms); stance and/or method used are include among factors additionally, WES on tumor tissue revealed a second hit in affecting cell viability during the freezing process. In CTNNB1 gene. Both germline mutations in males were addition to these factors, there is no definite information as found with a minor allele frequency <1% in Caucasian to whether there is a relationship between centrifugation population. The histidine at 134 and the phenylalanine at gradient and cell viability. We used eleven different cell 159 position in WTX were conserved in phylogenetic tree, lines, seven of which were monolayer (U-87MG, U- thus suggesting a causative role. These variants are located 118MG,LN-18,PC-3,DU145,LNCaP,WI-38)andfourof in exon2 encoding an important Phosphatidylinositol(4,5)- which were suspension (K-562, HL-60, CCFR-CEM, NCI- bisphosphate binding domain to localize WTX to the BL2171). We exposed cells to centrifugation with different plasma membrane. Most deleterious mutations in this time (5 and 10 min) and centrifugal gravity/rpm (600rpm/ domain correlate with fetal or neonatal lethality in affected 40g, 1200rpm/232g, 2400rpm/638g and 4800rpm/2550g) males. We hypothesized that c.401G>T mutation is afterpassaging.Then,weevaluateddeadandlivingcellsby responsible of the “mild” male phenotype of OCSC, prob- theCedexXSanalyzer.Wefoundsignificantdiffersincells ablybecauseofthechangeofabasiconhydrophobicamino viability for each cells after centrifugation process in par- acid (p.H134P) doesn’t promote dramatically conforma- allel to time and centrifugal gravity. In conclusion, this tional change intheWTX.Furthermore, we reported inthe study revealed differences in viability rates of cell lines in second patient the first evidence of germinal predisposing cell culture studies, depending on the centrifugation mutation in WTX in familial Wilms tumor. We also hypo- gradient. thesized that gain-of-function or loss-of-function mutations A. Asik: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. C. Kayabasi: at the same domain could cause very distinct clinical None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. F. Sogutlu: None. R. diseases. Gasimli: None. C. Celebi: None. E. Tayfur: None. S. D. Formicola: None. A. La Barbera: None. A. Yilmaz Susluer: None. C. Biray Avci: None. C. Provenzano: None. A. Gambale: None. P. Reho: None. Gunduz: None. L.Quaglietta:None.V.Palazzo:None.E.Bosi:None.L. Dosa: None. R. Artuso: None. A. Iolascon: None. S. E-P14.02 Giglio: None. Coverage analysis of targeted next generation sequence data among 204 primer immune deficiency patients E-P14 New diagnostic approaches, technical aspects & E. Pariltay,A. Aykut, A.Durmaz, O.Cogulu quality control Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey E-P14.01 The effects of the different centrifugal gravities on the cell Introduction: Next-generation sequencing is changing viability clinical routine of molecular diagnosis. As well as whole genome and exome sequencing targeted gene panels are A. Asik,N.OzatesAy, C. Kayabasi, B.Ozmen Yelken,F. getting increasingly used for diagnostic assays. Amplifica- Sogutlu,R.Gasimli,C.Celebi,E.Tayfur,S.YilmazSusluer,C. tion imbalances is one of most common the limitations of BirayAvci, C. Gunduz multi-amplicon targeted sequencing. Materials and Methods: We sequenced 204 primer Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical immune deficiency diagnosed patients by community Biology, Izmir, Turkey designed ready to use “Ampliseq Primary Immune Deficiency Research Panel v2” using 530 chip and Ion Cell culture is based on the principle of replicating cells S5™next-generationsequencer.Panelcovers264geneand under controlled conditions. Cell culture studies are an 5241ampliconsusingtwopools(2627and2614amplicons important part of today's popular research topics and are respectively). frequentlyusedasmodelsinvitrocancerresearch.Thegoal Results:Meanontargetreadwas97,86%andmeanread in cell and tissue culture is to keep the cells alive and to depthwas340,98wheremeanuniformitywas86,83%.We reproduce the cells and to freeze them for reusing when could not able to get any usable read from 42 of the 5241Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1025 amplicons (mean read count <0). Amplicon read count Rearrangement Noofpatients Size(Kb) Start End analysisrevealed,1844and3164ampliconshadatleastone read count below threshold 10 and 20 read respectively. Dup10_12 10 41.499 117,186,717 117,228,215 Amplification faults was not accumulated in specific genes Del2 6 7.822 117,138,471 117,146,292 and heterogeneously distributed. Del4-8 5 10.695 117,169,806 117,180,500 Conclusions: Target based gene panels are helpful for Del2_22 2 130.63 117,139,946 117,270,575 geneticdisorders wheremultigenetargetsareneeded tobe Dup22 2 5.398 117,267,448 117,272,845 sequenced.BecauseofanalyticpipelineDNAenrichmentis Del18_20 1 6.807 117,246,136 117,252,942 required. Biochemical nature of amplification is not a Del_upstream_9 1 76.283 115,913,429 117,196,552 perfect process. While reporting multi gene panels clin- Wholegenedel 1 188.739 117,120,005 117,308,744 icians havetoconsiderthepossibilityofuncoveredregions and using alternative methods for diagnosis. Here we share preliminarycoverageanalysisofprimerimmunedeficiency Conclusions: In Greece, as in other Mediterranean panel sequencing data. populations, CFTR mutations show great heterogeneity. In E. Pariltay: None. A. Aykut: None. A. Durmaz: None. ourstudythefrequencyoflargerearrangementsisestimated O. Cogulu: None. to be approximately 2%. In conclusion we suggested that screeningforsuchrearrangementsshouldbeincludedwhen E-P14.03 screening patients with typical CF and when aiming to Large rearrangements in the CFTR gene: Data from achieve a high detection rate. patients of Greek origin M. Poulou: None. H. Fryssira: None. S. Kitsiou-Tzeli: None. M. Tzetis: None. M.Poulou, H.Fryssira,S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, M.Tzetis E-P14.04 National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Department Design and application of an expanded newborn screening of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece NGS panel: first Argentinian experience Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) (MIM#219700) is the C. Fernandez,S. Menazzi,M. Fabbro,D.Lorenzi, M. Bilinski, second most common autosomal recessive disorder in M.Galain, P. Nicotra, J.Hamer,F. Nodar,S. Papier Greece after thalassemias. The carrier frequency is esti- matedapproximatelyat4-5%ofgeneralpopulationwithan Novagen, Buenos Aires, Argentina incidence of about 1 in 2500-3500 live births. Some patients, after sequencing the whole coding region and the Introduction: The aim of newborn screening (NBS) pro- exon - intron boundaries, have only one of the causative grams is to identify serious conditions that require early mutationsidentified.Thesepatientscarryontheotherallele detection and urgent pre-symptomatic treatment in order to a large rearrangement that cannot be detected with con- avertseriousclinicalharm.NBSinArgentinaismandatory ventional methods. for only 6 inborn errors of metabolism. NGS-based tech- Materials and Methods: The study population was 45 nologies allow laboratories to test multiple genes, thus patients, presenting with typical cystic fibrosis symptoms, enabling detection of several conditions simultaneously. with only one identified pathogenic mutation. We screened Our aim was to develop the first expanded NBS panel in these patients for abnormal copy numbers (deletions and Argentina to offer a broad and rapid molecular diagnosis. duplications) using MLPA® (SALSA MLPA P091 CFTR Materials and Methods: Guided by national and probemix,MRCHolland).Positivefindingswereconfirmed international NBS programs and recommendations from using a custom made array CGH, specific for CFTR gene, medicalsocieties(ESHG,ACMG,AAP)forgenetictesting platform 8x60K, G3 CGH+SNP microarray (Agilent in asymptomatic minors and interpretation of sequence Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). variants, we selected severe childhood-onset disorders with Results: A large rearrangement in the CFTR gene was available treatment that, if implemented early, would result detected in 28 out of 45 patients. Using a custom made in clinical benefits for the patient. An in-house pipeline for aCGH we were able to map the exact breakpoints bioinformatic analysis was developed and a focused [GRCh37- 7q11.21]. guideline for classification and report of variants was elaborated, as well as an algorithm for confirmatory tests. Results: The current panel includes 96 genes for 50 diseases: 10 organic acid disorders, 8 fatty acid oxidation disorders, 8 lysosomal storage disorders, 6 aminoacid1026 J.delPicchia disorders, 3 types of hyperammonemias, 2 immunodefi- cell level. The clonal expansion of rare LOY cells could ciencies, 2 hemoglobin disorders, 1 endocrine disorder and have important clinical implications. Therefore, we aim to 10 miscelaneous conditions. combine LOY and cell type detection in a clinically Conclusions: Currently, NBS by NGS should only be applicable single cell assay. This would benefit both considered an add-on to traditional screening programs. individual patients as well as the health care system and However,itisapromisinggenetictestthatmayreducefalse thesocietyatlarge.TheprojectisfundedbyanERC-StGas positivesandnegatives,shortentimesrequiredfordiagnosis well as other sources. and enable genetic counseling, but many issues should be M. Danielsson: None. J. Halvardson: None. B. Torabi taken into account and properly discussed when designing Moghadam: None. H. Davies: None. J. Dumanski: E. the panel. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other C. Fernandez: A. Employment (full or part-time); intellectual property); Modest; Cray innovation AB. L.A. Significant; Novagen. S. Menazzi: A. Employment (full Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, or part-time); Modest; Novagen. M. Fabbro: A. Employ- patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Cray ment (full or part-time); Significant; Novagen. D. Lorenzi: innovation AB. A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novagen. M.Bilinski:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; E-P14.06 Novagen. M. Galain: A. Employment (full or part-time); Implementing Epic, a next generation electronic health Significant; Novagen. P. Nicotra: A. Employment (full or record (EHR) at the clinical genetics department, part-time); Significant; Novagen. J. Hamer: A. Employ- Rigshospitalet Denmark ment(fullorpart-time);Significant;Novagen.F.Nodar:A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novagen. S. L. Nicolaisen, B. R.Diness Papier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novagen. Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark E-P14.05 When working with implementing a next generation elec- How to measure loss of chromosome Y tronichealthrecordasEpic,theestablishmentofnewwork flowshasbeenakeystrategy.TheEpicsystemisinitselfan M.Danielsson,J.Halvardson,B.TorabiMoghadam,H.Davies, integration of more than 30 different data systems and J.Dumanski, L.A. Forsberg devices and the implementation not only requires the hos- pitalstafftoadoptnewworkflows,butalsorequirespatient DepartmentofImmunology,GeneticsandPathology,Uppsala, participation, in order to facilitate their initial enrollment Sweden into the patient webportal system. Accordingly, to max- imizepatientenrollmentattheclinicalgeneticsdepartment, RecentdiscoveriesshowthatmosaiclossofchromosomeY we aimed to create new meaningful workflows and foster (LOY) in leukocytes is associated with increased risks of strong supportfor thesystem.Weprioritized oureffortson cancer, Alzheimer’s and cardiovascular disease. More than the first patient contact, creating a functioning work flow 15% of men older than 70 show some degree of LOY and around the administrators. During the initial enrollment these men survive on average only half as long as men period the administrators communicated that they were without LOY. But how is LOY measured today and what hesitant to provide patients with the instructional informa- would be the best method for the future? tion pamphlet needed to enroll in EPIC, as they had con- Genome wide arrays are most commonly used in LOY- cerns that it was not up to date and that the necessary studies, but other methods have also been used: whole functionswerenotworkinginEpic.Throughimplementing genomesequencing(WGS),genetargetedqPCR ordroplet weekly meetings with the administrators we were able to digital PCR (ddPCR). We have compared and evaluated consistently correct ongoing problems within the system arrays, WGS and ddPCR targeting a homologous gene and make sure that the instructional information given out, located on the X and Y chromosome for LOY-studies. The corresponded to what the patients met when they accessed cheapandeasyddPCRmethodgivesverysimilarresultsas the system. Creating this feedback loop ensured a general the expensive and precise WGS, when using whole blood quality control and maintenance of professional integrity. for detecting LOY. The potential of using this approach in a managerial or However, the sensitivity of all these methods arelimited, clinical context is apparent. leavinglowfrequenciesofLOYundetected.Thesemethods L. Nicolaisen: None. B.R. Diness: None. require high amounts of DNA input from hundreds of thousands of cells, but LOY is a binary event on the singleAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1027 E-P14.07 We tested cholesterol markers to make the best prediction Comparison of nucleic acids extraction to direct model based on our DTC service (GeneStyleTM) results. In amplification of punches processed by the CPA200™ thisstudy,wedescribethetestingresultsfrom647samples. systemfromNUCLEIC-CARD™bloodandsalivasamples The customers agreed the written confirmed and we col- lected the buccal swab DNA samples and disease history G.Paselli questionnaire. Among the DTC genes, we examined cho- lesterol gene markers (SORT1,HMGCR,ABO,ABCA1, Eurofins Genoma Group, Milano, Italy MYL2,LIPG,CETP) and self-reported hyperlipidemia his- tory with controlling age, sex, smoking, alcohol drinking, Introduction: Molecular investigation is important for the family history as the covariates. The single marker asso- detection of clotting defects. The NUCLEIC-CARD™ ciation with hyperlipidemia history did not show any WHITE (NCW) for blood and COLOR (NCC) for buccal association tendencies. Therefore, we combined the seven swabs (BS) and the CPA200™ a semi-automated punch- gene marker genotypes and calculated the genetic risk systemtoprocessNUCLEIC-CARD™(NC)(CopanItalia). scores(GRS) based on the number of risk allele and the The study’s objective was to compare nucleic acids multiple regression effects size to hyperlipidemia. Interest- extraction (NAE) to direct punches amplification (DPA) ingly, the combined index of the GRS was significantly processed by the CPA200. associated with the questionnaire cholesterol history (OR Methods:Forthisstudy,10bloodsandBS,wereusedto 2.492 (95% CI 1.179-5.266), P=0.017). Using this GRS, standardize the procedure and 35 specimens to validate it. we estimated the risk prediction accuracy by ROC curve, Samples were tested by NAE, and punches, processed by and the area under cover was 58.8%. Because the most of the CPA200 from blood on NCW and BS on NCC, by theDTCmarkerswerestudiedforthequantitativetraits,the DPA. Nucleic acid was extracted from blood and BS with predictive power might be weakening. Conclusively, the ® the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit; punches were washed with DTC service genes are well selected by the Korean gov- 200ul sterile water and dried. Extracts and punches were ernments,andthecompaniesshouldimprovetheprediction amplified with in-house PCR assays using primers specific accuracy based on the practical tests. for 14 clotting factors (apo e, AGT, FGB, factorV-Y, Keywords: Hyperlipidemia, Genetic FACTOR II, FACTOR V LEIDEN, MTHFR677, polymorphism, DTC MTHFR1298, FACTOR V CAMBRIGE, ACE, HPA, B. Kim: None. PAI, FACTOR XIII, APOB) followed by mini-sequencing reaction and EC on 3500 ABI System. E-P14.10 Results: In the 10 blood and BS all 14 markers were Vanadium in the blood of SCA2 patients as potential detectedusingNAEandDPA.Inthe35bloodstestedonly biomarker of the disease for FACTOR-II, FACTOR-V-LEIDEN, MTHFR677 and MTHFR1298, were detected by both methods with 100% S.Squadrone1,M.C.Abete1,P.Brizio1,C.Mancini2,L.Orsi3,A. results correlation. Brusco2 Conclusions: Data obtained in this study demonstrated that direct punches amplification can detect all 14 clotting 1Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale, Department of markers from NCW punches of blood on NCW and of BS Chemistry, Turin (Italy), Turin, Italy, 2University of Torino, on NCC. The NUCLEIC-CARD™ and CPA200™ in Department of Medical Sciences, 10126 Torino, Italy, Turin, combination with direct punches amplification are facilitat- Italy, 3Department of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Città ing specimens testing workflow for bleeding disorders. della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy, G. Paselli: None. Turin, Italy E-P14.08 Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is a biuxx neurological disorder characterized by cerebellar dysfunc- tion.Theassociationbetweenmetalsandneurodegenerative B. Kim diseases is under constant investigation, for their involve- ment in oxidative stress and their potential role as bio- Uijeongbu St. Mary's hospital, Uijeong Bu-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, markers of these pathologies. Redox active metals, like Korea, Republic of vanadium(V),undergoredox-cyclingreactionsincellsand can produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) in biological In 2016, the Korean government released 46 genes and systems (Valko et al., 2005). related12phenotypesfordirecttoconsumer(DTC)service.1028 J.delPicchia Materials and Methods: The whole blood of 20 SCA2 One of the rest was treated with phenytoin, and the other patients and of 18 healthy individuals was subjected to V was treated with valproic acid for seizure prevention after quantification by inductively coupled plasma mass spectro- cranial haemorrhage operation. All recovered from SCARs metry (ICP-MS). after stopping AED treatment and intensive care. HLA-B Results: Vanadium concentrations were significantly alleles were performed using PCR-sequence-based typing higher (p< 0.05) in patients (6.5 ±1.0 micrograms L-1) method and lymphocyte activation test (LAT) was con- compared to controls (3.7 ± 0.8 micrograms L-1). ducted for confirming the culprit drug of the SCARs. Conclusions: Neurodegenerative processes have been Results: Demographic findings (gender, age), culprit related to metal imbalances, with altered levels of different AEDs,andHLA-Ballelesofthe6patientslistedinTable1. elements in serum or blood samples. V species and, in LAT results were positive for the culprit drugs except one VO(2+ particular, the oxido-vanadium cation ) have been (F/59). Expression of HLA-B*51:01 and HLA-B*15:11 previously reported to be involved in the annihilation and alleles were detected in three (50.0%) and two (33.3%), formation of reactive oxygen species (Rehder, 2013). The respectively. Two patients had homozygous HLA-B*55:01 presenceofhigherlevelsofVincellsofSCA2patientsmay and HLA-B*15:11/*55:01 alleles, respectively. lead to the increase of ROS, and probably to the up Conclusions:TheresultsuggeststhatKoreanindividuals regulation of the antioxidant enzymes system to counteract with the HLA-B*51:01 allele, 8.35% in general population, theoxidativestress.Infact,thepresenceofoxidativestress may be susceptible to AED-induced SCARs. Further and a significant increase of superoxide dismutase (SOD1 investigations are necessary to confirm these findings. and SOD2) in SCA2 has been extensively documented (Guevara-Garcia et al., 2012; Cornelius et al., 2017). We Table 1. HLA-B alleles in patients. suggest that vanadium level in the blood of SCA2 patients Gender/Age AEDs HLA-B isofspecialinterest aspotentialbiomarkersofthisdisease. S. Squadrone: None. M.C. Abete: None. P. Brizio: F/59 carbamazepine *15:11/*51:01 None. C. Mancini: None. L. Orsi: None. A. M/60 phenytoin *51:01/*51:01 Brusco: None. F/48 carbamazepine *35:01/*51:01 M/40 valproate *15:11/*40:06 F/64 carbamazepine *46:01/*59:01 E-P15 Personalized/Predictive Medicine and M/67 carbamazepine *07:02/*58:01 Pharmacogenomics E-P15.03 E. Kim: None. J. Ghim: None. E. Cha: None. J. Kim: Antiepileptics-induced serious cutaneous adverse reactions None. J. Shin: None. and HLA-B alleles with lymphocyte activation tests in 6 Korean patients E-P15.05 Factors influencing patients’ willingness to take predictive E. Kim1,J. Ghim1,E.Cha2,J.Kim3,J.Shin2 breast cancer genetic test: a qualitative study of women in an Asian setting 1Inje University Busanpaik Hospital, Busan, Korea, Republic of, 2Inje University College of Medicine, Busan, Korea, S. Sun Republic of, 3Pukyong National Unversity, Busan, Korea, Republic of Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, Singapore <META NAME="author" CONTENT="김 은영"> Introduction: Antiepileptic drugs (AED) have been Reluctancetotakehereditarycancergenetictestsisreported known to induce serious cutaneous adverse reactions amongAsianwomen.Thisstudyaimstounderstandpatient (SCAR) such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic factors influencing the take-up rate of the genetic tests. A epidermal necrolysis. Despite of studies for examining the totaloftwenty-fourparticipantswererecruited,participants mechanism associated with HLA, the association between werewomenwithapersonal/familyhistoryofbreastand/or AED-induced SCARs and HLA alleles is still unclear. We ovarian cancer. shared about the factors that motivated or investigated HLA-B alleles in AED-induced SCARs. hindered them from taking the genetic test. Participants MaterialandMethods:SixAED-inducedSCARpatients were inclined to take the test due to five different reasons - wererequestedforevaluatingthecausality.Fourpatientsof for personal awareness, to create awareness for family, to them were treated with carbamazepine due to pain control. ascertaintheirrisksofcancerduetoastrongfamilyhistory,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1029 family support and lastly to heed the advice of medical T. P. Shkurat,D.Romanov, M.Shkurat professionals. However, concerns with regards to cost and theperceivedlackofabilitytocopewiththegeneticresults Southern Federal University, Rostov-on Don, Russian deterred participants from taking up the test. Additionally, Federation the lack of information about genetic tests was cited by participants as a factor that hindered them from making a Alu sequences are the most abundant short interspersed decision of whether to take the test. repeated elements in the human genome. These sequences S. Sun: None. are the most abundant mobile elements in the human gen- ome, representing 10.6% of nuclear DNA. The aim of the E-P15.06 study was to carry out a full-genomic bioinformational Comparison of seven contemporary pharmacogenetic search for microRNA motifs localized in human Alu assays with the PharmGKB database sequences. Genomic sequences were extracted from the NCBI database using the E-utilities suite of utilities. The L. Tilleman,D.Deforce, F. VanNieuwerburgh micro-RNA sequences were taken from the mirRBase database, release 21. The search was performed using the Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent miRanda and GLAM2Scan software suite. About 80-90% University, Ghent, Belgium of the miR-619 miR-619, miR-5585, miR-5095, and miR- 5096microRNAbindingsitesweredetectedwithintheAlu Genotyping of pharmacogenetic (PGx) genes can provide elements. The presence of binding sites for certain micro- informed personalized drug therapy and can prevent com- RNAs within Alu elements also explains the high con- mon adverse drug reactions. Today, there are several tests servatism of the distances between sites. The sequences commercially available to genotype individual Single miR-1273g and miR-1285-1,2 were found inside the Alu Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in PGx genes. In this elements, but lying on the opposite chain. The pre-Mir- studysevenmodernSNPgenotypingassayswerecompared 1273g sequences were detected within the Alu-elements, withthePharmacogenomicsKnowledgeBase(PharmGKB) which makes the latter a prospective source of the mature database to determine what proportion of the currently miR-1273g. miR-5196 and miR-466 were not found inside known pharmacogenetic effects is measured by these theAluelements,buttheyarealsowidelyrepresentedinthe assays. These seven assays are the “Ion AmpliSeqTM humangenome.ThestudywassupportedbytheMinistryof Pharmacogenomics Panel”, the “VeraCode® ADME Core education and science of the RF, project № 6.6762.2017. Panel”, the “iPLEX® PGx Pro Panel”, “DMETTM Plus”, T.P. Shkurat: None. D. Romanov: None. M. “PharmcoScanTM”, “Living DNA”, and “23andMe”. The Shkurat: None. PharmGKB database contains 3474 clinical annotations, which describe a variant-drug interaction. 94% of E-P16.02 PharmGKB’s clinical annotations can be determined with Discoveringpotentialcausativemutationsinhumancoding SNP assays. The other part can be determined with haplo- and noncoding genome with the interactive software typesandcopynumbervariations.OfPharmGKB’sclinical BasePlayer annotations, 76%, 68%, and 44% can be determined by PharmacoScanTM,LivingDNA,and23andMerespectively. R.Katainen1,I.Donner1,T.Cajuso1,E.Kaasinen1,K.Palin1,V. The other described assays, are designed to test only spe- Mäkinen1,L. A. Aaltonen1,E. Pitkänen2 cific subset of PGx SNPs. Grant:L.T.wasfundedbytheInstituteforthePromotion 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2European of Innovation through Science and Technology in Flanders MolecularBiologyLaboratory(EMBL),Heidelberg,Germany (IWT-Vlaanderen) (Grant no. 150042) L. Tilleman: None. D. Deforce: None. F. Van Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is routi- Nieuwerburgh: None. nely applied in life sciences and clinical practice, where interpretation of the resulting massive genomic data has become a critical challenge. The genome-wide mutation E-P16 Omics/Bioinformatics analyses enabled by NGS have had a revolutionary impact in revealing the predisposing and driving DNA alterations E-P16.01 behind a multitude of disorders. The workflow to identify Alu elements as source of microRNA sites in the human causative mutations commonly involves phases such as genome quality filtering, case-control comparison, genome annota- tion and visual validation, which require multiple1030 J.delPicchia processing steps and usage of various tools and scripts, well as Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. The analyzed oftenavailableonlyinLinuxenvironments.Tothisend,we currently MALDI-TOF data were obtained previously [2]. introduce an interactive and user-friendly multi-platform Results: Our results assumed extracellular histone- software, BasePlayer, which allows scientists, regardless of containingproteinsareinvolvedinbindingwithcirculating bioinformatics training, to carry out variant analysis in cfDNA for BCPs over HFs states. HFs: 176 proteins/ disease genetics settings. peptides joined with 195 GO terms were characterized; 45 Materials and Methods: The software can be run on proteins with no any predicted GO; BCPs: 167 proteins/ Windows, macOS and Linux systems with the Java peptides joined with 168 GO terms were characterized; 39 RuntimeEnvironment 1.7ornewerinstalled.Allannotated proteins with no any predicted GO. The most different reference genomes available at the Ensembl database are proteins were characterized by next GOs: GO:0005515 supportedandcanbedownloadedandinstalledthroughthe (Ontology:Molecular Function:protein binding):25 proteins BasePlayeruserinterface.Additionalannotationfilesforthe for HFs, 33 for BCPs; GO:0006355 (Ontology:Biological human reference genome (GRCh37), such as gnomAD Process:regulation of transcription, DNA-templated):8 pro- variant control data, ENCODE regulatory regions and teins for HFs, 16 for BCPs; GO:0055085 (Ontology: predicted transcription factor binding sites are available at Biological Process:transmembrane transport):1 proteins for the BasePlayer website. The source code is available at HFs, 5 for BCPs. https://github.com/rkataine/BasePlayer. References: [1].Bryzgunova OE and Laktionov PP Results: The unpublished version of BasePlayer has (2014). Generation of blood circulating DNAs: Sources, already been utilized in at least 18 publications by several featuresofstructionandcirculation.https://doi.org/10.1134/ disease genetics research groups. The software has now S1990750814030020 been made publicly available, and developed to be more [2].TamkovichSN,etal(2015).Identificationofproteins suitable for a wider audience. BasePlayer can be freely in blood nucleoprotein complexes. https://doi.org/10.1134/ downloaded at https://baseplayer.fi. S1068162015060163 R.Katainen:None.I.Donner:None.T.Cajuso:None. [3].Tamkovich SN, et al (2016). Protein Content of E. Kaasinen: None. K. Palin: None. V. Mäkinen: None. Circulating Nucleoprotein Complexes. https://doi.org/10. L.A. Aaltonen: None. E. Pitkänen: None. 1007/978-3-319-42044-8_26. M. Belenikin: None. S. Tamkovich: None. P. E-P16.03 Laktionov: None. Protein composition characterization of circulating nucleoprotein complexes E-P16.04 Epigenetic regulation of NET in postural tachycardia M.Belenikin1,2, S.Tamkovich3,2,P. Laktionov3 syndrome 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State A. El-Osta University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, 2Novosibirsk StateUniversity,Novosibirsk,RussianFederation,3Instituteof Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, SB of RAS, Australia Novosibirsk, Russian Federation Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) is Background: Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulated in characterized by the clinical symptoms of orthostatic bloodstream being packed into membrane coated structures intolerance, light-headedness, fatigue and near syncope on like apoptotic bodies or complexes with biopolymers like upright posture. Abnormal sympathetic nervous system histonesorDNA-bindingplasmaproteins[1].Bloodplasma activity suggests dysfunction of the norepinephrine trans- deoxyribonucleoprotein complexes (DNPCs) were isolated porter (NET) with evidence the gene responsible is under by affinity chromatography with antihistone antibodies tight epigenetic control. We show the Let7i miRNA is immobilized on Sepharose 6B; the proteins were separated associated with NET gene suppression in POTS subjects by10-20%SDS-PAGE,thentheproteinswereidentifiedby usinggenomewideRICh-Seq(RNA ofIsolated Chromatin MALDI-TOF [2,3]. combined with Sequencing). MeCP2 binding is mediated The aims of study: Studying the protein content in by Let7i and subject to pharmacological HDAC inhibition, DNPCs circulating in the blood plasma of healthy females restoring specific epigenetic modifications associated with (HFs)(5 samples) vs primary breast cancer patients (BCPs) NET gene expression in POTS subjects. We demonstrate (5 samples) by analysis of different protein signatures as thatinPOTSsubject’spharmacologicalhistonedeacetylaseAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1031 inhibition restores epigenetic control and expression of Significant; Novagen. P. Nicotra: A. Employment (full or norepinephrine transporter. part-time); Significant; Novagen. V. Chekherdemian: A. A. El-Osta: None. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novagen. F. Nodar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; E-P16.05 Novagen. S. Papier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Firstin-houseNGSandbioinformaticanalysisofexpanded Significant; Novagen. carrier screening in Argentina E-P16.06 M.Fabbro, D.Lorenzi, M.Bilinski, S.Menazzi, C.Fernandez, Enhancing specificity in genotyping by using a novel two M.Galain, P. Nicotra, V.Chekherdemian, F. Nodar,S. Papier enzyme chemistry Novagen, Buenos Aires, Argentina S. D.Rose Introduction:Initially,gene-by-genecarrierscreeningtests Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, United States wereofferedtocoupleswithhighriskofhavingachildwith a recessive disorder. The advent of next generation Here we present an improved SNP genotyping method that sequencing (NGS) has enabled the development of expan- combines the hybridization and allele specific extension ded carrier screening tests that analyze multiple genes benefitsintoasingleassayformatwithuniversalfluorescent simultaneously, allowing the consideration of alternative reporter probes. rhAmpTM SNP chemistry relies on the reproductive options and early intervention strategies. actions of two enzymes, an endoribonuclease (RNase H2) Here we describe the bioinformatic analysis of an and a mutated DNA polymerase. The rhAmp SNP assay expanded carrier screening panel for 688 autosomal and primers containasingleRNA baseandare 3’endblocked. X-linked recessive disorders. In addition, the allele specific primers have a non-target Material and Methods: DNA was extracted from 120 complimentarytail.Rapidde-blockingoftheprimersbythe blood samples. NGS of targeted-exons of 483 genes was enzyme RNase H2 only occurs upon hybridization to the performedonaNextseq550andsequencedataanalysiswas perfectlymatchedtarget.OncedeblockedbyRNaseH2,the achieved using an in-house bioinformatic pipeline. SNP site is then interrogated by a novel DNA polymerase Briefly, data was demultiplexed, converted to Fastq with enhanced allelic discriminating abilities. Upon recog- format and low-quality data was removed. Reads were nitionofthecorrectbase-pairing,extensionbythemodified aligned against the reference genome hg19 using Burrows- polymerase occurs from the perfect match primer. Recent WheelerAlignerandGenomeAnalysisToolkitwasusedto advancements in the technology include: 1) expansion of call variants. Then, variants were annotated and coverage the design algorithm to design assays against indels, 2) and functional impact filters were applied using a custom- development of a 4-color single tube format and 3) the made script. Filtered variants were classified according to ability to incorporate degenerate bases in the allele specific ACMG guidelines. primers to compensate for nearby polymorphisms. Those Results: A mean of 4742 raw variants per sample were polymorphismscanresultinpoorassayperformancedueto: found.Afterfiltering,ameanof355variantsweredetected no amplification, weak amplification, or allelic biased and after variant classification 83 pathogenic/likely patho- detection leading to incorrect genotyping results. genic variants (0.7 per sample) were identified. About one S.D. Rose: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- thirdofthepatientswerecarriersofatleastonepathogenic/ cant; Integrated DNA Technologies. likely pathogenic variant. Conclusions: Local development of a bioinformatic E-P16.09 pipeline has allowed our laboratory to set up an NGS- Research projects focused Laboratory Information based expanded carrier screening test, which could Management System potentially help identify couples at risk and reduce the incidence of severe recessive disorders. M.Lichvar1,R.Hekel1,2,J.Budis1,2,3,D.Smolak1,4,J. M. Fabbro: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Radvanszky1,4,5, T.Szemes1,4,6 nificant; Novagen. D. Lorenzi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novagen. M. Bilinski: A. Employ- 1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Slovak Centre of ment(fullorpart-time); Significant;Novagen.S.Menazzi: Scientific and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;Novagen.C. 3Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Mathematics, Fernandez:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava, Novagen. M. Galain: A. Employment (full or part-time); Slovakia, 4Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of1032 J.delPicchia Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, E-P16.10 5Institute for ClinicalandTranslational Research,Biomedical In silico assessment of leukemia: OSM gene and protein Research Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, analysis Slovakia, 6Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia M.AzarmiAghajan1,A.Ahmadikhah1,M.TalebiGharamaleki2 Introduction: Multi-project research-focused laboratories 1ShahidBeheshtiUniversity,Tehran,Iran,IslamicRepublicof, like core facilities may face challenge to register, track, 2Iran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic integrate and monitor samples and their analyses. These Republic of data contain personal information, so secure storage and access has high priority, also due to new European legis- Introduction:Genetically,inleukemiaascancerwithbone lation. Toface thesechallenges,wehavedevelopedaweb- marroworigin,oncostatin-Mgeneplaysacrucialroleinits basedLaboratoryInformationManagementSystem(LIMS) manifestation. Leukemia inhibitory factor/oncostatin-M optimized for multi-project laboratories. encoded the protein as a secreted cytokine inhibits the Results: LIMS is designed as 3-layer web-application, proliferation of a number of tumor cells. which enhances security and restricts accessibility to Materials and Methods: FGENESH and Promoter Scan potential attackers. Additional computational cluster pro- were used to the coding sequence and promoter analysis vides bioinformatic analyses over anonymized genomic respectively. The encoded protein analyzed by ProtParam data without personal identifiers. Summary analysis reports andProtScaleandhydrophobicitywasassessedbythesame are immutable to change, but with the possibility of ProtScale. Domains were analyzed by CD-search and repeated reanalysis in case of upgrades of computational InterProScan and possible post-translational modifications pipelines. got evaluated by ScanProsite. One instance of LIMS can be used to manage several Results:Thecodingsequence,759bp,islocatedin45to independent projects, with ability to assign user roles for 2961 nucleotides. Promoter sequence starts from 824 till each project separately. This restricts user to access only 877. Transcription start site is nucleotide number 868 and those projects, samples and analysis, which they are its distance from ATG is 132bp. The encoded protein is assigned to. Thus, we can collect a large genomic data sets made up 231 acid amines. Arginine and leucine with 13% in a single system, which allows to perform wide-scale andselenocysteineandpyro-leucinewith0%werethemost population studies that are based on aggregation analyses and least common ones in protein structure respectively. It over large cohort of individuals. isanunstableproteinwith30hoursestimatedhalf-life.The LIMS has mechanism to define genealogy relationships protein is hydrophobic in its N-terminal. It includes a between samples, which is utilized in genetics analyses of domainas4_helix_cytokine-like_coreinC-terminaland13 families' anamneses. Implementation of suggested diseases post-translational modification sites in 6 different classes. basedonphenotypestermsfromHPOdatabasemayfurther Four phosphorylation sites, three N-myristoylation sites, assist physicians in decision process. two amidation sites, a site for leucine-zipper template, two Conclusions: LIMS is web-based application for facil- N-glycosylation sites, and a cAMP/cGMP dependent itate storage and bioinformatic analysis of genomic data phosphorylation site. with emphasis on security of genomic and personal Conclusions: The encoded protein cannot be located in information. The system is easily extensible over new the cytoplasm due to its hydrophobicity and have an types and versions of data analysis pipelines. extracellular/non-cytoplasmic localization. On the other M. Lichvar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- hand,itsinstabilityindexshowsitstime-specifictranslation nificant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. R. Hekel: A. which correlates with its function in anti-proliferation Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Geneton Ltd., cancer cells activity. Bratislava,Slovakia.J.Budis:A.Employment(fullorpart- M.AzarmiAghajan:None.A.Ahmadikhah:None.M. time); Significant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. D. Talebi Gharamaleki: None. Smolak: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Radvanszky: A. E-P16.11 Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Geneton Ltd., Network-based classification of neurodevelopmental Bratislava, Slovakia. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full or pathology according to cytogenomic data part-time); Significant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. I.Y. Iourov1,2,3,S.G.Vorsanova1,2,M.A. Zelenova1,2, O.S. Kurinnaia1,2, K.S. Vasin1,2,Y. B.Yurov1,2Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1033 1FSBSI «Mental Health Research Center», Moscow, Russian E-P16.13 Federation,2AcademicianYu.E.VeltishchevResearchClinical Annotator: a novel custom tool for genomic variants InstituteofPediatrics,N.I.PirogovRussianNationalResearch annotation and classification Medical University, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3FSBEI FPE D.Lemos1,2,P. Oliveira1,2, C.São José1,2,3,J. Carvalho1,2,C. «RussianMedicalAcademyofPostgraduateEducation»ofthe Oliveira1,2,4 Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation 1i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal, 2IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Introduction: Regardless of significant progress in unco- Immunology, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS - Instituto Ciências vering genomic mechanisms for neurodevelopmental dis- Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal, 4Department of orders,alargeproportionofneurodevelopmentalpathology Pathology,MedicineFacultyoftheUniversityofPorto,Porto, cases remains to be idiopathic. In addition to commonly Portugal used analyses of associations between genomic variations and phenotypes, it appears that investigating candidate Introduction:Genomesequencingproduceslargeamounts diseaseprocessesbynetwork-basedclassificationaccording ofdatathatenablethediscoveryofgenomicvariants.Using to genomic data represents an intriguing alternative. appropriatebioinformaticstoolsandpublicdatabaseswhich Materials and Methods: Genome-wide CNV scan was aggregate clinical information, it is possible to understand performed in 545 individuals with neurodevelopmental thefunctionalimpactofsuchvariantsonhumanphenotypic pathology using array CGH and SNP-array techniques. traits. Several bioinformatics tools already exist, however Network-based classification of probable functional con- with limitations such as, the license costs and the limited sequences of genomic rearrangements was done according choice of public databases consulted. Therefore, our aim to a previously described protocol (Yurov et al., 2017) was to implement an in-house tool that aggregates infor- based on the fusion of genomic, epigenomic, proteomic/ mation collected from selected public databases, allowing interactomic and metabolomic data. the custom annotation of genomic variants and their clas- Results: We found that the variomes (set of all CNVs in sification in terms of pathogenicity. an individual genome) of individuals with neurodevelop- Materials and Methods: We implemented a tool, mental pathology are enriched in DNA replication, DNA Annotator, which annotates and classifies genomic variants damage/repair, nucleotide excision/mismatch repair, ATM- using data from 5 renowned public databases (Uniprot, pathway (DNA damage-ATM-p53-apoptosis pathway) as OMIM, ClinVar, dbSNP, Pubmed). Annotator can also wellasp53-,MAPK-,ErbB-,PI3KAkt-signalingpathways. integrate keywords, defined according to sample character- Additionally, we found enrichment for pathway clusters or istics, for advanced data/text mining, in order to further combinations (e.g. MAPK-signaling with axonal guidance; select collected data to best suit the clinical features of the DNA damage-ATM-p53-apoptosis with phagosome and sample under analysis. gap junction; p53-signaling with RNA transport and Results:Annotatorwasusedtoanalyzeandclassifyaset pathways in cancer etc.). There were 12 distinct pathway/ of 151 genomic variants, detected in 52 probands with process clusters and 14 distinct pathway/process combina- Familial Intestinal Gastric Cancer. These genomic variants tions which were further used for classification of had already been analyzed/classified using a commercial neurodevelopmental pathology. software. The comparison of the results obtained with both Conclusions: Network-based classification of neurode- analyses showed that Annotator was able to collect further velopmental pathology according to cytogenomic data information for 7/42 somatic variants and 4/24 germline appears to be an efficient approach to determine candidate variants, which were classified as of unknown significance processes for neurodevelopmental diseases. Furthermore, for the commercial software. our data indicate, for the first time, that alterations to Conclusion: Annotator is a valid tool for an accurate process clusters and combinations of altered processes annotation and efficient classification of genomic variants could be mechanisms for abnormal brain functioning. derived from sequencing experiments. Supported by RSF (14-15-00411). POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007274 I.Y. Iourov: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. M.A. NORTE-07-0162-FEDER-000118 Zelenova: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: None. K.S. Vasin: NORTE-07-0162-FEDER-000067 None. Y.B. Yurov: None. FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-015779 D.Lemos:None.P.Oliveira:None.C.SãoJosé:None. J. Carvalho: None. C. Oliveira: None.1034 J.delPicchia E-P17 Epigenetics and Gene Regulation N.Durcanoğlu1,G.Aktemur1,E.Aslan1,S.Yıldırım1,E.Akbaş1, S. Yılmaz1,&.Akalın2 E-P17.01 Fresh garlic extract might trigger apoptosis trough down 1Istanbul Medeniyet University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, regulation of miR-146a in A549 lung carcinoma cells Turkey, 2a dept of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey G.AKTEMUR1,N.DURCANOĞLU1,S. YILDIRIM1,E. Subject: Propolis is honey bee-derived apicultural product ASLAN1,S.YILMAZ1,E. AKBAŞ1,&.AKALIN2 that have been applied for human health for centuries in traditional medicine besides food diets and supplementary 1İSTANBUL MEDENİYET UNIVERSITY FACULTY OF nutrition. It has also attracted researchers’ attention due to MEDİCİNE, İSTANBUL, Turkey, 2İstanbul Medeniyet its apoptotic and anti-carcinogenic properties. Here, we Unıversıty Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical aimed to investigate the mechanism of apoptotic effects of Genetics, İSTANBUL, Turkey propolis by means of apoptosis regulating miRNAs expressions in human lung carcinoma cell lines (A549 Obective: Garlic (Allium sativum L.) has been used as cells). herbal drug since ancient ages for pulmonary and respira- Methods:Propolisextracts(beeMYHoney)wereprepared torycomplaints.ItsextractAllymethylsulfide(AMS)gives by ethanol (250 μg/mL). A549 cells were incubated with characteristic odor on breath when taken orally and known propolis extracts for 24 h with different concentrations in to have anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects on lung cell cultures of 6-well plates using 10x10E5 cells/well. carcinoma cell lines (A549). However, mechanism still Total RNAs were extracted and 10 miRNAs expressions needs to be elucidated. Thus, we aimed to explore the were analyzed by real time PCR (RotorGene Q, Qiagen). apoptosis regulating miRNA expressions for apoptotic Results:Theoptimumapoptoticaffectswereachievedat effects of garlic extract on A549 cells. concentrations of 0,625 μg/mL. Propolis extract treated Methods: A549 cells were incubated with fresh garlic A549cellsshowedgraduallyincreasedexpressionsofmiR- extract for 24 h. Total RNAs were extracted from cell 133a_2 and miR-143_1, and gradually decreased expres- cultures with cell count of 1x10E5 in 6-well plates. 10 sions of miR-21_2, miR -146a_1, miR-155_2 and miR- miRNAs regulation apoptosis were selected (miR-21_2, 183_2 by increased dosages of 0,125 μg/mL to 0,625 μg/ miR-31_1, miR-39_1, miR-133a_2, miR-143_1, miR- mL compared to non-treated tumor cells . 146a_1, miR-155_2, miR-183_2, miR-210_1 and miR- Conclusion: In our study, we for the first time 222_2) and expressions were analyzed by real time PCR represented the downregulation of apoptosis regulating (RotorGene Q, Qiagen). miRNAs in lung cancer cell lines (A549) after treatment of Results: Fresh garlic extract treated A549 cells repre- propolis extract, up to the literature. Hence, they may be a sented decreased expressions of miR-146a_1 (3,47 Fold roleforpropolistoinduceapoptosis(asitsanti-tumorigenic decrease)astheapoptosisincreased.However,proapoptotic affect) through epigenetic changes on Fas and FasL with/ miR143 expressions were also downregulated. without PTEN on the etrinsic pathway of programmed Discussion/Conclusion: Our study was the first to link cell death. the apoptosis of lung carcinoma cell lines with miRNA Reference: expressionsinA549cellline,uptotheliterature.According Preventive and protective effects of Turkish propolis…. to our results apoptosis might be triggered by upregulation Acta Biol Hung. 2011. 62(4):388-96. ofFasLduetodownregulationofmiR146aingarlicextract Degradation of miR-21 induces apoptosis…Cancer Gene treated A549 lung cancer cells. Down regulation of Ther. 2015 Nov;22(11):530-5. proapoptotic miR143 might be a compensation mechanism N. Durcanoğlu: None. G. Aktemur: None. E. Aslan: and need to be investigated with further studies. REFER- None. S. Yıldırım: None. E. Akbaş: None. S. Yılmaz: ENCE: Gruhlke MC, et al. Antioxidants (Basel). 2016 Dec None. &. Akalın: None. 26;6(1) G.Aktemur:None.N.DurcanoĞlu:None.S.Yildirim: None.E.Aslan:None.S.Yilmaz:None.E.AkbaŞ:None. E-P18 Genetic epidemiology/Population genetics/ &. Akalin: None. Statistical methodology and evolutionary genetics E-P17.02 E-P18.01 Propolismightinduceapoptosisthroughdownregulationof The frequency of change of the nucleotide sequence in the anti-apoptotic miRNAs on A549 human lung carcinoma gene TYR at albinism in Russia cellsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1035 V. V.Kadyshev1,A. V.Marakhonov1,T. A. Vasilyeva1, E.K. 1Vilnius university, Institute of Biomedical Science, Vilnius, Ginter1,A. V. Polyakov1,R. A.Zinchenko1,2 Lithuania, 2Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences, Vilnius, Lithuania 1FSBSI Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Introduction: Some variations in monocarboxylate trans- Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation porter (MCT1) and collagen-encoding (COL1A1, COL3A1) genes have been associated with specific athletic perfor- Introduction: Albinism is a genetically heterogeneous mance and susceptibility to injuries (e.g. musculoskeletal hereditary disease characterized by a reduced amount of softtissueinjuries).Theaimofthiscase-controlassociation melanin pigment in different structures of the body. Cur- studywas toinvestigate prevalence ofriskallelesofMCT1 rently, the albinism is described in either an isolated form rs1049434, COL1A1 rs1800012, COL3A1 rs1800255 in affecting the only eye or eye and skin (11 clinical and Lithuanian professional football players. geneticvariants),orsyndromicpathology.Accordingtothe Methods:Atotalof150footballers(Caucasianmale)and literature, about 70% of cases account for the oculocuta- 150 controls (sedentary, healthy male) were genotyped neousform.In5%ofcases,areducedamountofpigmentis using TaqMan RT-PCR assay. a symptom of a syndromic pathology. Results: The genotype distribution were in HWE for all Aim: To investigate the frequency and spectrum of the groups (P>0.05). There were no differences in genotype/ mutations in the TYR gene in Russian patients with alleles frequency for COL1A1 rs1800012 and COL3A1 albinism. rs1800255 between the footballers and control groups. The Materials and Methods: The laboratory of genetic odds ratio (OR) of athlete harboring COL3A1 AA epidemiology, “RCMG,” for the first time in Russia genotypes (the risk allele A) compared to control was conducted a clinical and genetic study of patients with 0.29 (95%CI: 0.08-0.89, p=0.04). Significant MCT1 albinism.Thecohortsizewas33Russianpatients.Weused genotype distribution were determined between the foot- clinical and molecular-genetic methods to confirm the ballers and controls (TT/TA/AA: 45.3/44.7/10% vs 34.0/ diagnosis. 47.3/18.7%; p=0.04). The proportion of MCT1 risk allele Results: The molecular genetic study of DNA of the A, observed in controls (42.3%) was larger than in all patients revealed changes in the TYR, which is responsible footballers (32.3%, p=0.07), specifically, than in mid- for oculocutaneousalbinism type 1,are theprevalentcause fielders (26.7%; p=0.04). The OR of MCT1 TT genotype (63%). Frequent mutations were c.650G>A (frequency and being a football player was 1.61 (95%CI 1.012-2.574, 0.42), c.1037-3C>G (0.15), c.140G>A (0.07). Changes in p=0.045), while the OR of MCT1 AA genotype was 0.48 gene ОСА2 were observed in 9% cases (oculocutaneous (95%CI 0.242-0.937, p=0.035). albinism type 2). In other 9 % of cases, isolated ocular Conclusions:MCT1rs1049434(Tallele)associatedwith albinism associated with changes in GPR143 was con- footballperformance.CarryingtheMCT1TTgenotypemay firmed. In the latter two types, no frequent mutations have be protective against sport-related injury. The MCT1 AA yet identified. andCOL3A1AAgenotypesmayinfluenceincreasedriskof Conclusions: Russian patients with albinism have the injury. Replication studies are needed to support our data high frequency of mutations in the TYR gene (63 %) and to fully understand the relationship between predis- associated with oculocutaneous albinism type 1. The work position to injuries in football. was partially supported by the RFBR grant 17-04-00288. V. Gineviciene: None. A. Jakaitiene: None. I. Asme- V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. T.A. naviciute: None. A. Utkus: None. L. Tubelis: None. Vasilyeva: None. E.K. Ginter: None. A.V. Polyakov: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None. E-P18.04 Identificationofthegeneticfactorsunderlyingcomorbidity E-P18.03 between bronchial asthma and hypertension Investigation of MCT1 rs1049434, COL1A1 rs1800012 and COL3A1 rs1800255 variants related to susceptibility to E.Y.Bragina1,M.B.Freidin1,O.V.Saik2,O.Zolotareva3,I.A. injuries in professional football players Goncharova1,V.A.Ivanisenko2,V.E.Dosenko4,R.Hofestaedt3 V.Gineviciene1,A.Jakaitiene1,I.Asmenaviciute1,A.Utkus1,L. 1ResearchInstituteofMedicalGenetics,TomskNRMC,Tomsk, Tubelis2 Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, RussianFederation,3BielefeldUniversity,Bielefeld,Germany,1036 J.delPicchia 4Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, National Academy of abortionsregisteredintheregionsoftheRussiaforthe2010 Science, Kiev, Ukraine to 2014. The total number of births was 3030104. The analysisincludes: anencephaly-138cases, encephalocele- The phenomenon of comorbidity between diseases in an 106,spinabifida-878,hydrocephalus-1095,omphalocele individual patient is a global problem of contemporary -288,gastroschisis-345,renal agenesis -78,transposition health care. The comorbidity between two phenotypes can of the great vessels - 523, hypoplastic left heart - 324, beexplainedbysharedgeneticvariantspredisposingtoboth diaphragmatichernia-564,bladderextrophy-59,cleftlip- diseases. One of the features of the clinical course of 2157, cleft palate - 1404, limb reduction defects - 1036, bronchial asthma (BA) is its significant comorbidity with esophageal atresia - 721, anorectal atresia - 708, hypospa- cardiovascular pathology. According to epidemiological dias - 4141, epispadias - 30 and Down syndrome - 2842. data, BA has a decisive influence on the subsequent risk of Results: The prevalence with and without elective cardiovasculardisease.Therefore,hypertensionandBAcan pregnancy terminations was detected for each defect. The beconsideredasanexampleofcommoncomorbiddiseases. highlevelofpregnancyterminationoccursforanencephaly, From the point of view of genetics, these two diseases are encephalocele, bilateral renal agenesis. The rate of preg- wellstudiedandmanygenesforBAandhypertensionwere nancy termination for Down syndrome is 34%. As a result identified. We assume that their comorbidity is based on of the including of induced abortion the rate of defects shared pathophysiological changes for both BA and varies greatly: for anencephaly (in 7.48 times), encephalo- hypertension associated with genes involved in the regula- cele (3.18 times), renal agenesis (2.53 times), omphalocele tion of immune system, smooth muscle tone and vascular (2.39 times). The Down syndrome rate in newborns remodeling. We set out to elaborate this hypothesis and decreased by 1.5 times among livebirths. identify genes of this comorbidity. We prioritized genes Conclusion:TheaccountingofCMamongnewbornsand using several criteria based on gene network analysis elective terminations allows to determine the true preva- describing mechanisms of BA and hypertension comor- lence of congenital malformations and to assess the impact bidity. The top list of candidate genes that can be involved of prenatal diagnosis on the level of the CM among in convergent pathophysiological mechanisms leading to newborns. comorbidity of BA and hypertension include TLR4, CAT, N. Demikova: None. M. Podolnaya: None. A. Lapina: IL10, CST3, ICAM1, IRF6, AKT1, NFKB1, PNP, SELL, None. A. Asanov: None. CCL5, IL2RB, IDS, FOS, NT5C2, and BHLHE40. We also identified96eQTLSNPsforthesegenesandstudythemto E-P18.07 validate our hypothesis in cohorts of patients with BA, The relationship between genomic damage and eating hypertension and individuals affected by both the diseases. behavior in healthy middle-aged Koreans This work was funded by VolkswagenStiftung program (grant №90335). K. Kim1,J. Kim2 E.Y. Bragina: None. M.B. Freidin: None. O.V. Saik: None. O. Zolotareva: None. I.A. Goncharova: None. V. 1Gachon University College of Medicine, Incheon, Korea, A. Ivanisenko: None. V.E. Dosenko: None. R. Republic of, 2Eulji Medical Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic of Hofestaedt: None. Introduction: Cytokinesis-block micronucleus cytome E-P18.05 (CBMN-Cyt) is a quantitative index of DNA damage. The The impact of prenatal diagnosis on congenital purpose of this study is to know the correlation between malformations prevalence in Russia DNA damage and eating habits in healthy middle-aged Koreans. N.Demikova1,M. Podolnaya1,A. Lapina1,A. Asanov2 MaterialsandMethods:DNAdamagewasevaluatedby thefrequencyofmicronuclei(MNi),nucleoplasmicbridges 1Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, (NPBs), nuclear buds (NBUDs) with CBMN-Cyt assay in Research Clinical Institute of Pediatric, Moscow, Russian totally 300 healthy males and females aged 30-59 years. Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical There were no smokers nor problem drinkers. The University, Moscow, Russian Federation relationship between participants' eating behaviors and CBMN-Cyt assay parameters were analyzed by linear Aim of the study. The impact of prenatal diagnosis on regression model. prevalence of congenital malformations (CM). Results: In univariate analysis, in men, MNi frequencies MaterialsandMethods:Thematerialsofthestudywere werehigherwithregularintakeofvegetable,andlowerwith cases of CM among live births, stillbirths and induced regular intake of high animal fat and high sugar dessertsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1037 (P<0.05). In women, NPBs frequencies were higher with spectrum of mutations in the PAH gene was studied in 14 regular intake of vegetables, and NBUDs frequencies were unrelated individuals of HPA. higher with regular intake of protein and diverse kinds of Results: The frequency of PKU according to the results food (P<0.05). After adjusting age, job and exercise ofnewbornscreeningwas1:3607newborns.ADNAstudy behaviors, although MNi and NBUDs frequencies were conducted in 14 patients with HPA revealed 11 mutations. notrelatedofeacheatingbehaviors,NPBsfrequencieswere Twomutationsweredetectedwithhighfrequencies:P281L higher with regular intake of fried food or stir-fry (allele frequency 0.43), P211T (0.21). Mutation R261Q (P=0.020) in men. In women, while MNi and NPBs (0.07) was found in two patients in the compound frequencies were not related of each eating behaviors, heterozygous state with mutation P281L. The remaining 8 NBUDs frequencies were higher with regular intake of mutations (V230I, A403V, R408W, F331S, E390G, protein (P=0.034). A300S, R261Q, M1R, I306V, R261Q) met once (allele Conclusion: Generally, in 30-59-year-old healthy Kor- frequency 0.04). eans with genomic healthy lifestyles, there were no Conclusions: Newborn screening revealed a high inci- significant relationships between DNA damage parameters dence of HPA (1:3607 newborns) in NOA. The population andeatinghabits,buttheregularintakeoffriedfoodorstir- ofNOAischaracterizedbyaspecificspectrumofthePAH fry in men and regular intake of protein in women were mutations; frequent ones are P281L and P211T. This work associated with the increase of DNA damage. was partially funded by RFBR grant 18-15-00090. K. Kim: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, R.A. Zinchenko: None. P. Gundorova: None. Z.K. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Getoeva: None. I.S. Tebieva: None. A.V. Marakhonov: grants already received); Modest; Bio Research Complex None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. I.A. Kuznetcova: None. A. Co., Ltd., Korea. J. Kim: None. V. Polyakov: None. E.K. Ginter: None. E-P18.09 E-P18.10 Allele frequencies of PAH gene mutations in patients with Distribution of Factor V Leiden, Prothrombin G20210A hyperphenylalaninemia in Republic of North Ossetia and MTHFR C677T mutations in ethnic Georgian, Alania (Russia) Armenian and Azerbaijani Patients living in Georgia with thrombosis or pregnancy complications R. A.Zinchenko1,2, P.Gundorova1,Z. K. Getoeva3, I.S. Tebieva3, A.V. Marakhonov1,4,V. V. Kadyshev1, I.A. K. Kartvelishvili1,2,N.Pirtskhelani1,2,N.Kochiashvili2,L. Kuznetcova1,A. V.Polyakov1,E.K. Ginter1 Makhaldiani3,N.Pargalava4 1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for 1Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Levan Medical Genetics», Моscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Samkharauli National Forensics Bureau, Tbilisi, Georgia, 3K. Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, EristaviNationalCenterofExperimentalandClinicalSergery, Russian Federation, 3Republican children`s clinical hospital Tbilisi, Georgia, 4Bokhua Memorial Cardiovascular Center, Repablic North Ossetia Alanya Ministry of health of the Tbilisi, Georgia Russian Federation, Vladikavkaz, Russian Federation, 4Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Introduction: Thrombophilia gene mutations are most Russian Federation common genetic factors of thromboembolism and preg- nancy complications. The prevalence of these mutations Introduction: Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is an inborn differs significantly in populations and ethnic groups. metaboliccondition,causedbymutationsinthesomegenes Aim: Due to the fact that ethnic Georgians (86,6%), (PAH, PTS, QDPR, GCH1, PCBD1, SPR). That results in Azerbaijanis (6,3%) and Armenians (4,5%) are living decreased metabolism of phenylalanine (FA) and can lead together in Georgia and lack of data on the prevalence of to the severe intellectual deficiency. thrombophilia gene mutations among these ethnic groups, Aims:TostudythefrequencyofHPAintheRepublicof theaimofourstudywastodetectandcomparedistribution North Ossetia-Alania (NOA) according to the results of of thrombophilia gene mutations in Georgian, Armenian newborn screening. To assess the frequency and the and Azerbaijani Patients with thrombosis or pregnancy spectrum of the PAH mutations in unrelated patients complications. with HPA. Materials and Methods: 548 Georgians, 56 Armenians MaterialsandMethods:Thenumberofnewbornsinthe and 122 Azerbaijanis with venous thromboembolism or NOA screened for the period 2007-2016 was 101005. 28 pregnancy complications and also 200 unaffected Geor- patients with HPA were identified. The frequency and the gians were genotyped by PCR analyses.1038 J.delPicchia Results: Our eight years studies confirm that distribution Biology,SiberianBranchoftheRussianAcademyofSciences, of studied mutations in Georgians resembles upper data of Novosibirsk, Russian Federation Caucasians and has impact on the development of thrombosis and pregnancy complications. Prevalence of Genetic deafness is heterogeneous disability with different studied mutations is different in these ethnic groups, with inheritancepatternsandthemostcommonformisrecessive highest rate in Armenians. Results are presented in table. deafness caused by mutations in gene GJB2. High fre- quency of GJB2-caused deafness in some populations is suggested by combined effects of assortative mating tradi- DistributionofmutationsinethnicgroupsofGeorgia tionamongdeafpeoplebasedonlinguistichomogamy(sigh EthnicGroupsof FVL- Pr- MTHFR- MTHFR-677T language) and relaxed selection against deafness (Nance Georgia 1691A 20210A 677T(homo) (hetero) etal.,2000).WepreviouslyrevealedGJB2-causeddeafness Georgian 11.5% 7.12% 9.85% 37.4% proportioninsomeindigenousSiberianpopulations:15.1% (patients)(548) inTuvinians (RepublicTuva),17.5% inAltaians(Republic Georgian 1% 3% 2% 35% Altai), 53.0% in Yakuts (Republic Sakha/Yakutia) while (control)(200) sufficient number of familial deafness cases remained Armenian 28.57% 17.86% 14.29% 42.86% (patients)(56) undiagnosed.Thisstudypresentstheresultsofcomparative analysis of the survey data (marriage patterns, fertility, Azerbaijanis 8.2% 3.28% 6.56% 39.34% (patients)(122) communication mode, social interactions) of deaf indivi- duals from these Siberian regions. Assortative marriage rates were 64.5% (Tuva), 72.9% (Altai), with significant differences (p<0.05) between urban and rural residents - Conclusions: It is important to investigate whether this 70.9% vs 57.7% (Tuva), 91.9% vs 58.3% (Altai), and highest rate of mutations in Armenians is due to the 77.1% (Yakutia, urban residents). Fertility (mean children phenomenonofgeneticisolatesortherateisthesameasin number)ofdeafindividualsisslightlyreducedcomparedto Armenian population. Following our results, large-scale theirhearingsiblings:2.22±0.06vs2.40±0.05 (Tuva),1.76 research of thrombophilia gene mutations in Armenian and ±0.10 vs 2.24±0.09 (Yakutia). Majority of respondents Azerbaijani population is reasonable, because prophylaxis indicate sign language as main communication mode and andtimelystartedtreatmentisveryimportantforprevention prefer contacts with deaf people whereas they feel embar- of thromboembolism and pregnancy complications. rassed by misunderstandings with hearing people. We K. Kartvelishvili: None. N. Pirtskhelani: None. N. developed an agent-based computer model to study the Kochiashvili: None. L. Makhaldiani: None. N. trends of hereditary deafness prevalence in population tak- Pargalava: None. ing into account obtained genetic and socio-demographic data.Modelisdesignedforsingle-locuscontrolofdeafness E-P18.14 with possibility of extending for two or more loci. Work is Insight into genetic and social aspects of modern supported by ICG project #0324-2018-0016 and RFBR communities of deaf people in Siberia for forecasting the (#15-04-04860_а, #17-29-06016_ofi_m). prevalence of hereditary deafness O.L. Posukh: None. M.S. Bady-Khoo: None. G.P. Romanov: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. A.A. Smir- O.L. Posukh1,2,M. S.Bady-Khoo3,G.P. Romanov4,5,N.A. nova:None.M.V.Zytsar:None.E.A.Maslova:None.V. Barashkov4,5,A.A.Smirnova1,M.V.Zytsar1,2,E.A.Maslova1,2, Y. Danilchenko: None. O.V. Posukh: None. S.A. V. Y.Danilchenko1,2, O.V.Posukh6,S.A. Lashin1,2 Lashin: None. 1Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, E-P18.15 Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Blood glucose, BMI and telomere length in a cohort of Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Novosibirsk State Colombian schoolchildren University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Scientific Research Institute of Medical-Social Problems and U.Fairbrother1,E. Kidd1, J.Buxton2,P. Camacho3,4, J.Le Management of the Republic of Tuva, Kyzyl, Russian Page-Pezet1,D.Cohen3,4, P. Lopez-Jaramillo3,4,A.I.F. Federation, 4Laboratory of Molecular Biology, MK Ammosov Blakemore5,6,A. J.Walley7 North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Yakut 1School of Human Science, London Metropolitan University, Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk, North Campus, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Russian Federation, 6Institute of Molecular and Cellular BiomolecularSciences,SchoolofLifeSciences,PharmacyandAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1039 Chemistry, Kingston University, London, United Kingdom, 1Federal state scientific budgetary Institution «Research 3UniversidaddeSantander,Santander,Colombia,4Fundación Centre for Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation, Oftalmológica de Santander, Santander, Colombia, 2Republican children`s clinical hospital. Ministry of health of 5Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial the Russian Federation. Medical genetic department, College London, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Vladicavkas, Russian Federation, 3Pirogov Russian National Life Sciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation University, London, United Kingdom, 7St George's University of London, London, United Kingdom Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF; OMIM #219700) is a common autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations Introduction: A few studies have reported that mean tel- in the CFTR gene. The prevalence of CFTR mutations omere length (TL) is associated with obesity and blood differs among various ethnic, demographic, and racial glucoseinchildrenofEuropeanorAraborigin.Thepresent groups. Peculiar distribution of CFTR mutations in Osse- studywasdesignedtoassesswhetherBMIorbloodglucose tianswasstudied.TheRepublicofNorthOssetia–Alania,a is associated with TL in school-age children of South partoftheNorthCaucasusFederalregionofRF,islocated American origin. on the Northern slope of the Greater Caucasus. The popu- Materials and Methods: Relative telomere length ratios lation is about 700,000 people. Ossetians make 64,5% of were determined in 375 subjects (age 9-14 years). Subjects the population of North Ossetia. were recruited within the ACFIES (Association between MaterialsandMethods:DNAof6OssetianCFpatients Cardiorespiratory Fitness, Muscular Strength and Body from the Republic of North Ossetia – Alania was analyzed Composition with Metabolic Risk Factors in Colombian for 33 common CFTR mutations and sequencing. DNA of Children) study. Phenotypes were determined using stan- 108healthyOssetianswithoutCFfamilyhistorywastested dard tests and an extensive questionnaire. Statistical for 13 CFTR mutations (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), F508del, analysis was carried out using SPSSv25 (IBM Inc., USA). I507del, 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2183AA>G, 2184insA, Results: Partial correlation analysis, controlling for the 394delTT, 3821delT, L138ins, W1282X, E92K). effects of age, gender, PCR plate and BMI demonstrates a Results: Three CF patients were relatives: two first robust negative correlation between TL and blood glucose siblings and one second sibling. They had the same (r= -0.14, p=0.008). Using a univariate linear model genotype, F508del/W1282X. The genotypes of three other analytical approach, blood glucose is also significantly unrelated CF patients were W1282X/W1282X, W1282X/ associated with telomere length (p=0.011) with the same 2184insA, 2184del4/1248+1G>A. One heterozygous car- variablesinthemodel.NosignificantassociationwithBMI rier of W1282X mutation was detected in 108 healthy was detected. Ossetians. Conclusions: TL is a potential biomarker: blood glucose Conclusion: Themost common CF mutationinOssetian is negatively associated with TL in this cohort of patients was W1282X (4 in 9 CF chromosomes). Earlier Colombian schoolchildren and this effect does not appear W1282X mutation was also revealed in some other to be related to obesity. The lack of association with BMI Caucasus populations (Karachay, Nogai). 1677delTA may be due to the difference in ethnicity or because mutation, common in autochthonous Caucasus ethnic previousstudieshavehadhigherthannormalproportionsof groups, such as Chechens, Ingush, Georgians, was not children with early-onset obesity. Further work to investi- identified either in Ossetian CF patients or in healthy gate this relationship in larger cohorts may yield insights persons.2184del4and1248+1G>Amutationsarenovelfor into the relationship of telomere attrition with pathological Russian Federation. processes in pre-clinical diabetes. The research was supported by grant RSF 17-15-01051. U.Fairbrother:None.E.Kidd:None.J.Buxton:None. N.V. Petrova: None. T. Vasilyeva: None. N. Kashirs- P. Camacho: None. J. Le Page-Pezet: None. D. Cohen: kaya: None. E. Kondratyeva: None. Z. Getoeva: None. None. P. Lopez-Jaramillo: None. A.I.F. Blakemore: M.Dzhadzhieva:None.O.Novoselova:None.E.Ginter: None. A.J. Walley: None. None. R. Zinchenko: None. E-P18.16 The study of CFTR mutations in the population of the E-P19 Genetic counselling/Education/public services North Ossetia Alania Republic, Russian Federation E-P19.01 N.V.Petrova1,T.Vasilyeva1,N.Kashirskaya1,E.Kondratyeva1, Prenatalfindingsof28infantswithDownsyndrome:atwo- Z. Getoeva2,M. Dzhadzhieva2,O.Novoselova1,E. Ginter1,R. year retrospective evaluation Zinchenko1,31040 J.delPicchia H.Ilgin-Ruhi Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus Ankara University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey Introduction: Pre-eclampsia is categorized as a hyperten- sive disorder occurring during pregnancy. Mild forms of Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is the most common preeclampsia generally do not possess any symptoms, chromosomaldisorderwiththebirthincidence1:700-1000. whereas the severe forms may cause headaches, renal The high risk of DS is evaluated by prenatal screening insufficiency and even fetal and maternal death. The inci- programs during pregnancy. The aim of this study is to dence of pre-eclampsia varies between 2% to 10% of summarize the prenatal findings of 28 infants with Down pregnanciesglobally.However,WHOreportedthatthisrate syndrome investigated postnatally. isreportedtobealmostseventimesmoreinthedeveloping Materials and Methods: The study includes a retro- countries. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the spective data analysis of intrauterin periods of 28 babies knowledge, screening methods and the incidence of pre- with DS. Conventional karyotypes from peripheral blood eclampsia in North Cyprus. samplings were performed to confirm DS diagnosis. Materials and Methods: Questionnaire based survey Results: The prenatal karyotype indications of the were conducted to women at least 18 years of age. The families are shown in Table 1. Only three DS cases were maternal variables including age, possible gestational age prenatally diagnosed. and previous pregnancy associated complications were Table 1.Indications for prenatal Downsyndromescreen- collected from all the volunteers. The social-economic and ing in the families educationalstatusofthewomenweretaken into considera- tionforthisanalysis.Theknowledgeandawarenessofpre- eclampsia associated risks and complications were Maternal Indicationsofprenatalkaryotyping Indication age Ø evaluated. Maternal Firstand/ Ultrasound Combined* Results: The overall awareness of pre-eclampsia was agealone orsecond anomalies 53% and 39% had experienced pre-eclampsia themselves. maternal Duetothelackofknowledgeonthecomplications,women serum with pre-eclampsia specified that they experienced sub- screening stantial panic and stress upon diagnosed. The awareness < 0 2 5 4 5 was associated with the level of education. However, 35years generally the women were not aware of the maternal/fetal ≥ 3 4 4 1 0 mortality risk or any possibilities with the genetic 35years predispositions. Conclusion:Lackofawarenesstranslatestoworsehealth outcomes, including fetal and maternal death or pre-term *Positive serum screening with abnormal ultrasound births. Therefore, proper counselling should be provided to findings the community about the incidence and the indication of Among the 28 families, 23 (82%) were evaluated in the this threatening condition. high-risk group, 5 (18%) were in the low-risk group. P. Tulay: None. M.C. Ergoren: None. R. However, only three families have had amniocentesis. Kalkan: None. Majorcongenitalmalformationsweredetectedpostnatalyin 22 DS infants (79%). E-P19.03 Conclusion: Prenatal and postnatal genetic counseling is Clinical Genetics and rare diseases in University Hospital extremely important in Down syndrome. Prenataly detec- Brno, Czech Republic (Genetic counselling - Diagnostics - tion of severe malformations is one of the most important Care - Research - Education) factor affecting family decisions about whether or not to continue the pregnancy. R.Gaillyová1,2,M.Macek3,4,A.Arellanesová5,I.Valáková1,2,H. H. Ilgin-Ruhi: None. Bučková6,L. Homola7,L. Fajkusová8,M.Havlovicová3 E-P19.02 1University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Brno, Pre-eclampsia: Awareness of the life threating condition Czech Republic, 2Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Pre-eclampsia:awarenessofthelifethreatingconditionPre- Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Dept. of Biology eclampsia: Awareness of the life threating condition and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague, P. Tulay,M.C. Ergoren,R. Kalkan Czech Republic, 4National coordination Centre for RareAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:… 1041 Diseases,Prague,CzechRepublic,5CzechAssociationofRare R.Gaillyová:None.M.Macek:None.A.Arellanesová: Diseases, Prague,Czech Republic, 6University Hospital Brno, None. I. Valášková: None. H. Bučková: None. L. Dept. of Pediatric Dermatology, EB Centre Czech Republic, Homola: None. L. Fajkusová: None. M. Centre for Rare Skin Diseases, member of ERN-Skin, Brno, Havlovicová: None. CzechRepublic,7UniversityHospitalBrno,ClinicofPediatric Infectious Diseases, CF Centre, Brno, Czech Republic, E-P19.04 8University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and The effect of neuroeducational methods on leucocyte Gene Therapy, Clinic of Internal Medicine – Hematology and telomere shortening dynamics Oncology, Brno, Czech Republic D.Serapinas1,M.Mendele2, J.Tumaite1,A. Serapiniene1,K. In accordance with the, Council Recommendation on an Martinsone3 action in the field of rare diseases“ the Czech Government approved the 2nd National Strategy for rare diseases. The 1Mykolas Romeris University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Institute of Department of Medical Genetics University Hospital Brno Neuroeducational Methods, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of cooperates with the National Coordination Centre for Rare Health Psychology and Education, Rīga Stradiņ University, Diseases (Prague-Motol) and with centres for rare diseases Ryga, Latvia in University Hospital Brno (part of respective European Reference Networks), e.g. mainly in the area of geno- Introduction: Recent data points the importance of psy- dermatoses and epidermolysis bullosa, cystic fibrosis, neu- chological factors for health state including genetic level. romusculardiseases,rarecardiacarrhythmiasandmalignant The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of neu- hyperthermia. Clinical geneticists and molecular biologists roeducational methods on telomere length shortening. are involved in genetic counselling, provide postnatal and Materials and Methods: This study summarizes the prenatal genetic diagnostics and preventive testing in findings on telomere length changes from a controlled families with various rare diseases. In cooperation with the group study of neuroeducational methods over a 6 month Czech Society of Medical Genetics and Genomics (www. period. The study was conducted on 20 relatively healthy slg.cz) our department organises an annual conference for subjects aged 20-59 years old. 10 persons had regular professionalsinthefieldofmedicalgeneticsonthetopicof neuroeducational sesions (stress reduction, mindfulness, art rare diseases. Rare diseases are also the theme of lectures therapy with professional specialists). Control group for students of the Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of consisted of 10 individuals, matched by demografic and Science, Masaryk University (MU) in Brno. In cooperation healthhistorycriteria.HT-Q-FISHwasusedtomeasurethe with patient organisations, as DEBRA CR, Czech CF median telomere length (LifeLenght, Spain) Association, Parent-Project and others, we prepare lectures Results: Subjects that have passed neuroeducational and informational materials for patients with rare diseases sessions decreased telomere length over the 6 months and their families. Together with the Czech Association of period non significantly (100±27bp; p=0.63), whereas Rare Diseases (www.vzacna-onemocneni.cz), we subjects in the control group significantly lost telomeres organize lectures for students of Masaryk University in (420±80bp; p=0.02). 2017 in which are patients with rare diseases directly Conclusions:Thefindingsofthispilotstudysuggestthat involved and interact with students. An integral part of our neuroeducational methods can contribute for the slower workarealsolecturesforthepublicandanannualmeeting shortening of telomeres. in Brno organized on the occasion of the annual Rare D. Serapinas: None. M. Mendele: None. J. Tumaite: Diseases Day. None. A. Serapiniene: None. K. Martinsone: None.